the Tenant of Wildfell Hall
AUTHOR's PREFACE to the SECOND EDITION
while I acknowledge the success of the present work to have be
great than I anticipate, and the praise it have elicit from a
few kind critic to have be great than it deserve, I must also
admit that from some other quarter it have be censure with an
asperity which I be as little prepared to expect, and which my
judgment, as well as my feeling, assure I be more bitter than
just. it be scarcely the province of an author to refute the
argument of his censor and vindicate his own production; but I
may be allow to make here a few observation with which I would
have preface the first edition, have I foresee the necessity of
such precaution against the misapprehension of those who would
read it with a prejudiced mind or be content to judge it by a hasty
glance.
my object in write the follow page be not simply to amuse
the Reader; neither be it to gratify my own taste, nor yet to
ingratiate myself with the Press and the public: I wish to tell
the truth, for truth always convey its own moral to those who be
able to receive it. but as the priceless treasure too frequently
hide at the bottom of a well, it need some courage to dive for
it, especially as he that do so will be likely to incur more
scorn and obloquy for the mud and water into which he have venture
to plunge, than thank for the jewel he procure; as, in like
manner, she who undertake the cleansing of a careless bachelor's
apartment will be liable to more abuse for the dust she raise than
commendation for the clearance she effect. let it not be
imagine, however, that I consider myself competent to reform the
error and abuse of society, but only that I would fain contribute
my humble quota towards so good an aim; and if I can gain the
public ear at all, I would rather whisper a few wholesome truth
therein than much soft nonsense.
as the story of 'Agnes Grey' be accuse of extravagant over-
colour in those very part that be carefully copy from the
life, with a most scrupulous avoidance of all exaggeration, so, in
the present work, I find myself censure for depict CON AMORE,
with 'a morbid love of the coarse, if not of the brutal,' those
scene which, I will venture to say, have not be more painful for
the most fastidious of my critic to read than they be for I to
describe. I may have go too far; in which case I shall be
careful not to trouble myself or my reader in the same way again;
but when we have to do with vice and vicious character, I maintain
it be well to depict they as they really be than as they would
wish to appear. to represent a bad thing in its least offensive
light be, doubtless, the most agreeable course for a writer of
fiction to pursue; but be it the most honest, or the safe? be it
well to reveal the snare and pitfall of life to the young and
thoughtless traveller, or to cover they with branch and flower?
oh, reader! if there be less of this delicate concealment of
fact - this whispering, 'peace, peace,' when there be no peace,
there would be less of sin and misery to the young of both sex
who be leave to wring their bitter knowledge from experience.
I would not be understand to suppose that the proceeding of the
unhappy scapegrace, with his few profligate companion I have here
introduce, be a speciman of the common practice of society - the
case be an extreme one, as I trust none would fail to perceive;
but I know that such character do exist, and if I have warn one
rash youth from follow in their step, or prevent one
thoughtless girl from fall into the very natural error of my
heroine, the book have not be write in vain. but, at the same
time, if any honest reader shall have derive more pain than
pleasure from its perusal, and have close the last volume with a
disagreeable impression on his mind, I humbly crave his pardon, for
such be far from my intention; and I will endeavour to do well
another time, for I love to give innocent pleasure. yet, be it
understand, I shall not limit my ambition to this - or even to
produce 'a perfect work of art': time and talent so spend, I
should consider waste and misapply. such humble talent as God
have give I I will endeavour to put to their great use; if I be
able to amuse, I will try to benefit too; and when I feel it my
duty to speak an unpalatable truth, with the help of God, I will
speak it, though it be to the prejudice of my name and to the
detriment of my reader's immediate pleasure as well as my own.
one word more, and I have do. respect the author's identity,
I would have it to he distinctly understand that Acton Bell be
neither Currer nor Ellis Bell, and therefore let not his fault be
attribute to they. as to whether the name be real or fictitious,
it cannot greatly signify to those who know he only by his work.
as little, I should think, can it matter whether the writer so
designate be a man, or a woman, as one or two of my critic
profess to have discover. I take the imputation in good part, as
a compliment to the just delineation of my female character; and
though I be bind to attribute much of the severity of my censor
to this suspicion, I make no effort to refute it, because, in my
own mind, I be satisfied that if a book be a good one, it be so
whatever the sex of the author may be. all novel be, or should
be, write for both man and woman to read, and I be at a loss to
conceive how a man should permit himself to write anything that
would be really disgraceful to a woman, or why a woman should be
censure for write anything that would be proper and become for
a man.
JULY 22nd, 1848.
the TENANT of WILDFELL HALL
CHAPTER I
you must go back with I to the autumn of 1827.
my father, as you know, be a sort of gentleman farmer in -shire;
and I, by his express desire, succeed he in the same quiet
occupation, not very willingly, for ambition urge I to high
aim, and self-conceit assure I that, in disregard its voice,
I be bury my talent in the earth, and hide my light under a
bushel. my mother have do her utmost to persuade I that I be
capable of great achievement; but my father, who think ambition
be the sure road to ruin, and change but another word for
destruction, would listen to no scheme for better either my own
condition, or that of my fellow mortal. he assure I it be all
rubbish, and exhort I, with his die breath, to continue in the
good old way, to follow his step, and those of his father before
he, and let my high ambition be to walk honestly through the
world, look neither to the right hand nor to the left, and to
transmit the paternal acre to my child in, at least, as
flourish a condition as he leave they to I.
'well! - an honest and industrious farmer be one of the most useful
member of society; and if I devote my talent to the cultivation
of my farm, and the improvement of agriculture in general, I shall
thereby benefit, not only my own immediate connection and
dependant, but, in some degree, mankind at large:- hence I shall
not have live in vain.' with such reflection as these I be
endeavour to console myself, as I plod home from the field,
one cold, damp, cloudy evening towards the close of October. but
the gleam of a bright red fire through the parlour window have more
effect in cheer my spirit, and rebuke my thankless repining,
than all the sage reflection and good resolution I have force my
mind to frame; - for I be young then, remember - only four-and-
twenty - and have not acquire half the rule over my own spirit that
I now possess - trifling as that may be.
however, that haven of bliss must not be enter till I have
exchange my miry boot for a clean pair of shoe, and my rough
surtout for a respectable coat, and make myself generally
presentable before decent society; for my mother, with all her
kindness, be vastly particular on certain point.
in ascend to my room I be meet upon the stair by a smart,
pretty girl of nineteen, with a tidy, dumpy figure, a round face,
bright, bloom cheek, glossy, cluster curl, and little merry
brown eye. I need not tell you this be my sister Rose. she be,
I know, a comely matron still, and, doubtless, no less lovely - in
your eye - than on the happy day you first behold she. nothing
tell I then that she, a few year hence, would be the wife of one
entirely unknown to I as yet, but destine hereafter to become a
close friend than even herself, more intimate than that unmannerly
lad of seventeen, by whom I be collar in the passage, on come
down, and well-nigh jerk off my equilibrium, and who, in
correction for his impudence, receive a resounding whack over the
sconce, which, however, sustain no serious injury from the
infliction; as, besides be more than commonly thick, it be
protect by a redundant shock of short, reddish curl, that my
mother call auburn.
on enter the parlour we find that honour lady seat in her
arm-chair at the fireside, work away at her knitting, accord
to her usual custom, when she have nothing else to do. she have
sweep the hearth, and make a bright blaze fire for our reception;
the servant have just bring in the tea-tray; and Rose be
produce the sugar-basin and tea-caddy from the cupboard in the
black oak side-board, that shine like polished ebony, in the
cheerful parlour twilight.
'well! here they both be,' cry my mother, look round upon we
without retard the motion of her nimble finger and glitter
needle. 'now shut the door, and come to the fire, while Rose get
the tea ready; Ibe sure you must be starve; - and tell I what
youhave be about all day; - I like to know what my child have
be about.'
'Ihave be break in the grey colt - no easy business that -
direct the ploughing of the last wheat stubble - for the
ploughboy have not the sense to direct himself - and carry out a
plan for the extensive and efficient draining of the low
meadowland.'
'thatbe my brave boy! - and Fergus, what have you be do?'
'badger-baiting.'
and here he proceed to give a particular account of his sport,
and the respective trait of prowess evince by the badger and the
dog; my mother pretend to listen with deep attention, and
watch his animate countenance with a degree of maternal
admiration I think highly disproportione to its object.
'itbe time you should be do something else, Fergus,' say I, as
soon as a momentary pause in his narration allow I to get in a
word.
'what can I do?' reply he; 'my mother willnot let I go to sea or
enter the army; and Ibe determined to do nothing else - except make
myself such a nuisance to you all, that you will be thankful to get
rid of I on any term.'
our parent soothingly stroke his stiff, short curl. he growl,
and try to look sulky, and then we all take our seat at the
table, in obedience to the thrice-repeat summon of Rose.
'now take your tea,' say she; 'and Iwill tell you what Ihave be
do. Ihave be to call on the Wilsons; and itbe a thousand
pity you donot go with I, Gilbert, for Eliza Millward be
there!'
'well! what of she?'
'oh, nothing! - Ibe not go to tell you about she; - only that
shebe a nice, amusing little thing, when she be in a merry humour,
and I shouldnot mind call she - '
'hush, hush, my dear! your brother have no such idea!' whisper my
mother earnestly, hold up her finger.
'well,' resume Rose; 'I be go to tell you an important piece
of news I hear there - I have be burst with it ever since.
you know it be report a month ago, that somebody be go to
take Wildfell Hall - and - what do you think? it have actually be
inhabit above a week! - and we never know!'
'impossible!' cry my mother.
'preposterous!!!' shriek Fergus.
'it have indeed! - and by a single lady!'
'good gracious, my dear! the place be in ruin!'
'she have have two or three room make habitable; and there she
live, all alone - except an old woman for a servant!'
'oh, dear! that spoil it - Iwould hop she be a witch,' observe
Fergus, while carve his inch-thick slice of bread and butter.
'Nonsense, Fergus! but benot it strange, mamma?'
'strange! I can hardly believe it.'
'but you may believe it; for Jane Wilson have see she. she go
with her mother, who, of course, when she hear of a stranger being
in the neighbourhood, would be on pin and needle till she have
see she and get all she could out of she. she be call Mrs.
Graham, and she be in mourning - not widow's weed, but slightish
mourning - and she be quite young, they say, - not above five or
six and twenty, - but so reserved! they try all they could to
find out who she be and where she come from, and, all about she,
but neither Mrs. Wilson, with her pertinacious and impertinent
home-thrust, nor Miss Wilson, with her skilful manoeuvring, could
manage to elicit a single satisfactory answer, or even a casual
remark, or chance expression calculate to allay their curiosity,
or throw the faint ray of light upon her history, circumstance,
or connection. moreover, she be barely civil to they, and
evidently well pleased to say 'good-by,' than 'how do you do.'
but Eliza Millward say her father intend to call upon she soon,
to offer some pastoral advice, which he fear she need, as, though
she be know to have enter the neighbourhood early last week, she
do not make her appearance at church on Sunday; and she - Eliza,
that be - will beg to accompany he, and be sure she can succeed in
wheedle something out of she - you know, Gilbert, she can do
anything. and we should call some time, mamma; itbe only proper,
you know.'
'of course, my dear. poor thing! how lonely she must feel!'
'and pray, be quick about it; and mind you bring I word how much
sugar she put in her tea, and what sort of cap and apron she
wear, and all about it; for I donot know how I can live till I
know,' say Fergus, very gravely.
but if he intend the speech to be hail as a master-stroke of
wit, he signally fail, for nobody laugh. however, he be not
much disconcert at that; for when he have take a mouthful of
bread and butter and be about to swallow a gulp of tea, the humour
of the thing burst upon he with such irresistible force, that he
be oblige to jump up from the table, and rush snorting and
choke from the room; and a minute after, be hear scream in
fearful agony in the garden.
as for I, I be hungry, and content myself with silently
demolish the tea, ham, and toast, while my mother and sister
go on talk, and continue to discuss the apparent or non-
apparent circumstance, and probable or improbable history of the
mysterious lady; but I must confess that, after my brother's
misadventure, I once or twice raise the cup to my lip, and put it
down again without dare to taste the content, lest I should
injure my dignity by a similar explosion.
the next day my mother and Rose hasten to pay their compliment
to the fair recluse; and come back but little wise than they go;
though my mother declare she do not regret the journey, for if
she have not gain much good, she flatter herself she have
impart some, and that be well: she have give some useful
advice, which, she hop, would not be throw away; for Mrs.
Graham, though she say little to any purpose, and appear
somewhat self-opinionate, seem not incapable of reflection, -
though she do not know where she have be all her life, poor
thing, for she betray a lamentable ignorance on certain point,
and have not even the sense to be ashamed of it.
'on what point, mother?' ask I.
'on household matter, and all the little nicety of cookery, and
such thing, that every lady ought to be familiar with, whether she
be require to make a practical use of her knowledge or not. I
give she some useful piece of information, however, and several
excellent receipt, the value of which she evidently could not
appreciate, for she beg I would not trouble myself, as she live
in such a plain, quiet way, that she be sure she should never make
use of they. "no matter, my dear," say I; "it be what every
respectable female ought to know; - and besides, though you be
alone now, you will not be always so; you have be marry, and
probably - I might say almost certainly - will be again." "you be
mistaken there, ma'am," say she, almost haughtily; "I be certain I
never shall." - but I tell she I know well.'
'some romantic young widow, I suppose,' say I, 'come there to end
her day in solitude, and mourn in secret for the dear depart -
but it willnot last long.'
'no, I think not,' observed Rose; 'for she donot seem very
disconsolate after all; and shebe excessively pretty - handsome
rather - you must see she, Gilbert; you will call she a perfect
beauty, though you could hardly pretend to discover a resemblance
between she and Eliza Millward.'
'well, I can imagine many face more beautiful than Eliza's, though
not more charming. I allow she have small claim to perfection; but
then, I maintain that, if she be more perfect, she would be less
interesting.'
'and so you prefer her fault to other people's perfection?'
'just so - save my mother's presence.'
'oh, my dear Gilbert, what nonsense you talk! - I know you donot
mean it; itbe quite out of the question,' say my mother, get
up, and bustle out of the room, under pretence of household
business, in order to escape the contradiction that be tremble
on my tongue.
after that Rose favour I with further particular respect
Mrs. Graham. her appearance, manner, and dress, and the very
furniture of the room she inhabit, be all set before I, with
rather more clearness and precision than I care to see they; but,
as I be not a very attentive listener, I could not repeat the
description if I would.
the next day be Saturday; and, on Sunday, everybody wonder
whether or not the fair unknown would profit by the vicar's
remonstrance, and come to church. I confess I look with some
interest myself towards the old family pew, appertain to
Wildfell Hall, where the fade crimson cushion and lining have be
unpressed and unrenewe so many year, and the grim escutcheon,
with their lugubrious border of rusty black cloth, frown so
sternly from the wall above.
and there I behold a tall, lady-like figure, clothe in black. she
face be towards I, and there be something in it which, once
see, invite I to look again. her hair be raven black, and
dispose in long glossy ringlet, a style of coiffure rather
unusual in those day, but always graceful and become; her
complexion be clear and pale; her eye I could not see, for, be
bent upon her prayer-book, they be conceal by their drooping
lid and long black lash, but the brow above be expressive and
well define; the forehead be lofty and intellectual, the nose, a
perfect aquiline and the feature, in general, unexceptionable -
only there be a slight hollowness about the cheek and eye, and
the lip, though finely form, be a little too thin, a little
too firmly compressed, and have something about they that betoken,
I think, no very soft or amiable temper; and I say in my heart -
'I would rather admire you from this distance, fair lady, than be
the partner of your home.'
just then she happen to raise her eye, and they meet mine; I do
not choose to withdraw my gaze, and she turn again to her book,
but with a momentary, indefinable expression of quiet scorn, that
be inexpressibly provoke to I.
'she think I an impudent puppy,' think I. 'Humph! - she shall
change her mind before long, if I think it worth while.'
but then it flash upon I that these be very improper thought
for a place of worship, and that my behaviour, on the present
occasion, be anything but what it ought to be. previous, however,
to direct my mind to the service, I glance round the church to
see if any one have be observe I; - but no, - all, who be not
attend to their prayer-book, be attend to the strange
lady, - my good mother and sister among the rest, and Mrs. Wilson
and her daughter; and even Eliza Millward be slily glance from
the corner of her eye towards the object of general attraction.
then she glance at I, simper a little, and blush, modestly
look at her prayer-book, and endeavour to compose her feature.
here I be transgress again; and this time I be make sensible
of it by a sudden dig in the rib, from the elbow of my pert
brother. for the present, I could only resent the insult by
press my foot upon his toe, defer further vengeance till we
get out of church.
now, Halford, before I close this letter, Iwill tell you who Eliza
Millward be: she be the vicar's young daughter, and a very
engage little creature, for whom I feel no small degree of
partiality; - and she know it, though I have never come to any
direct explanation, and have no definite intention of so do, for
my mother, who maintain there be no one good enough for I
within twenty mile round, could not bear the thought of my
marrying that insignificant little thing, who, in addition to she
numerous other disqualification, have not twenty pound to call she
own. Eliza's figure be at once slight and plump, her face small,
and nearly as round as my sister's, - complexion, something similar
to her, but more delicate and less decidedly bloom, - nose,
retrousse, - feature, generally irregular; and, altogether, she
be rather charming than pretty. but her eye - I must not forget
those remarkable feature, for therein her chief attraction lay -
in outward aspect at least; - they be long and narrow in shape,
the irid black, or very dark brown, the expression various, and
ever change, but always either preternaturally - I have almost
say diabolically - wicked, or irresistibly bewitch - often
both. her voice be gentle and childish, her tread light and soft
as that of a cat:- but her manner more frequently resemble those
of a pretty playful kitten, that be now pert and roguish, now timid
and demure, accord to its own sweet will.
her sister, Mary, be several year old, several inch tall,
and of a large, coarser build - a plain, quiet, sensible girl, who
have patiently nurse their mother, through her last long, tedious
illness, and be the housekeeper, and family drudge, from thence
to the present time. she be trust and value by her father,
love and court by all dog, cat, child, and poor people, and
slight and neglect by everybody else.
the Reverend Michael Millward himself be a tall, ponderous elderly
gentleman, who place a shovel hat above his large, square,
massive-feature face, carry a stout walk-stick in his hand,
and incase his still powerful limb in knee-breech and gaiter,
- or black silk stocking on state occasion. he be a man of
fix principle, strong prejudice, and regular habit, intolerant
of dissent in any shape, act under a firm conviction that his
opinion be always right, and whoever differ from they must be
either most deplorably ignorant, or wilfully blind.
in childhood, I have always be accustom to regard he with a
feeling of reverential awe - but lately, even now, surmount, for,
though he have a fatherly kindness for the well-behave, he be a
strict disciplinarian, and have often sternly reprove our juvenile
failing and peccadillo; and moreover, in those day, whenever he
call upon our parent, we have to stand up before he, and say our
catechism, or repeat, 'how doth the little busy bee,' or some other
hymn, or - bad than all - be question about his last text, and
the head of the discourse, which we never could remember.
sometimes, the worthy gentleman would reprove my mother for be
over-indulgent to her son, with a reference to old Eli, or David
and Absalom, which be particularly gall to her feeling; and,
very highly as she respect he, and all his saying, I once hear
her exclaim, 'I wish to goodness he have a son himself! he wouldnot
be so ready with his advice to other people then; - hewould see what
it be to have a couple of boy to keep in order.'
he have a laudable care for his own bodily health - keep very early
hour, regularly take a walk before breakfast, be vastly
particular about warm and dry clothing, have never be know to
preach a sermon without previously swallow a raw egg - albeit he
be gift with good lung and a powerful voice, - and be,
generally, extremely particular about what he eat and drank, though
by no mean abstemious, and have a mode of dietary peculiar to
himself, - be a great despiser of tea and such slop, and a
patron of malt liquor, bacon and egg, ham, hung beef, and other
strong meat, which agree well enough with his digestive organ,
and therefore be maintain by he to be good and wholesome for
everybody, and confidently recommend to the most delicate
convalescent or dyspeptic, who, if they fail to derive the
promise benefit from his prescription, be tell it be because
they have not persevere, and if they complain of inconvenient
result therefrom, be assure it be all fancy.
I will just touch upon two other person whom I have mention, and
then bring this long letter to a close. these be Mrs. Wilson and
her daughter. the former be the widow of a substantial farmer, a
narrow-minded, tattle old gossip, whose character be not worth
describing. she have two son, Robert, a rough countrifie farmer,
and Richard, a retire, studious young man, who be study the
classic with the vicar's assistance, prepare for college, with a
view to enter the church.
their sister Jane be a young lady of some talent, and more
ambition. she have, at her own desire, receive a regular boarding-
school education, superior to what any member of the family have
obtain before. she have take the polish well, acquire
considerable elegance of manner, quite lose her provincial accent,
and could boast of more accomplishment than the vicar's daughter.
she be consider a beauty besides; but never for a moment could
she number I amongst her admirer. she be about six and twenty,
rather tall and very slender, her hair be neither chestnut nor
auburn, but a most decide bright, light red; her complexion be
remarkably fair and brilliant, her head small, neck long, chin well
turn, but very short, lip thin and red, eye clear hazel, quick,
and penetrate, but entirely destitute of poetry or feeling. she
have, or might have have, many suitor in her own rank of life, but
scornfully repulse or reject they all; for none but a gentleman
could please her refined taste, and none but a rich one could
satisfy her soar ambition. one gentleman there be, from whom
she have lately receive some rather pointed attention, and upon
whose heart, name, and fortune, it be whisper, she have serious
design. this be Mr. Lawrence, the young squire, whose family have
formerly occupy Wildfell Hall, but have desert it, some fifteen
year ago, for a more modern and commodious mansion in the
neighbouring parish.
now, Halford, I bid you adieu for the present. this be the first
instalment of my debt. if the coin suit you, tell I so, and Iwill
send you the rest at my leisure: if you would rather remain my
creditor than stuff your purse with such ungainly, heavy piece, -
tell I still, and Iwill pardon your bad taste, and willingly keep
the treasure to myself.
your immutably,
gilbert MARKHAM.
CHAPTER II
I perceive, with joy, my most value friend, that the cloud of your
displeasure have pass away; the light of your countenance bless
I once more, and you desire the continuation of my story:
therefore, without more ado, you shall have it.
I think the day I last mention be a certain Sunday, the late
in the October of 1827. on the following Tuesday I be out with my
dog and gun, in pursuit of such game as I could find within the
territory of Linden-Car; but find none at all, I turn my arm
against the hawk and carrion crow, whose depredation, as I
suspect, have deprive I of well prey. to this end I leave the
more frequented region, the woode valley, the corn-field, and
the meadow-land, and proceed to mount the steep acclivity of
Wildfell, the wild and the lofty eminence in our
neighbourhood, where, as you ascend, the hedge, as well as the
tree, become scanty and stunt, the former, at length, give
place to rough stone fence, partly green over with ivy and moss,
the latter to larch and Scotch fir-tree, or isolate
blackthorn. the field, be rough and stony, and wholly unfit
for the plough, be mostly devoted to the posturing of sheep and
cattle; the soil be thin and poor: bit of grey rock here and
there peep out from the grassy hillock; bilberry-plant and
heather - relic of more savage wildness - grow under the wall;
and in many of the enclosure, ragweed and rush usurped
supremacy over the scanty herbage; but these be not my property.
near the top of this hill, about two mile from Linden-Car, stand
Wildfell Hall, a superannuated mansion of the Elizabethan era,
build of dark grey stone, venerable and picturesque to look at, but
doubtless, cold and gloomy enough to inhabit, with its thick stone
mullion and little latticed pane, its time-eat air-hole, and
its too lonely, too unsheltered situation, - only shield from the
war of wind and weather by a group of Scotch fir, themselves half
blight with storm, and look as stern and gloomy as the Hall
itself. behind it lie a few desolate field, and then the brown
heath-clothe summit of the hill; before it (enclose by stone wall,
and enter by an iron gate, with large ball of grey granite -
similar to those which decorate the roof and gable - surmount
the gate-post) be a garden, - once stock with such hard plant
and flower as could well brook the soil and climate, and such
tree and shrub as could well endure the gardener's torture
shear, and most readily assume the shape he choose to give they, -
now, have be leave so many year untilled and untrimmed,
abandon to the weed and the grass, to the frost and the wind,
the rain and the drought, it present a very singular appearance
indeed. the close green wall of privet, that have border the
principal walk, be two-third wither away, and the rest grow
beyond all reasonable bound; the old boxwood swan, that sit beside
the scraper, have lose its neck and half its body: the castellate
tower of laurel in the middle of the garden, the gigantic warrior
that stand on one side of the gateway, and the lion that guard
the other, be sprout into such fantastic shape as resemble
nothing either in heaven or earth, or in the water under the
earth; but, to my young imagination, they present all of they a
goblinish appearance, that harmonise well with the ghostly legion
and dark tradition our old nurse have tell we respect the
haunt hall and its depart occupant.
I have succeed in kill a hawk and two crow when I come within
sight of the mansion; and then, relinquish further depredation,
I saunter on, to have a look at the old place, and see what
change have be work in it by its new inhabitant. I do not
like to go quite to the front and stare in at the gate; but I
pause beside the garden wall, and look, and see no change -
except in one wing, where the break window and dilapidate roof
have evidently be repair, and where a thin wreath of smoke be
curl up from the stack of chimney.
while I thus stand, lean on my gun, and look up at the dark
gable, sink in an idle reverie, weave a tissue of wayward
fancy, in which old association and the fair young hermit, now
within those wall, bear a nearly equal part, I hear a slight
rustling and scramble just within the garden; and, glance in
the direction whence the sound proceed, I behold a tiny hand
elevate above the wall: it cling to the topmost stone, and then
another little hand be raise to take a firm hold, and then
appear a small white forehead, surmount with wreath of light
brown hair, with a pair of deep blue eye beneath, and the upper
portion of a diminutive ivory nose.
the eye do not notice I, but sparkle with glee on behold
Sancho, my beautiful black and white setter, that be course
about the field with its muzzle to the ground. the little creature
raise its face and call aloud to the dog. the good-nature
animal pause, look up, and wag his tail, but make no far
advance. the child (a little boy, apparently about five year
old) scramble up to the top of the wall, and call again and
again; but find this of no avail, apparently make up his mind,
like Mahomet, to go to the mountain, since the mountain would not
come to he, and attempt to get over; but a crab old cherry-
tree, that grow hard by, catch he by the frock in one of its
crooked scraggy arm that stretch over the wall. in attempt
to disengage himself his foot slip, and down he tumble - but
not to the earth; - the tree still keep he suspend. there be a
silent struggle, and then a pierce shriek; - but, in an instant,
I have drop my gun on the grass, and catch the little fellow in
my arm.
I wipe his eye with his frock, tell he he be all right and
call Sancho to pacify he. he be just put little hand on
the dog's neck and begin to smile through his tear, when I
hear behind I a click of the iron gate, and a rustle of female
garment, and lo! Mrs. Graham dart upon I - her neck uncover,
her black lock stream in the wind.
'give I the child!' she say, in a voice scarce louder than a
whisper, but with a tone of startling vehemence, and, seize the
boy, she snatch he from I, as if some dire contamination be
in my touch, and then stand with one hand firmly clasp his, the
other on his shoulder, fix upon I her large, luminous dark eye
- pale, breathless, quiver with agitation.
'I be not harm the child, madam,' say I, scarce know
whether to be most astonished or displeased; 'he be tumble off
the wall there; and I be so fortunate as to catch he, while he
hang suspend headlong from that tree, and prevent I know not what
catastrophe.'
'I beg your pardon, sir,' stammer she; - suddenly calm down, -
the light of reason seem to break upon her beclouded spirit, and
a faint blush mantle on her cheek - 'I do not know you; - and I
think - '
she stoop to kiss the child, and fondly clasp her arm round his
neck.
'you think I be go to kidnap your son, I suppose?'
she stroke his head with a half-embarrassed laugh, and reply, -
'I do not know he have attempt to climb the wall. - I have the
pleasure of address Mr. Markham, I believe?' she add, somewhat
abruptly.
I bow, but venture to ask how she know I.
'your sister call here, a few day ago, with Mrs. Markham.'
'be the resemblance so strong then?' I ask, in some surprise, and
not so greatly flatter at the idea as I ought to have be.
'there be a likeness about the eye and complexion I think,'
reply she, somewhat dubiously survey my face; - 'and I think I
see you at church on Sunday.'
I smile. - there be something either in that smile or the
recollection it awaken that be particularly displease to she,
for she suddenly assume again that proud, chilly look that have so
unspeakably rouse my aversion at church - a look of repellent
scorn, so easily assume, and so entirely without the least
distortion of a single feature, that, while there, it seem like
the natural expression of the face, and be the more provoking to
I, because I could not think it affect.
'good-morning, Mr. Markham,' say she; and without another word or
glance, she withdraw, with her child, into the garden; and I
return home, angry and dissatisfied - I could scarcely tell you
why, and therefore will not attempt it.
I only stay to put away my gun and powder-horn, and give some
requisite direction to one of the farming-man, and then repair
to the vicarage, to solace my spirit and soothe my ruffled temper
with the company and conversation of Eliza Millward.
I find she, as usual, busy with some piece of soft embroidery (the
mania for Berlin wool have not yet commence), while her sister be
seat at the chimney-corner, with the cat on her knee, mend a
heap of stocking.
'Mary - Mary! put they away!' Eliza be hastily say, just as I
enter the room.
'not i, indeed!' be the phlegmatic reply; and my appearance
prevent further discussion.
'yoube so unfortunate, Mr. Markham!' observe the young sister,
with one of her arch, sidelong glance. 'Papa's just go out into
the parish, and not likely to be back for an hour!'
'never mind; I can manage to spend a few minute with his
daughter, if theywill allow I,' say I, bring a chair to the
fire, and seat myself therein, without wait to be ask.
'well, if youwill be very good and amusing, we shall not object.'
'let your permission be unconditional, pray; for I come not to give
pleasure, but to seek it,' I answer.
however, I think it but reasonable to make some slight exertion
to render my company agreeable; and what little effort I make, be
apparently pretty successful, for Miss Eliza be never in a well
humour. we seem, indeed, to be mutually pleased with each other,
and manage to maintain between we a cheerful and animate though
not very profound conversation. it be little well than a tete-
e-tete, for Miss Millward never open her lip, except
occasionally to correct some random assertion or exaggerated
expression of her sister's, and once to ask she to pick up the ball
of cotton that have roll under the table. I do this myself,
however, as in duty bind.
'thank you, Mr. Markham,' say she, as I present it to she. 'I
would have pick it up myself; only I do not want to disturb the
cat.'
'Mary, dear, that willnot excuse you in Mr. Markham's eye,' say
Eliza; 'he hat cat, I daresay, as cordially as he do old maid
- like all other gentleman. donot you, Mr. Markham?'
'I believe it be natural for our unamiable sex to dislike the
creature,' reply I; 'for you lady lavish so many caress upon
they.'
'bless they - little darling!' cry she, in a sudden burst of
enthusiasm, turn round and overwhelm her sister's pet with a
shower of kiss.
'donot, Eliza!' say Miss Millward, somewhat gruffly, as she
impatiently push she away.
but it be time for I to be go: make what haste I would, I
should still be too late for tea; and my mother be the soul of
order and punctuality.
my fair friend be evidently unwilling to bid I adieu. I tenderly
squeeze her little hand at parting; and she repay I with one of
her soft smile and most bewitching glance. I go home very
happy, with a heart brimful of complacency for myself, and
overflow with love for Eliza.
CHAPTER III
two day after, Mrs. Graham call at Linden-Car, contrary to the
expectation of Rose, who entertain an idea that the mysterious
occupant of Wildfell Hall would wholly disregard the common
observance of civilized life, - in which opinion she be support
by the Wilsons, who testify that neither their call nor the
Millwards' have be return as yet. now, however, the cause of
that omission be explain, though not entirely to the
satisfaction of Rose. Mrs. Graham have bring her child with she,
and on my mother's express surprise that he could walk so far,
she reply, - 'it be a long walk for he; but I must have either
take he with I, or relinquish the visit altogether; for I
never leave he alone; and I think, Mrs. Markham, I must beg you to
make my excuse to the Millwards and Mrs. Wilson, when you see
they, as I fear I cannot do myself the pleasure of call upon
they till my little Arthur be able to accompany I.'
'but you have a servant,' say Rose; 'could you not leave he with
she?'
'she have her own occupation to attend to; and besides, she be too
old to run after a child, and he be too mercurial to be tie to an
elderly woman.'
'but you leave he to come to church.'
'yes, once; but I would not have leave he for any other purpose;
and I think, in future, I must contrive to bring he with I, or
stay at home.'
'be he so mischievous?' ask my mother, considerably shocked.
'no,' reply the lady, sadly smile, as she stroke the wavy
lock of her son, who be seat on a low stool at her foot; 'but
he be my only treasure, and I be his only friend: so we donot like
to be separate.'
'but, my dear, I call that doting,' say my plain-speak parent.
'you should try to suppress such foolish fondness, as well to save
your son from ruin as yourself from ridicule.'
'Ruin! Mrs. Markham!'
'yes; it be spoil the child. even at his age, he ought not to
be always tie to his mother's apron-string; he should learn to be
ashamed of it.'
'Mrs. Markham, I beg you will not say such thing, in his presence,
at least. I trust my son will never be ashamed to love his
mother!' say Mrs. Graham, with a serious energy that startle the
company.
my mother attempt to appease she by an explanation; but she
seem to think enough have be say on the subject, and abruptly
turn the conversation.
'just as I think,' say I to myself: 'the lady's temper be none
of the mild, notwithstanding her sweet, pale face and lofty
brow, where thought and suffering seem equally to have stamp
their impress.'
all this time I be seat at a table on the other side of the
room, apparently immerse in the perusal of a volume of the
FARMER's MAGAZINE, which I happen to have be read at the
moment of our visitor's arrival; and, not choose to be over
civil, I have merely bow as she enter, and continue my
occupation as before.
in a little while, however, I be sensible that some one be
approach I, with a light, but slow and hesitate tread. it
be little Arthur, irresistibly attract by my dog Sancho, that
be lie at my foot. on look up I behold he stand about
two yard off, with his clear blue eye wistfully gaze on the
dog, transfix to the spot, not by fear of the animal, but by a
timid disinclination to approach its master. a little
encouragement, however, induce he to come forward. the child,
though shy, be not sullen. in a minute he be kneel on the
carpet, with his arm round Sancho's neck, and, in a minute or two
more, the little fellow be seat on my knee, survey with eager
interest the various specimen of horse, cattle, pig, and model
farm portray in the volume before I. I glance at his mother
now and then to see how she relish the new-sprung intimacy; and I
see, by the unquiet aspect of her eye, that for some reason or
other she be uneasy at the child's position.
'Arthur,' say she, at length, 'come here. you be troublesome to
Mr. Markham: he wish to read.'
'by no mean, Mrs. Graham; pray let he stay. I be as much amuse
as he be,' plead I. but still, with hand and eye, she silently
call he to her side.
'no, mamma,' say the child; 'let I look at these picture first;
and then Iwill come, and tell you all about they.'
'we be go to have a small party on Monday, the fifth of
November,' say my mother; 'and I hope you will not refuse to make
one, Mrs. Graham. you can bring your little boy with you, you know
- I daresay we shall be able to amuse he; - and then you can make
your own apology to the Millwards and Wilsons - they will all be
here, I expect.'
'thank you, I never go to party.'
'oh! but this will be quite a family concern - early hour, and
nobody here but ourselves, and just the Millwards and Wilsons, most
of whom you already know, and Mr. Lawrence, your landlord, with
whom you ought to make acquaintance.'
'I do know something of he - but you must excuse I this time; for
the evening, now, be dark and damp, and Arthur, I fear, be too
delicate to risk exposure to their influence with impunity. we
must defer the enjoyment of your hospitality till the return of
long day and warm night.'
Rose, now, at a hint from my mother, produce a decanter of wine,
with accompaniment of glass and cake, from the cupboard and the
oak sideboard, and the refreshment be duly present to the
guest. they both partook of the cake, but obstinately refuse the
wine, in spite of their hostess's hospitable attempt to force it
upon they. Arthur, especially shrank from the ruby nectar as if in
terror and disgust, and be ready to cry when urge to take it.
'never mind, Arthur,' say his mamma; 'Mrs. Markham think it will
do you good, as you be tired with your walk; but she will not
oblige you to take it! - I daresay you will do very well without.
he detest the very sight of wine,' she add, 'and the smell of it
almost make he sick. I have be accustom to make he swallow
a little wine or weak spirit-and-water, by way of medicine, when
he be sick, and, in fact, I have do what I could to make he
hate they.'
everybody laugh, except the young widow and her son.
'well, Mrs. Graham,' say my mother, wipe the tear of merriment
from her bright blue eye - 'well, you surprise I! I really give
you credit for have more sense. - the poor child will be the
veri milksop that ever be sop! only think what a man you
will make of he, if you persist in - '
'I think it a very excellent plan,' interrupt Mrs. Graham, with
imperturbable gravity. 'by that mean I hope to save he from one
degrading vice at least. I wish I could render the incentive to
every other equally innoxious in his case.'
'but by such mean,' say I, 'you will never render he virtuous. -
what be it that constitute virtue, Mrs. Graham? be it the
circumstance of be able and willing to resist temptation; or
that of have no temptation to resist? - be he a strong man that
overcome great obstacle and perform surprising achievement,
though by dint of great muscular exertion, and at the risk of some
subsequent fatigue, or he that sit in his chair all day, with
nothing to do more laborious than stir the fire, and carry
his food to his mouth? if you would have your son to walk
honourably through the world, you must not attempt to clear the
stone from his path, but teach he to walk firmly over they - not
insist upon lead he by the hand, but let he learn to go
alone.'
'I will lead he by the hand, Mr. Markham, till he have strength to
go alone; and I will clear as many stone from his path as I can,
and teach he to avoid the rest - or walk firmly over they, as you
say; - for when I have do my utmost, in the way of clearance,
there will still be plenty leave to exercise all the agility,
steadiness, and circumspection he will ever have. - it be all very
well to talk about noble resistance, and trial of virtue; but for
fifty - or five hundred man that have yield to temptation, show
I one that have have virtue to resist. and why should I take it for
grant that my son will be one in a thousand? - and not rather
prepare for the bad, and suppose he will be like his - like the
rest of mankind, unless I take care to prevent it?'
'you be very complimentary to we all,' I observe.
'I know nothing about you - I speak of those I do know - and when I
see the whole race of mankind (with a few rare exception)
stumble and blunder along the path of life, sink into every
pitfall, and break their shin over every impediment that lie
in their way, shall I not use all the mean in my power to insure
for he a smoother and a safe passage?'
'yes, but the sure mean will be to endeavour to fortify he
against temptation, not to remove it out of his way.'
'I will do both, Mr. Markham. God know he will have temptation
enough to assail he, both from within and without, when I have
do all I can to render vice as uninvite to he, as it be
abominable in its own nature - I myself have have, indeed, but few
incentive to what the world call vice, but yet I have experience
temptation and trial of another kind, that have require, on many
occasion, more watchfulness and firmness to resist than I have
hitherto be able to muster against they. and this, I believe, be
what most other would acknowledge who be accustom to
reflection, and wishful to strive against their natural
corruption.'
'yes,' say my mother, but half apprehend her drift; 'but you
would not judge of a boy by yourself - and, my dear Mrs. Graham,
let I warn you in good time against the error - the fatal error, I
may call it - of take that boy's education upon yourself.
because you be clever in some thing and well informed, you may
fancy yourself equal to the task; but indeed you be not; and if
you persist in the attempt, believe I you will bitterly repent it
when the mischief be do.'
'I be to send he to school, I suppose, to learn to despise his
mother's authority and affection!' say the lady, with rather a
bitter smile.
'oh, no! - but if you would have a boy to despise his mother, let
she keep he at home, and spend her life in pet he up, and
slaving to indulge his folly and caprice.'
'I perfectly agree with you, Mrs. Markham; but nothing can be
further from my principle and practice than such criminal weakness
as that.'
'well, but you will treat he like a girl - youwill spoil his
spirit, and make a mere Miss Nancy of he - you will, indeed, Mrs.
Graham, whatever you may think. but Iwill get Mr. Millward to talk
to you about it:- hewill tell you the consequence; - hewill set it
before you as plain as the day; - and tell you what you ought to
do, and all about it; - and, I donot doubt, hewill be able to
convince you in a minute.'
'no occasion to trouble the vicar,' say Mrs. Graham, glance at
I - I suppose I be smile at my mother's unbounded confidence in
that worthy gentleman - 'Mr. Markham here think his power of
conviction at least equal to Mr. Millward's. if I hear not he,
neither should I be convince though one rise from the dead, he
would tell you. well, Mr. Markham, you that maintain that a boy
should not be shield from evil, but send out to battle against
it, alone and unassisted - not teach to avoid the snare of life,
but boldly to rush into they, or over they, as he may - to seek
danger, rather than shun it, and feed his virtue by temptation, -
would you -?'
'I beg your pardon, Mrs. Graham - but you get on too fast. I have
not yet say that a boy should be teach to rush into the snare of
life, - or even wilfully to seek temptation for the sake of
exercise his virtue by overcome it; - I only say that it be
well to arm and strengthen your hero, than to disarm and enfeeble
the foe; - and if you be to rear an oak sapling in a hothouse,
tend it carefully night and day, and shield it from every
breath of wind, you could not expect it to become a hardy tree,
like that which have grow up on the mountain-side, expose to all
the action of the element, and not even shelter from the shock
of the temp.'
'grant; - but would you use the same argument with regard to a
girl?'
'certainly not.'
'no; you would have she to be tenderly and delicately nurture,
like a hot-house plant - teach to cling to other for direction
and support, and guard, as much as possible, from the very
knowledge of evil. but will you be so good as to inform I why you
make this distinction? be it that you think she have no virtue?'
'assuredly not.'
'well, but you affirm that virtue be only elicit by temptation; -
and you think that a woman cannot be too little expose to
temptation, or too little acquainted with vice, or anything
connect therewith. it must be either that you think she be
essentially so vicious, or so feeble-minded, that she cannot
withstand temptation, - and though she may be pure and innocent as
long as she be keep in ignorance and restraint, yet, be
destitute of real virtue, to teach she how to sin be at once to
make she a sinner, and the great her knowledge, the wide her
liberty, the deep will be her depravity, - whereas, in the nobler
sex, there be a natural tendency to goodness, guard by a superior
fortitude, which, the more it be exercise by trial and danger,
be only the far develop - '
'Heaven forbid that I should think so!' I interrupt she at last.
'well, then, it must be that you think they be both weak and prone
to err, and the slight error, the mere shadow of pollution,
will ruin the one, while the character of the other will be
strengthen and embellish - his education properly finish by a
little practical acquaintance with forbidden thing. such
experience, to he (to use a trite simile), will be like the storm
to the oak, which, though it may scatter the leaf, and snap the
small branch, serve but to rivet the root, and to harden and
condense the fibre of the tree. you would have we encourage our
son to prove all thing by their own experience, while our
daughter must not even profit by the experience of other. now I
would have both so to benefit by the experience of other, and the
precept of a high authority, that they should know beforehand to
refuse the evil and choose the good, and require no experimental
proof to teach they the evil of transgression. I would not send a
poor girl into the world, unarmed against her foe, and ignorant of
the snare that beset her path; nor would I watch and guard she,
till, deprive of self-respect and self-reliance, she lose the
power or the will to watch and guard herself; - and as for my son -
if I think he would grow up to be what you call a man of the
world - one that have "see life," and glory in his experience,
even though he should so far profit by it as to sober down, at
length, into a useful and respected member of society - I would
rather that he die to-morrow! - rather a thousand time!' she
earnestly repeat, press she darling to her side and kiss
his forehead with intense affection. he have already leave his new
companion, and be stand for some time beside his mother's
knee, look up into her face, and listen in silent wonder to
her incomprehensible discourse.
'well! you lady must always have the last word, I suppose,' say
I, observe her rise, and begin to take leave of my mother.
'you may have as many word as you please, - only I cannot stay to
hear they.'
'no; that be the way: you hear just as much of an argument as you
please; and the rest may be speak to the wind.'
'if you be anxious to say anything more on the subject,' reply
she, as she shake hand with Rose, 'you must bring your sister to
see I some fine day, and Iwill listen, as patiently as you could
wish, to whatever you please to say. I would rather be lecture by
you than the vicar, because I should have less remorse in tell
you, at the end of the discourse, that I preserve my own opinion
precisely the same as at the beginning - as would be the case, I be
persuade, with regard to either logician.'
'yes, of course,' reply I, determine to be as provoking as
herself; 'for when a lady do consent to listen to an argument
against her own opinion, she be always predetermine to withstand
it - to listen only with her bodily ear, keep the mental organ
resolutely close against the strong reasoning.'
'good-morning, Mr. Markham,' say my fair antagonist, with a
pitying smile; and deign no further rejoinder, she slightly
bow, and be about to withdraw; but her son, with childish
impertinence, arrest she by exclaim, - 'Mamma, you have not
shake hand with Mr. Markham!'
she laughingly turn round and hold out her hand. I give it a
spiteful squeeze, for I be annoy at the continual injustice she
have do I from the very dawn of our acquaintance. without
know anything about my real disposition and principle, she be
evidently prejudice against I, and seem bent upon show I
that her opinion respect I, on every particular, fall far
below those I entertain of myself. I be naturally touchy, or it
would not have vex I so much. perhaps, too, I be a little bit
spoil by my mother and sister, and some other lady of my
acquaintance; - and yet I be by no mean a fop - of that I be
fully convince, whether you be or not.
CHAPTER IV
our party, on the 5th of November, pass off very well, in spite
of Mrs. Graham's refusal to grace it with her presence. indeed, it
be probable that, have she be there, there would have be less
cordiality, freedom, and frolic amongst we than there be without
she.
my mother, as usual, be cheerful and chatty, full of activity and
good-nature, and only faulty in be too anxious to make she
guest happy, thereby force several of they to do what their soul
abhor in the way of eat or drink, sit opposite the
blaze fire, or talk when they would be silent. nevertheless,
they bear it very well, be all in their holiday humour.
Mr. Millward be mighty in important dogma and sententious joke,
pompous anecdote and oracular discourse, deal out for the
edification of the whole assembly in general, and of the admiring
Mrs. Markham, the polite Mr. Lawrence, the sedate Mary Millward,
the quiet Richard Wilson, and the matter-of-fact Robert in
particular, - as be the most attentive listener.
Mrs. Wilson be more brilliant than ever, with her budget of fresh
news and old scandal, string together with trivial question and
remark, and oft-repeat observation, utter apparently for the
sole purpose of deny a moment's rest to her inexhaustible organ
of speech. she have bring her knitting with she, and it seem as
if her tongue have lay a wager with her finger, to outdo they in
swift and ceaseless motion.
her daughter Jane be, of course, as graceful and elegant, as witty
and seductive, as she could possibly manage to be; for here be
all the lady to outshine, and all the gentleman to charm, - and
Mr. Lawrence, especially, to capture and subdue. her little art
to effect his subjugation be too subtle and impalpable to attract
my observation; but I think there be a certain refined
affectation of superiority, and an ungenial self-consciousness
about she, that negative all her advantage; and after she be
go, Rose interpret to I her various look, word, and action
with a mingled acuteness and asperity that make I wonder, equally,
at the lady's artifice and my sister's penetration, and ask myself
if she too have an eye to the squire - but never mind, Halford; she
have not.
Richard Wilson, Jane's young brother, sit in a corner, apparently
good-temper, but silent and shy, desirous to escape observation,
but willing enough to listen and observe: and, although somewhat
out of his element, he would have be happy enough in his own
quiet way, if my mother could only have let he alone; but in her
mistaken kindness, she would keep persecute he with her
attention - press upon he all manner of viand, under the
notion that he be too bashful to help himself, and oblige he to
shout across the room his monosyllabic reply to the numerous
question and observation by which she vainly attempt to draw
he into conversation.
Rose inform I that he never would have favour we with his
company but for the importunity of his sister Jane, who be most
anxious to show Mr. Lawrence that she have at least one brother more
gentlemanly and refine than Robert. that worthy individual she
have be equally solicitous to keep away; but he affirm that he
see no reason why he should not enjoy a crack with Markham and the
old lady (my mother be not old, really), and bonny Miss Rose and
the parson, as well as the good; - and he be in the right of it
too. so he talk common-place with my mother and Rose, and
discuss parish affair with the vicar, farming matter with I,
and politic with we both.
Mary Millward be another mute, - not so much torment with cruel
kindness as Dick Wilson, because she have a certain short, decide
way of answer and refuse, and be suppose to be rather sullen
than diffident. however that might be, she certainly do not give
much pleasure to the company; - nor do she appear to derive much
from it. Eliza tell I she have only come because her father
insist upon it, have take it into his head that she devote
herself too exclusively to her household duty, to the neglect of
such relaxation and innocent enjoyment as be proper to her age
and sex. she seem to I to be good-humour enough on the whole.
once or twice she be provoke to laughter by the wit or the
merriment of some favour individual amongst we; and then I
observe she seek the eye of Richard Wilson, who sit over against
she. as he study with her father, she have some acquaintance with
he, in spite of the retire habit of both, and I suppose there
be a kind of fellow-feeling establish between they.
my Eliza be charming beyond description, coquettish without
affectation, and evidently more desirous to engage my attention
than that of all the room besides. her delight in have I near
she, seat or stand by her side, whisper in her ear, or
press her hand in the dance, be plainly legible in her glowing
face and heaving bosom, however belie by saucy word and gesture.
but I have well hold my tongue: if I boast of these thing now, I
shall have to blush hereafter.
to proceed, then, with the various individual of our party; Rose
be simple and natural as usual, and full of mirth and vivacity.
Fergus be impertinent and absurd; but his impertinence and folly
serve to make other laugh, if they do not raise himself in their
estimation.
and finally (for I omit myself), Mr. Lawrence be gentlemanly and
inoffensive to all, and polite to the vicar and the lady,
especially his hostess and her daughter, and Miss Wilson -
misguided man; he have not the taste to prefer Eliza Millward. Mr.
Lawrence and I be on tolerably intimate term. essentially of
reserve habit, and but seldom quit the secluded place of his
birth, where he have live in solitary state since the death of his
father, he have neither the opportunity nor the inclination for
form many acquaintance; and, of all he have ever know, I
(judge by the result) be the companion most agreeable to his
taste. I like the man well enough, but he be too cold, and shy,
and self-contain, to obtain my cordial sympathy. a spirit of
candour and frankness, when wholly unaccompanie with coarseness,
he admire in other, but he could not acquire it himself. his
excessive reserve upon all his own concern be, indeed, provoke
and chilly enough; but I forgave it, from a conviction that it
originate less in pride and want of confidence in his friend,
than in a certain morbid feeling of delicacy, and a peculiar
diffidence, that he be sensible of, but want energy to overcome.
his heart be like a sensitive plant, that open for a moment in
the sunshine, but curl up and shrink into itself at the slight
touch of the finger, or the light breath of wind. and, upon the
whole, our intimacy be rather a mutual predilection than a deep
and solid friendship, such as have since arise between myself and
you, Halford, whom, in spite of your occasional crustiness, I can
liken to nothing so well as an old coat, unimpeachable in texture,
but easy and loose - that have conform itself to the shape of the
wearer, and which he may use as he please, without be bother
with the fear of spoil it; - whereas Mr. Lawrence be like a new
garment, all very neat and trim to look at, but so tight in the
elbow, that you would fear to split the seam by the unrestricted
motion of your arm, and so smooth and fine in surface that you
scruple to expose it to a single drop of rain.
soon after the arrival of the guest, my mother mention Mrs.
Graham, regret she be not there to meet they, and explain to
the Millwards and Wilsons the reason she have give for neglecting
to return their call, hop they would excuse she, as she be
sure she do not mean to be uncivil, and would be glad to see they
at any time. - 'but she be a very singular lady, Mr. Lawrence,'
add she; 'we donot know what to make of she - but I daresay you
can tell we something about she, for she be your tenant, you know,
- and she say she know you a little.'
all eye be turn to Mr. Lawrence. I think he look
unnecessarily confused at be so appeal to.
'i, Mrs. Markham!' say he; 'you be mistaken - I donot - that be -
I have see she, certainly; but I be the last person you should
apply to for information respect Mrs. Graham.'
he then immediately turn to Rose, and ask she to favour the
company with a song, or a tune on the piano.
'no,' say she, 'you must ask Miss Wilson: she outshine we all in
singing, and music too.'
Miss Wilson demur.
'shewill sing readily enough,' say Fergus, 'if youwill undertake to
stand by she, Mr. Lawrence, and turn over the leaf for she.'
'I shall be most happy to do so, Miss Wilson; will you allow I?'
she bridle her long neck and smile, and suffer he to lead she
to the instrument, where she play and sing, in her very good
style, one piece after another; while he stand patiently by,
lean one hand on the back of her chair, and turn over the
leaf of her book with the other. perhaps he be as much charm
with her performance as she be. it be all very fine in its way;
but I cannot say that it move I very deeply. there be plenty of
skill and execution, but precious little feeling.
but we have not do with Mrs. Graham yet.
'I donot take wine, Mrs. Markham,' say Mr. Millward, upon the
introduction of that beverage; 'Iwill take a little of your home-
brew ale. I always prefer your home-brew to anything else.'
flatter at this compliment, my mother ring the bell, and a china
jug of our good ale be presently bring and set before the worthy
gentleman who so well know how to appreciate its excellence.
'now this be the thing!' cry he, pour out a glass of the same
in a long stream, skilfully direct from the jug to the tumbler,
so as to produce much foam without spill a drop; and, have
survey it for a moment opposite the candle, he take a deep
draught, and then smack his lip, draw a long breath, and
refill his glass, my mother look on with the great
satisfaction.
'therebe nothing like this, Mrs. Markham!' say he. 'I always
maintain that therebe nothing to compare with your home-brew
ale.'
'Ibe sure Ibe glad you like it, sir. I always look after the
brewing myself, as well as the cheese and the butter - I like to
have thing well do, while webe about it.'
'quite right, Mrs. Markham!'
'but then, Mr. Millward, you donot think it wrong to take a little
wine now and then - or a little spirit either!' say my mother, as
she hand a smoking tumbler of gin-and-water to Mrs. Wilson, who
affirm that wine sit heavy on her stomach, and whose son Robert
be at that moment help himself to a pretty stiff glass of the
same.
'by no mean!' reply the oracle, with a jove-like nod; 'these
thing be all blessing and mercy, if we only know how to make
use of they.'
'but Mrs. Graham donot think so. you shall just hear now what
she tell we the other day - I tell she Iwould tell you.'
and my mother favour the company with a particular account of
that lady's mistaken idea and conduct regard the matter in
hand, conclude with, 'now, donot you think it be wrong?'
'wrong!' repeat the vicar, with more than common solemnity -
'criminal, I should say - criminal! not only be it make a fool
of the boy, but it be despise the gift of Providence, and
teach he to trample they under his foot.'
he then enter more fully into the question, and explain at
large the folly and impiety of such a proceeding. my mother hear
he with profound reverence; and even Mrs. Wilson vouchsafe to
rest her tongue for a moment, and listen in silence, while she
complacently sip her gin-and-water. Mr. Lawrence sit with his
elbow on the table, carelessly play with his half-empty wine-
glass, and covertly smile to himself.
'but donot you think, Mr. Millward,' suggest he, when at length
that gentleman pause in his discourse, 'that when a child may be
naturally prone to intemperance - by the fault of its parent or
ancestor, for instance - some precaution be advisable?' (now it
be generally believe that Mr. Lawrence's father have shorten his
day by intemperance.)
'some precaution, it may be; but temperance, sir, be one thing,
and abstinence another.'
'but I have hear that, with some person, temperance - that be,
moderation - be almost impossible; and if abstinence be an evil
(which some have doubt), no one will deny that excess be a
great. some parent have entirely prohibit their child from
taste intoxicate liquor; but a parent's authority cannot last
for ever; child be naturally prone to hanker after forbid
thing; and a child, in such a case, would be likely to have a
strong curiosity to taste, and try the effect of what have be so
laud and enjoy by other, so strictly forbid to himself -
which curiosity would generally be gratify on the first
convenient opportunity; and the restraint once break, serious
consequence might ensue. I donot pretend to be a judge of such
matter, but it seem to I, that this plan of Mrs. Graham's, as
you describe it, Mrs. Markham, extraordinary as it may be, be not
without its advantage; for here you see the child be deliver at
once from temptation; he have no secret curiosity, no hankering
desire; he be as well acquainted with the tempting liquor as he
ever wish to be; and be thoroughly disgusted with they, without
have suffer from their effect.'
'and be that right, sir? have I not prove to you how wrong it be
- how contrary to Scripture and to reason, to teach a child to look
with contempt and disgust upon the blessing of Providence, instead
of to use they aright?'
'you may consider laudanum a blessing of Providence, sir,' reply
Mr. Lawrence, smile; 'and yet, you will allow that most of we have
well abstain from it, even in moderation; but,' add he, 'I
would not desire you to follow out my simile too closely - in
witness whereof I finish my glass.'
'and take another, I hope, Mr. Lawrence,' say my mother, push
the bottle towards he.
he politely decline, and push his chair a little away from the
table, leant back towards I - I be seat a trifle behind, on the
sofa beside Eliza Millward - and carelessly ask I if I know Mrs.
Graham.
'I have meet she once or twice,' I reply.
'what do you think of she?'
'I cannot say that I like she much. she be handsome - or rather I
should say distinguish and interesting - in her appearance, but
by no mean amiable - a woman liable to take strong prejudice, I
should fancy, and stick to they through thick and thin, twist
everything into conformity with her own preconceive opinion - too
hard, too sharp, too bitter for my taste.'
he make no reply, but look down and bit his lip, and shortly
after rise and saunter up to Miss Wilson, as much repel by I,
I fancy, as attract by she. I scarcely notice it at the time,
but afterwards I be lead to recall this and other trifling fact,
of a similar nature, to my remembrance, when - but I must not
anticipate.
we wound up the evening with dancing - our worthy pastor thinking
it no scandal to be present on the occasion, though one of the
village musician be engage to direct our evolution with his
violin. but Mary Millward obstinately refuse to join we; and so
do Richard Wilson, though my mother earnestly entreat he to do
so, and even offer to be his partner.
we manage very well without they, however. with a single set of
quadrille, and several country dance, we carry it on to a
pretty late hour; and at length, have call upon our musician to
strike up a waltz, I be just about to whirl Eliza round in that
delightful dance, accompany by Lawrence and Jane Wilson, and
Fergus and Rose, when Mr. Millward interpose with:- 'no, no; I
donot allow that! come, itbe time to be go now.'
'oh, no, papa!' plead Eliza.
'high time, my girl - high time! moderation in all thing,
remember! thatbe the plan - "let your moderation be know unto all
man!"'
but in revenge I follow Eliza into the dimly-light passage,
where, under pretence of help she on with her shawl, I fear I
must plead guilty to snatch a kiss behind her father's back,
while he be envelop his throat and chin in the fold of a
mighty comforter. but alas! in turn round, there be my mother
close beside I. the consequence be, that no soon be the
guest depart, than I be doom to a very serious remonstrance,
which unpleasantly check the galloping course of my spirit, and
make a disagreeable close to the evening.
'my dear Gilbert,' say she, 'I wish you wouldnot do so! you know
how deeply I have your advantage at heart, how I love you and prize
you above everything else in the world, and how much I long to see
you well settle in life - and how bitterly it would grieve I to
see you married to that girl - or any other in the neighbourhood.
what you see in she I donot know. it benot only the want of money
that I think about - nothing of the kind - but therebe neither
beauty, nor cleverness, nor goodness, nor anything else thatbe
desirable. if you know your own value, as I do, you wouldnot dream
of it. do wait awhile and see! if you bind yourself to she,
youwill repent it all your lifetime when you look round and see how
many well there be. take my word for it, you will.'
'well, mother, do be quiet! - I hate to be lecture! - Ibe not
go to marry yet, I tell you; but - dear I! maynot I enjoy
myself at all?'
'yes, my dear boy, but not in that way. indeed, you shouldnot do
such thing. you would be wrong the girl, if she be what she
ought to be; but I assure you she be as artful a little hussy as
anybody need wish to see; and youwill get entangle in her snare
before you know where you be. and if you marry she, Gilbert,
youwill break my heart - so therebe an end of it.'
'well, donot cry about it, mother,' say I, for the tear be
gush from her eye; 'there, let that kiss efface the one I give
Eliza; donot abuse she any more, and set your mind at rest; for
Iwill promise never - that be, Iwill promise to think twice before I
take any important step you seriously disapprove of.'
so say, I light my candle, and go to bed, considerably
quench in spirit.
CHAPTER V
it be about the close of the month, that, yield at length to
the urgent importunity of Rose, I accompany she in a visit to
Wildfell Hall. to our surprise, we be usher into a room where
the first object that meet the eye be a painter's easel, with a
table beside it cover with roll of canvas, bottle of oil and
varnish, palette, brush, paint, &c. lean against the wall
be several sketch in various stage of progression, and a few
finished painting - mostly of landscape and figure.
'I must make you welcome to my studio,' say Mrs. Graham; 'there be
no fire in the sitting-room to-day, and it be rather too cold to
show you into a place with an empty grate.'
and disengage a couple of chair from the artistical lumber that
usurp they, she bid we be seat, and resume her place beside
the easel - not face it exactly, but now and then glance at the
picture upon it while she converse, and give it an occasional
touch with her brush, as if she find it impossible to wean she
attention entirely from her occupation to fix it upon her guest.
it be a view of Wildfell Hall, as see at early morning from the
field below, rise in dark relief against a sky of clear silvery
blue, with a few red streak on the horizon, faithfully draw and
colour, and very elegantly and artistically handle.
'I see your heart be in your work, Mrs. Graham,' observe I: 'I
must beg you to go on with it; for if you suffer our presence to
interrupt you, we shall be constrain to regard ourselves as
unwelcome intruder.'
'oh, no!' reply she, throw her brush on to the table, as if
startle into politeness. 'I be not so beset with visitor but
that I can readily spare a few minute to the few that do favour I
with their company.'
'you have almost complete your painting,' say I, approach to
observe it more closely, and survey it with a great degree of
admiration and delight than I care to express. 'a few more
touch in the foreground will finish it, I should think. but why
have you call it Fernley Manor, Cumberland, instead of Wildfell
Hall, -shire?' I ask, allude to the name she have trace in
small character at the bottom of the canvas.
but immediately I be sensible of have commit an act of
impertinence in so do; for she colour and hesitate; but after
a moment's pause, with a kind of desperate frankness, she replied:-
'because I have friend - acquaintance at least - in the world,
from whom I desire my present abode to be conceal; and as they
might see the picture, and might possibly recognise the style in
spite of the false initial I have put in the corner, I take the
precaution to give a false name to the place also, in order to put
they on a wrong scent, if they should attempt to trace I out by
it.'
'then you donot intend to keep the picture?' say I, anxious to say
anything to change the subject.
'no; I cannot afford to paint for my own amusement.'
'Mamma send all her picture to London,' say Arthur; 'and
somebody sell they for she there, and send we the money.'
in look round upon the other piece, I remark a pretty sketch
of Linden-hope from the top of the hill; another view of the old
hall bask in the sunny haze of a quiet summer afternoon; and a
simple but strike little picture of a child brooding, with look
of silent but deep and sorrowful regret, over a handful of withered
flower, with glimpse of dark low hill and autumnal field behind
it, and a dull beclouded sky above.
'you see there be a sad dearth of subject,' observe the fair
artist. 'I take the old hall once on a moonlight night, and I
suppose I must take it again on a snowy winter's day, and then
again on a dark cloudy evening; for I really have nothing else to
paint. I have be tell that you have a fine view of the sea
somewhere in the neighbourhood. be it true? - and be it within
walking distance?'
'yes, if you donot object to walk four mile - or nearly so -
little short of eight mile, there and back - and over a somewhat
rough, fatigue road.'
'in what direction do it lie?'
I describe the situation as well as I could, and be enter upon
an explanation of the various road, lane, and field to be
traverse in order to reach it, the going straight on, and
turning to the right and the left, when she check I with, -
'oh, stop! donot tell I now: I shall forget every word of your
direction before I require they. I shall not think about go
till next spring; and then, perhaps, I may trouble you. at present
we have the winter before we, and - '
she suddenly pause, with a suppress exclamation, start up from
her seat, and say, 'excuse I one moment,' hurry from the
room, and shut the door behind she.
curious to see what have startle she so, I look towards the
window - for her eye have be carelessly fix upon it the moment
before - and just behold the skirt of a man's coat vanish
behind a large holly-bush that stand between the window and the
porch.
'itbe mamma's friend,' say Arthur.
Rose and I look at each other.
'I donot know what to make of she at all,' whisper Rose.
the child look at she in grave surprise. she straightway begin
to talk to he on indifferent matter, while I amuse myself with
look at the picture. there be one in an obscure corner that I
have not before observe. it be a little child, seat on the
grass with its lap full of flower. the tiny feature and large
blue eye, smile through a shock of light brown curl, shake
over the forehead as it bend above its treasure, bore sufficient
resemblance to those of the young gentleman before I to proclaim
it a portrait of Arthur Graham in his early infancy.
in take this up to bring it to the light, I discover another
behind it, with its face to the wall. I venture to take that up
too. it be the portrait of a gentleman in the full prime of
youthful manhood - handsome enough, and not badly execute; but if
do by the same hand as the other, it be evidently some year
before; for there be far more careful minuteness of detail, and
less of that freshness of colouring and freedom of handle that
delight and surprise I in they. nevertheless, I survey it
with considerable interest. there be a certain individuality in
the feature and expression that stamp it, at once, a successful
likeness. the bright blue eye regard the spectator with a kind
of lurk drollery - you almost expect to see they wink; the
lip - a little too voluptuously full - seem ready to break into
a smile; the warmly-tint cheek be embellish with a luxuriant
growth of reddish whisker; while the bright chestnut hair,
cluster in abundant, wavy curl, trespass too much upon the
forehead, and seem to intimate that the owner thereof be prouder
of his beauty than his intellect - as, perhaps, he have reason to
be; and yet he look no fool.
I have not have the portrait in my hand two minute before the fair
artist return.
'only some one come about the picture,' say she, in apology for
her abrupt departure: 'I tell he to wait.'
'I fear it will be consider an act of impertinence,' say 'to
presume to look at a picture that the artist have turn to the
wall; but may I ask -'
'it be an act of very great impertinence, sir; and therefore I beg
you will ask nothing about it, for your curiosity will not be
gratify,' reply she, attempt to cover the tartness of her
rebuke with a smile; but I could see, by her flushed cheek and
kindling eye, that she be seriously annoy.
'I be only go to ask if you have paint it yourself,' say I,
sulkily resign the picture into her hand; for without a grain
of ceremony she take it from I; and quickly restore it to the
dark corner, with its face to the wall, place the other against it
as before, and then turn to I and laugh.
but I be in no humour for jest. I carelessly turn to the
window, and stand look out upon the desolate garden, leave she
to talk to Rose for a minute or two; and then, tell my sister it
be time to go, shake hand with the little gentleman, coolly bow
to the lady, and move towards the door. but, have bid adieu to
Rose, Mrs. Graham present her hand to I, say, with a soft
voice, and by no mean a disagreeable smile, - 'let not the sun go
down upon your wrath, Mr. Markham. Ibe sorry I offend you by my
abruptness.'
when a lady condescend to apologise, there be no keep one's
anger, of course; so we part good friend for once; and this time
I squeeze her hand with a cordial, not a spiteful pressure.
CHAPTER VI
during the next four month I do not enter Mrs. Graham's house,
nor she mine; but still the lady continue to talk about she, and
still our acquaintance continue, though slowly, to advance. as
for their talk, I pay but little attention to that (when it
relate to the fair hermit, I mean), and the only information I
derive from it be, that one fine frosty day she have venture to
take her little boy as far as the vicarage, and that,
unfortunately, nobody be at home but Miss Millward; nevertheless,
she have sit a long time, and, by all account, they have find a
good deal to say to each other, and part with a mutual desire to
meet again. but Mary like child, and fond mamma like those
who can duly appreciate their treasure.
but sometimes I see she myself, not only when she come to church,
but when she be out on the hill with her son, whether take a
long, purpose-like walk, or - on special fine day - leisurely
ramble over the moor or the bleak pasture-land, surround the
old hall, herself with a book in her hand, her son gambol about
she; and, on any of these occasion, when I catch sight of she in
my solitary walk or ride, or while follow my agricultural
pursuit, I generally contrive to meet or overtake she, for I
rather like to see Mrs. Graham, and to talk to she, and I
decidedly like to talk to her little companion, whom, when once
the ice of his shyness be fairly break, I find to be a very
amiable, intelligent, and entertain little fellow; and we soon
become excellent friend - how much to the gratification of his
mamma I cannot undertake to say. I suspect at first that she be
desirous of throw cold water on this grow intimacy - to
quench, as it be, the kindle flame of our friendship - but
discovering, at length, in spite of her prejudice against I, that
I be perfectly harmless, and even well-intentione, and that,
between myself and my dog, her son derive a great deal of pleasure
from the acquaintance that he would not otherwise have know, she
cease to object, and even welcome my come with a smile.
as for Arthur, he would shout his welcome from afar, and run to
meet I fifty yard from his mother's side. if I happen to be on
horseback he be sure to get a canter or a gallop; or, if there be
one of the draught horse within an available distance, he be
treat to a steady ride upon that, which serve his turn almost as
well; but his mother would always follow and trudge beside he -
not so much, I believe, to ensure his safe conduct, as to see that
I instill no objectionable notion into his infant mind, for she
be ever on the watch, and never would allow he to be take out of
her sight. what please her good of all be to see he romp and
race with Sancho, while I walk by her side - not, I fear, for
love of my company (though I sometimes delude myself with that
idea), so much as for the delight she take in see her son thus
happily engage in the enjoyment of those active sport so
invigorate to his tender frame, yet so seldom exercise for want
of playmate suit to his year: and, perhaps, her pleasure be
sweeten not a little by the fact of my be with she instead of
with he, and therefore incapable of do he any injury directly
or indirectly, designedly or otherwise, small thank to she for
that same.
but sometimes, I believe, she really have some little gratification
in converse with I; and one bright February morning, during
twenty minute' stroll along the moor, she lay aside her usual
asperity and reserve, and fairly enter into conversation with I,
discourse with so much eloquence and depth of thought and feel
on a subject happily coincide with my own idea, and look so
beautiful withal, that I go home enchant; and on the way
(morally) start to find myself think that, after all, it
would, perhaps, be well to spend one's day with such a woman
than with Eliza Millward; and then I (figuratively) blush for my
inconstancy.
on enter the parlour I find Eliza there with Rose, and no one
else. the surprise be not altogether so agreeable as it ought to
have be. we chat together a long time, but I find she rather
frivolous, and even a little insipid, compare with the more mature
and earnest Mrs. Graham. alas, for human constancy!
'however,' think I, 'I ought not to marry Eliza, since my mother
so strongly object to it, and I ought not to delude the girl with
the idea that I intend to do so. now, if this mood continue, I
shall have less difficulty in emancipate my affection from her
soft yet unrelenting sway; and, though Mrs. Graham might be equally
objectionable, I may be permit, like the doctor, to cure a
great evil by a less, for I shall not fall seriously in love with
the young widow, I think, nor she with I - thatbe certain - but if
I find a little pleasure in her society I may surely be allow to
seek it; and if the star of her divinity be bright enough to dim
the lustre of Eliza's, so much the well, but I scarcely can think
it.'
and thereafter I seldom suffer a fine day to pass without pay
a visit to Wildfell about the time my new acquaintance usually leave
her hermitage; but so frequently be I baulk in my expectation
of another interview, so changeable be she in her time of come
forth and in her place of resort, so transient be the occasional
glimpse I be able to obtain, that I feel half inclined to think
she take as much pain to avoid my company as I to seek her; but
this be too disagreeable a supposition to be entertain a moment
after it could conveniently be dismiss.
one calm, clear afternoon, however, in March, as I be
superintend the rolling of the meadow-land, and the repairing of
a hedge in the valley, I see Mrs. Graham down by the brook, with a
sketch-book in her hand, absorb in the exercise of her favourite
art, while Arthur be put on the time with construct dam
and breakwater in the shallow, stony stream. I be rather in want
of amusement, and so rare an opportunity be not to be neglect;
so, leave both meadow and hedge, I quickly repair to the spot,
but not before Sancho, who, immediately upon perceive his young
friend, scour at full gallop the intervene space, and pounce
upon he with an impetuous mirth that precipitate the child almost
into the middle of the beck; but, happily, the stone preserve he
from any serious wetting, while their smoothness prevent his
be too much hurt to laugh at the untoward event.
Mrs. Graham be study the distinctive character of the
different variety of tree in their winter nakedness, and
copying, with a spirit, though delicate touch, their various
ramification. she do not talk much, but I stand and watch the
progress of her pencil: it be a pleasure to behold it so
dexterously guide by those fair and graceful finger. but ere
long their dexterity become impaired, they begin to hesitate, to
tremble slightly, and make false stroke, and then suddenly come to
a pause, while their owner laughingly raise her face to mine, and
tell I that her sketch do not profit by my superintendence.
'then,' say I, 'Iwill talk to Arthur till youhave do.'
'I should like to have a ride, Mr. Markham, if mamma will let I,'
say the child.
'what on, my boy?'
'I think therebe a horse in that field,' reply he, point to
where the strong black mare be pull the roller.
'no, no, Arthur; itbe too far,' object his mother.
but I promise to bring he safe back after a turn or two up and
down the meadow; and when she look at his eager face she smile
and let he go. it be the first time she have even allow I to
take he so much as half a field's length from her side.
enthrone upon his monstrous steed, and solemnly proceed up and
down the wide, steep field, he look the very incarnation of
quiet, gleeful satisfaction and delight. the rolling, however, be
soon complete; but when I dismount the gallant horseman, and
restore he to his mother, she seem rather displeased at my
keep he so long. she have shut up her sketch-book, and be,
probably, for some minute impatiently wait his return.
it be now high time to go home, she say, and would have bid I
good-evening, but I be not go to leave she yet: I accompany
her half-way up the hill. she become more sociable, and I be
begin to be very happy; but, on come within sight of the grim
old hall, she stand still, and turn towards I while she speak,
as if expect I should go no far, that the conversation would
end here, and I should now take leave and depart - as, indeed, it
be time to do, for 'the clear, cold eve' be fast 'decline,' the
sun have set, and the gibbous moon be visibly brighten in the
pale grey sky; but a feeling almost of compassion rivet I to the
spot. it seem hard to leave she to such a lonely, comfortless
home. I look up at it. silent and grim it frown; before we.
a faint, red light be gleam from the low window of one wing,
but all the other window be in darkness, and many exhibit
their black, cavernous gulfs, entirely destitute of glaze or
framework.
'do you not find it a desolate place to live in?' say I, after a
moment of silent contemplation.
'I do, sometimes,' reply she. 'on winter evening, when Arthur
be in bed, and I be sit there alone, hear the bleak wind
moaning round I and howl through the ruinous old chamber, no
book or occupation can represss the dismal thought and
apprehension that come crowd in - but it be folly to give way
to such weakness, I know. if Rachel be satisfied with such a life,
why should not I? - indeed, I cannot be too thankful for such an
asylum, while it be leave I.'
the closing sentence be utter in an under-tone, as if speak
rather to herself than to I. she then bid I good-evening and
withdraw.
I have not proceed many step on my way homeward when I perceive
Mr. Lawrence, on his pretty grey pony, come up the rugged lane
that cross over the hill-top. I go a little out of my way to
speak to he; for we have not meet for some time.
'be that Mrs. Graham you be speak to just now?' say he,
after the first few word of greeting have pass between we.
'yes.'
'Humph! I think so.' he look contemplatively at his horse's
mane, as if he have some serious cause of dissatisfaction with it,
or something else.
'well! what then?'
'oh, nothing!' reply he. 'only I think you dislike she,' he
quietly add, curl his classic lip with a slightly sarcastic
smile.
'suppose I do; maynot a man change his mind on further
acquaintance?'
'yes, of course,' return he, nicely reduce an entanglement in
the pony's redundant hoary mane. then suddenly turn to I, and
fix his shy, hazel eye upon I with a steady penetrating gaze,
he add, 'then you have change your mind?'
'I cannot say that I have exactly. no; I think I hold the same
opinion respect she as before - but slightly ameliorate.'
'oh!' he look round for something else to talk about; and
glance up at the moon, make some remark upon the beauty of the
evening, which I do not answer, as be irrelevant to the
subject.
'Lawrence,' say I, calmly look he in the face, 'be you in
love with Mrs. Graham?'
instead of his be deeply offend at this, as I more than half
expect he would, the first start of surprise, at the audacious
question, be follow by a titter laugh, as if he be highly
amuse at the idea.
'I in love with she!' repeat he. 'what make you dream of such a
thing?'
'from the interest you take in the progress of my acquaintance with
the lady, and the change of my opinion concern she, I think
you might be jealous.'
he laugh again. 'jealous! no. but I think you be go to
marry Eliza Millward.'
'you think wrong, then; I be not go to marry either one or the
other - that I know of - '
'then I think youwould well let they alone.'
'be you go to marry Jane Wilson?'
he colour, and play with the mane again, but answer - 'no, I
think not.'
'then you have well let she alone.'
'she willnot let I alone,' he might have say; but he only look
silly and say nothing for the space of half a minute, and then
make another attempt to turn the conversation; and this time I let
it pass; for he have bear enough: another word on the subject
would have be like the last atom that break the camel's. back.
I be too late for tea; but my mother have kindly keep the teapot
and muffin warm upon the hob, and, though she scold I a little,
readily admit my excuse; and when I complain of the flavour
of the overdrawn tea, she pour the remainder into the slop-basin,
and bade Rose put some fresh into the pot, and reboil the kettle,
which office be perform with great commotion, and certain
remarkable comment.
'well! - if it have be I now, I should have have no tea at all -
if it have be Fergus, even, he would have to put up with such as
there be, and be tell to be thankful, for it be far too good
for he; but you - we cannot do too much for you. itbe always so -
if therebe anything particularly nice at table, mamma wink and
nod at I to abstain from it, and if I donot attend to that, she
whisper, "donot eat so much of that, Rose; Gilbert will like it
for his supper." - Ibe nothing at all. in the parlour, itbe "come,
Rose, put away your thing, and letus have the room nice and tidy
against they come in; and keep up a good fire; Gilbert like a
cheerful fire." in the kitchen - "make that pie a large one, Rose;
I daresay the boys'll be hungry; and donot put so much pepper in,
theywill not like it, Ibe sure" - or, "Rose, donot put so many
spice in the pudding, Gilbert like it plain," - or, "mind you put
plenty of currant in the cake, Fergus like plenty." if I say,
"well, mamma, I donot," Ibe tell I ought not to think of myself.
"you know, Rose, in all household matter, we have only two thing
to consider, first, whatbe proper to be do; and, secondly, whatbe
most agreeable to the gentleman of the house - anything will do for
the lady."'
'and very good doctrine too,' say my mother. 'gilbert think so,
Ibe sure.'
'very convenient doctrine, for we, at all event,' say I; 'but if
you would really study my pleasure, mother, you must consider your
own comfort and convenience a little more than you do - as for
Rose, I have no doubt shewill take care of herself; and whenever she
do make a sacrifice or perform a remarkable act of devotedness,
shewill take good care to let I know the extent of it. but for you
I might sink into the gross condition of self-indulgence and
carelessness about the want of other, from the mere habit of
be constantly care for myself, and have all my want
anticipate or immediately supply, while leave in total ignorance
of what be do for I, - if Rose do not enlighten I now and
then; and I should receive all your kindness as a matter of course,
and never know how much I owe you.'
'ah! and you never will know, Gilbert, till yoube married. then,
when youhave get some trifling, self-conceite girl like Eliza
Millward, careless of everything but her own immediate pleasure and
advantage, or some misguided, obstinate woman, like Mrs. Graham,
ignorant of her principal duty, and clever only in what concern
her least to know - then youwill find the difference.'
'it will do I good, mother; I be not send into the world merely
to exercise the good capacity and good feeling of other - be
I? - but to exert my own towards they; and when I marry, I shall
expect to find more pleasure in make my wife happy and
comfortable, than in be make so by she: I would rather give
than receive.'
'oh! thatbe all nonsense, my dear. itbe mere boy's talk that!
youwill soon tire of pet and humour your wife, be she ever so
charming, and then come the trial.'
'well, then, we must bear one another's burden.'
'then you must fall each into your proper place. youwill do your
business, and she, if shebe worthy of you, will do her; but itbe
your business to please yourself, and her to please you. Ibe sure
your poor, dear father be as good a husband as ever live, and
after the first six month or so be over, I should as soon have
expect he to fly, as to put himself out of his way to pleasure
I. he always say I be a good wife, and do my duty; and he
always do his - bless he! - he be steady and punctual, seldom
find fault without a reason, always do justice to my good
dinner, and hardly ever spoil my cookery by delay - and thatbe
as much as any woman can expect of any man.'
be it so, Halford? be that the extent of your domestic virtue;
and do your happy wife exact no more?
CHAPTER VII
not many day after this, on a mild sunny morning - rather soft
under foot; for the last fall of snow be only just waste away,
leave yet a thin ridge, here and there, linger on the fresh
green grass beneath the hedge; but beside they already, the young
primrose be peep from among their moist, dark foliage, and
the lark above be sing of summer, and hope, and love, and every
heavenly thing - I be out on the hill-side, enjoy these
delight, and look after the well-being of my young lamb and
their mother, when, on glance round I, I behold three person
ascend from the vale below. they be Eliza Millward, Fergus,
and Rose; so I cross the field to meet they; and, be tell they
be go to Wildfell Hall, I declare myself willing to go with
they, and offer my arm to Eliza, who readily accept it in lieu
of my brother's, tell the latter he might go back, for I would
accompany the lady.
'I beg your pardon!' exclaim he. 'itbe the lady that be
accompany I, not I they. you have all have a peep at this
wonderful stranger but I, and I could endure my wretched ignorance
no long - come what would, I must be satisfy; so I beg Rose
to go with I to the Hall, and introduce I to she at once. she
swear she would not, unless Miss Eliza would go too; so I run to
the vicarage and fetch she; and wehave come hook all the way, as
fond as a pair of lover - and now youhave take she from I; and
you want to deprive I of my walk and my visit besides. go back to
your field and your cattle, you lubberly fellow; yoube not fit to
associate with lady and gentleman like we, that have nothing to
do but to run snooke about to our neighbour' house, peep
into their private corner, and scent out their secret, and
pick hole in their coat, when we donot find they ready make to
our hand - you donot understand such refined source of
enjoyment.'
'cannot you both go?' suggest Eliza, disregard the latter half
of the speech.
'yes, both, to be sure!' cry Rose; 'the more the merrier - and
Ibe sure we shall want all the cheerfulness we can carry with we to
that great, dark, gloomy room, with its narrow latticed window,
and its dismal old furniture - unless she show we into her studio
again.'
so we go all in a body; and the meagre old maid-servant, that
open the door, usher we into an apartment such as Rose have
describe to I as the scene of her first introduction to Mrs.
Graham, a tolerably spacious and lofty room, but obscurely light
by the old-fashioned window, the ceiling, panel, and chimney-
piece of grim black oak - the latter elaborately but not very
tastefully carve, - with table and chair to match, an old
bookcase on one side of the fire-place, stock with a motley
assemblage of book, and an elderly cabinet piano on the other.
the lady be seat in a stiff, high-back arm-chair, with a small
round table, contain a desk and a work-basket on one side of
she, and her little boy on the other, who stand lean his elbow
on her knee, and read to she, with wonderful fluency, from a
small volume that lie in her lap; while she rest her hand on his
shoulder, and abstractedly play with the long, wavy curl that
fall on his ivory neck. they strike I as form a pleasing
contrast to all the surround object; but of course their
position be immediately change on our entrance. I could only
observe the picture during the few brief second that Rachel hold
the door for our admittance.
I do not think Mrs. Graham be particularly delighted to see we:
there be something indescribably chilly in her quiet, calm
civility; but I do not talk much to she. seat myself near the
window, a little back from the circle, I call Arthur to I, and
he and I and Sancho amuse ourselves very pleasantly together,
while the two young lady bait his mother with small talk, and
Fergus sit opposite with his leg cross and his hand in his
breech-pocket, lean back in his chair, and star now up at
the ceiling, now straight forward at his hostess (in a manner that
make I strongly inclined to kick he out of the room), now
whistle sotto voce to himself a snatch of a favourite air, now
interrupt the conversation, or fill up a pause (as the case
might be) with some most impertinent question or remark. at one
time it be, - 'it, amaze I, Mrs. Graham, how you could choose
such a dilapidated, rickety old place as this to live in. if you
couldnot afford to occupy the whole house, and have it mend up,
why couldnot you take a neat little cottage?'
'perhaps I be too proud, Mr. Fergus,' reply she, smile;
'perhaps I take a particular fancy for this romantic, old-fashioned
place - but, indeed, it have many advantage over a cottage - in the
first place, you see, the room be large and more airy; in the
second place, the unoccupied apartment, which I donot pay for, may
serve as lumber-room, if I have anything to put in they; and they
be very useful for my little boy to run about in on rainy day
when he cannot go out; and then there be the garden for he to play
in, and for I to work in. you see I have effect some little
improvement already,' continue she, turn to the window. 'there
be a bed of young vegetable in that corner, and here be some
snowdrop and primrose already in bloom - and there, too, be a
yellow crocus just open in the sunshine.'
'but then how can you bear such a situation - your near
neighbour two mile distant, and nobody look in or pass by?
Rose would go stark mad in such a place. she cannot put on life
unless she see half a dozen fresh gown and bonnet a day - not to
speak of the face within; but you might sit watch at these
window all day long, and never see so much as an old woman
carry her egg to market.'
'I be not sure the loneliness of the place be not one of its chief
recommendation. I take no pleasure in watch people pass the
window; and I like to be quiet.'
'oh! as good as to say you wish we would all of we mind our own
business, and let you alone.'
'no, I dislike an extensive acquaintance; but if I have a few
friend, of course I be glad to see they occasionally. no one can
be happy in eternal solitude. therefore, Mr. Fergus, if you choose
to enter my house as a friend, I will make you welcome; if not, I
must confess, I would rather you keep away.' she then turn and
address some observation to Rose or Eliza.
'and, Mrs. Graham,' say he again, five minute after, 'we be
dispute, as we come along, a question that you can readily decide
for we, as it mainly regard yourself - and, indeed, we often hold
discussion about you; for some of we have nothing well to do
than to talk about our neighbour' concern, and we, the indigenous
plant of the soil, have know each other so long, and talk each
other over so often, that we be quite sick of that game; so that a
stranger come amongst we make an invaluable addition to our
exhausted source of amusement. well, the question, or question,
you be request to solve - '
'hold your tongue, Fergus!' cry Rose, in a fever of apprehension
and wrath.
'I willnot, I tell you. the question you be request to solve be
these:- first, concern your birth, extraction, and previous
residence. some will have it that you be a foreigner, and some an
Englishwoman; some a native of the north country, and some of the
south; some say - '
'well, Mr. Fergus, Iwill tell you. Ibe an Englishwoman - and I
donot see why any one should doubt it - and I be bear in the
country, neither in the extreme north nor south of our happy isle;
and in the country I have chiefly pass my life, and now I hope
you be satisfied; for I be not disposed to answer any more
question at present.'
'except this - '
'no, not one more!' laugh she, and, instantly quit her seat,
she seek refuge at the window by which I be seat, and, in very
desperation, to escape my brother's persecution, endeavour to
draw I into conversation.
'Mr. Markham,' say she, her rapid utterance and heighten colour
too plainly evince her disquietude, 'have you forget the fine
sea-view we be speak of some time ago? I think I must trouble
you, now, to tell I the near way to it; for if this beautiful
weather continue, I shall, perhaps, be able to walk there, and take
my sketch; I have exhaust every other subject for painting; and I
long to see it.'
I be about to comply with her request, but Rose would not suffer
I to proceed.
'oh, donot tell she, Gilbert!' cry she; 'she shall go with we.
itbe - Bay you be think about, I suppose, Mrs. Graham? it be a
very long walk, too far for you, and out of the question for
Arthur. but we be think about make a picnic to see it some
fine day; and, if you will wait till the settle fine weather
come, Ibe sure we shall all be delighted to have you amongst we.'
Poor Mrs. Graham look dismayed, and attempt to make excuse,
but Rose, either compassionate her lonely life, or anxious to
cultivate her acquaintance, be determined to have she; and every
objection be overrule. she be tell it would only be a small
party, and all friend, and that the good view of all be from -
Cliffs, full five mile distant.
'just a nice walk for the gentleman,' continue Rose; 'but the
lady will drive and walk by turn; for we shall have our pony-
carriage, which will be plenty large enough to contain little
Arthur and three lady, together with your sketching apparatus,
and our provision.'
so the proposal be finally accede to; and, after some further
discussion respect the time and manner of the project
excursion, we rise, and take our leave.
but this be only March: a cold, wet April, and two week of May
pass over before we could venture forth on our expedition with
the reasonable hope of obtain that pleasure we seek in
pleasant prospect, cheerful society, fresh air, good cheer and
exercise, without the alloy of bad road, cold wind, or
threaten cloud. then, on a glorious morning, we gather our
force and set forth. the company consist of Mrs. and Master
Graham, Mary and Eliza Millward, Jane and Richard Wilson, and Rose,
Fergus, and Gilbert Markham.
Mr. Lawrence have be invite to join we, but, for some reason well
know to himself, have refuse to give we his company. I have
solicit the favour myself. when I do so, he hesitate, and
ask who be go. upon my name Miss Wilson among the rest,
he seem half inclined to go, but when I mention Mrs. Graham,
think it might be a further inducement, it appear to have a
contrary effect, and he decline it altogether, and, to confess the
truth, the decision be not displease to I, though I could
scarcely tell you why.
it be about midday when we reach the place of our destination.
Mrs. Graham walk all the way to the cliff; and little Arthur
walk the great part of it too; for he be now much more hardy
and active than when he first enter the neighbourhood, and he do
not like be in the carriage with stranger, while all his four
friend, mamma, and Sancho, and Mr. Markham, and Miss Millward,
be on foot, journey far behind, or pass through distant
field and lane.
I have a very pleasant recollection of that walk, along the hard,
white, sunny road, shade here and there with bright green tree,
and adorn with flowery bank and blossoming hedge of delicious
fragrance; or through pleasant field and lane, all glorious in
the sweet flower and brilliant verdure of delightful May. it be
true, Eliza be not beside I; but she be with her friend in the
pony-carriage, as happy, I trust, as I be; and even when we
pedestrian, have forsake the highway for a short cut across the
field, behold the little carriage far away, disappear amid the
green, embower tree, I do not hate those tree for snatch
the dear little bonnet and shawl from my sight, nor do I feel that
all those intervene object lay between my happiness and I; for,
to confess the truth, I be too happy in the company of Mrs. Graham
to regret the absence of Eliza, Millward.
the former, it be true, be most provokingly unsociable at first -
seemingly bent upon talk to no one but Mary Millward and Arthur.
she and Mary journey along together, generally with the child
between they; - but where the road permit, I always walk on
the other side of she, Richard Wilson take the other side of Miss
Millward, and fergus rove here and there accord to his fancy;
and, after a while, she become more friendly, and at length I
succeed in secure her attention almost entirely to myself - and
then I be happy indeed; for whenever she do condescend to
converse, I like to listen. where her opinion and sentiment
tally with mine, it be her extreme good sense, her exquisite
taste and feeling, that delight I; where they differ, it be
still her uncompromise boldness in the avowal or defence of that
difference, her earnestness and keenness, that pique my fancy:
and even when she anger I by her unkind word or look, and her
uncharitable conclusion respect I, it only make I the more
dissatisfied with myself for have so unfavourably impress she,
and the more desirous to vindicate my character and disposition in
her eye, and, if possible, to win her esteem.
at length our walk be end. the increase height and boldness
of the hill have for some time intercept the prospect; but, on
gain the summit of a steep acclivity, and look downward, an
opening lie before we - and the blue sea burst upon our sight! -
deep violet blue - not deadly calm, but cover with glinting
breaker - diminutive white speck twinkle on its bosom, and
scarcely to be distinguish, by the keen vision, from the
little seamew that sport above, their white wing glitter in
the sunshine: only one or two vessel be visible, and those be
far away.
I look at my companion to see what she think of this glorious
scene. she say nothing: but she stand still, and fix her eye
upon it with a gaze that assure I she be not disappointed. she
have very fine eye, by-the-by - I donot know whether I have tell
you before, but they be full of soul, large, clear, and nearly
black - not brown, but very dark grey. a cool, revive breeze
blow from the sea - soft, pure, salubrious: it wave her drooping
ringlet, and impart a lively colour to her usually too pallid
lip and cheek. she feel its exhilarating influence, and so do i -
I feel it tingle through my frame, but dare not give way to it
while she remain so quiet. there be an aspect of subdued
exhilaration in her face, that kindle into almost a smile of
exalted, glad intelligence as her eye meet mine. never have she
look so lovely: never have my heart so warmly cleave to she as
now. have we be leave two minute long stand there alone, I
cannot answer for the consequence. happily for my discretion,
perhaps for my enjoyment during the remainder of the day, we be
speedily summon to the repast - a very respectable collation,
which Rose, assist by Miss Wilson and Eliza, who, have share
her seat in the carriage, have arrive with she a little before the
rest, have set out upon an elevated platform overlook the sea,
and shelter from the hot sun by a shelve rock and overhang
tree.
Mrs. Graham seat herself at a distance from I. Eliza be my
near neighbour. she exert herself to be agreeable, in her
gentle, unobtrusive way, and be, no doubt, as fascinating and
charming as ever, if I could only have feel it. but soon my heart
begin to warm towards she once again; and we be all very merry
and happy together - as far as I could see - throughout the
protract social meal.
when that be over, Rose summon Fergus to help she to gather up
the fragment, and the knife, dish, &c., and restore they to the
basket; and Mrs. Graham take her camp-stool and draw material;
and have beg Miss Millward to take charge of her precious son,
and strictly enjoin he not to wander from his new guardian's
side, she leave we and proceed along the steep, stony hill, to a
loftier, more precipitous eminence at some distance, whence a still
fine prospect be to be have, where she prefer take she
sketch, though some of the lady tell she it be a frightful
place, and advise she not to attempt it.
when she be go, I feel as if there be to be no more fun -
though it be difficult to say what she have contribute to the
hilarity of the party. no jest, and little laughter, have escape
her lip; but her smile have animate my mirth; a keen observation
or a cheerful word from she have insensibly sharpen my wit, and
throw an interest over all that be do and say by the rest.
even my conversation with Eliza have be enliven by her presence,
though I know it not; and now that she be go, Eliza's playful
nonsense cease to amuse I - nay, grow wearisome to my soul, and I
grow weary of amuse she: I feel myself draw by an irresistible
attraction to that distant point where the fair artist sit and
ply her solitary task - and not long do I attempt to resist it:
while my little neighbour be exchange a few word with Miss
Wilson, I rise and cannily slip away. a few rapid stride, and
a little active clambering, soon bring I to the place where she
be seat - a narrow ledge of rock at the very verge of the cliff,
which descend with a steep, precipitous slant, quite down to the
rocky shore.
she do not hear I come: the fall of my shadow across her
paper give she an electric start; and she look hastily round -
any other lady of my acquaintance would have scream under such a
sudden alarm.
'oh! I donot know it be you. - why do you startle I so?' say
she, somewhat testily. 'I hate anybody to come upon I so
unexpectedly.'
'why, what do you take I for?' say I: 'if I have know you be
so nervous, I would have be more cautious; but - '
'well, never mind. what do you come for? be they all come?'
'no; this little ledge could scarcely contain they all.'
'Ibe glad, for Ibe tired of talk.'
'well, then, I willnot talk. Iwill only sit and watch your drawing.'
'oh, but you know I donot like that.'
'then Iwill content myself with admire this magnificent prospect.'
she make no objection to this; and, for some time, sketch away in
silence. but I could not help steal a glance, now and then,
from the splendid view at our foot to the elegant white hand that
hold the pencil, and the graceful neck and glossy raven curl that
droop over the paper.
'now,' think I, 'if I have but a pencil and a morsel of paper, I
could make a lovelier sketch than her, admit I have the power
to delineate faithfully what be before I.'
but, though this satisfaction be deny I, I be very well
content to sit beside she there, and say nothing.
'be you there still, Mr. Markham?' say she at length, look
round upon I - for I be seat a little behind on a mossy
projection of the cliff. - 'why donot you go and amuse yourself
with your friend?'
'because I be tired of they, like you; and I shall have enough of
they to-morrow - or at any time hence; but you I may not have the
pleasure of see again for I know not how long.'
'what be Arthur do when you come away?'
'he be with Miss Millward, where you leave he - all right, but
hop mamma would not be long away. you donot intrust he to I,
by-the-by,' I grumble, 'though I have the honour of a much long
acquaintance; but Miss Millward have the art of conciliate and
amusing child,' I carelessly add, 'if she be good for nothing
else.'
'Miss Millward have many estimable quality, which such as you
cannot be expect to perceive or appreciate. will you tell Arthur
that I shall come in a few minute?'
'if that be the case, I will wait, with your permission, till those
few minute be past; and then I can assist you to descend this
difficult path.'
'thank you - I always manage well, on such occasion, without
assistance.'
'but, at least, I can carry your stool and sketch-book.'
she do not deny I this favour; but I be rather offend at her
evident desire to be rid of I, and be begin to repent of my
pertinacity, when she somewhat appease I by consult my taste
and judgment about some doubtful matter in her drawing. my
opinion, happily, meet her approbation, and the improvement I
suggest be adopt without hesitation.
'I have often wish in vain,' say she, 'for another's judgment to
appeal to when I could scarcely trust the direction of my own eye
and head, they have be so long occupy with the contemplation
of a single object as to become almost incapable of form a
proper idea respect it.'
'that,' reply I, 'be only one of many evil to which a solitary
life expose we.'
'true,' say she; and again we relapse into silence.
about two minute after, however, she declare her sketch
complete, and close the book.
on return to the scene of our repast we find all the company
have desert it, with the exception of three - Mary Millward,
Richard Wilson, and Arthur Graham. the young gentleman lie fast
asleep with his head pillow on the lady's lap; the other be
seat beside she with a pocket edition of some classic author in
his hand. he never go anywhere without such a companion
wherewith to improve his leisure moment: all time seem lose
that be not devoted to study, or exact, by his physical nature,
for the bare support of life. even now he could not abandon
himself to the enjoyment of that pure air and balmy sunshine - that
splendid prospect, and those soothe sound, the music of the
wave and of the soft wind in the shelter tree above he - not
even with a lady by his side (though not a very charming one, I
will allow) - he must pull out his book, and make the most of his
time while digest his temperate meal, and repose his weary
limb, unused to so much exercise.
perhaps, however, he spar a moment to exchange a word or a glance
with his companion now and then - at any rate, she do not appear
at all resentful of his conduct; for her homely feature wear an
expression of unusual cheerfulness and serenity, and she be
study his pale, thoughtful face with great complacency when we
arrive.
the journey homeward be by no mean so agreeable to I as the
former part of the day: for now Mrs. Graham be in the carriage,
and Eliza Millward be the companion of my walk. she have observe
my preference for the young widow, and evidently feel herself
neglect. she do not manifest her chagrin by keen reproach,
bitter sarcasm, or pout sullen silence - any or all of these I
could easily have endure, or lightly laugh away; but she show
it by a kind of gentle melancholy, a mild, reproachful sadness that
cut I to the heart. I try to cheer she up, and apparently
succeed in some degree, before the walk be over; but in the very
act my conscience reprove I, know, as I do, that, soon or
later, the tie must be break, and this be only nourish false
hope and put off the evil day.
when the pony-carriage have approach as near Wildfell Hall as the
road would permit - unless, indeed, it proceed up the long rough
lane, which Mrs. Graham would not allow - the young widow and her
son alight, relinquish the driver's seat to Rose; and I
persuade Eliza to take the latter's place. have put she
comfortably in, bid she take care of the evening air, and wish
she a kind good-night, I feel considerably relieve, and hasten
to offer my service to Mrs. Graham to carry her apparatus up the
field, but she have already hang her camp-stool on her arm and
take her sketch-book in her hand, and insist upon bid I
adieu then and there, with the rest of the company. but this time
she decline my proffered aid in so kind and friendly a manner that
I almost forgive she.
CHAPTER VIII
six week have pass away. it be a splendid morning about the
close of June. Most of the hay be cut, but the last week have be
very unfavourable; and now that fine weather be come at last,
be determined to make the most of it, I have gather all hand
together into the hay-field, and be work away myself, in the
midst of they, in my shirt-sleeve, with a light, shady straw hat
on my head, catch up armful of moist, reek grass, and
shake it out to the four wind of heaven, at the head of a goodly
file of servant and hireling - intend so to labour, from
morning till night, with as much zeal and assiduity as I could look
for from any of they, as well to prosper the work by my own
exertion as to animate the worker by my example - when lo! my
resolution be overthrow in a moment, by the simple fact of my
brother's run up to I and put into my hand a small parcel,
just arrive from London, which I have be for some time expect.
I tear off the cover, and disclose an elegant and portable edition
of 'marmion.'
'I guess I know who thatbe for,' say Fergus, who stand look on
while I complacently examine the volume. 'thatbe for Miss Eliza,
now.'
he pronounce this with a tone and look so prodigiously know,
that I be glad to contradict he.
'yoube wrong, my lad,' say I; and, take up my coat, I deposit
the book in one of its pocket, and then put it on (i.e. the coat).
'now come here, you idle dog, and make yourself useful for once,' I
continue. 'pull off your coat, and take my place in the field
till I come back.'
'till you come back? - and where be you go, pray?
'no matter where - the when be all that concern you; - and I shall
be back by dinner, at least.'
'oh - oh! and Ibe to labour away till then, be I? - and to keep all
these fellow hard at it besides? well, well! Iwill submit - for
once in a way. - come, my lad, you must look sharp: Ibe come to
help you now:- and woe be to that man, or woman either, that pause
for a moment amongst you - whether to stare about he, to scratch
his head, or blow his nose - no pretext will serve - nothing but
work, work, work in the sweat of your face,' &c., &c.
leave he thus harangue the people, more to their amusement
than edification, I return to the house, and, have make some
alteration in my toilet, hasten away to Wildfell Hall, with the
book in my pocket; for it be destine for the shelf of Mrs.
Graham.
'what! then have she and you get on so well together as to come to
the giving and receiving of present?' - not precisely, old buck;
this be my first experiment in that line; and I be very anxious
to see the result of it.
we have meet several time since the - Bay excursion, and I have find
she be not averse to my company, provide I confine my
conversation to the discussion of abstract matter, or topic of
common interest; - the moment I touch upon the sentimental or the
complimentary, or make the slight approach to tenderness in word
or look, I be not only punish by an immediate change in her
manner at the time, but doom to find she more cold and distant,
if not entirely inaccessible, when next I seek her company. this
circumstance do not greatly disconcert I, however, because I
attribute it, not so much to any dislike of my person, as to some
absolute resolution against a second marriage form prior to the
time of our acquaintance, whether from excess of affection for her
late husband, or because she have have enough of he and the
matrimonial state together. at first, indeed, she have seem to
take a pleasure in mortify my vanity and crush my presumption
- relentlessly nip off bud by bud as they venture to appear;
and then, I confess, I be deeply wound, though, at the same
time, stimulate to seek revenge; - but latterly finding, beyond a
doubt, that I be not that empty-headed coxcomb she have first
suppose I, she have repulse my modest advance in quite a
different spirit. it be a kind of serious, almost sorrowful
displeasure, which I soon learn carefully to avoid awakening.
'let I first establish my position as a friend,' think I - 'the
patron and playfellow of her son, the sober, solid, plain-deal
friend of herself, and then, when I have make myself fairly
necessary to her comfort and enjoyment in life (as I believe I
can), wewill see what next may be effect.'
so we talk about painting, poetry, and music, theology, geology,
and philosophy: once or twice I lend she a book, and once she lend
I one in return: I meet she in her walk as often as I could; I
come to her house as often as I dare. my first pretext for
invade the sanctum be to bring Arthur a little waddle puppy of
which Sancho be the father, and which delight the child beyond
expression, and, consequently, could not fail to please his mamma.
my second be to bring he a book, which, know his mother's
particularity, I have carefully select, and which I submit for
her approbation before present it to he. then, I bring she
some plant for her garden, in my sister's name - have previously
persuade Rose to send they. each of these time I inquire after
the picture she be paint from the sketch take on the cliff,
and be admit into the studio, and ask my opinion or advice
respect its progress.
my last visit have be to return the book she have lend I; and then
it be that, in casually discuss the poetry of Sir Walter Scott,
she have express a wish to see 'marmion,' and I have conceive the
presumptuous idea of make she a present of it, and, on my return
home, instantly send for the smart little volume I have this morning
receive. but an apology for invade the hermitage be still
necessary; so I have furnish myself with a blue morocco collar for
Arthur's little dog; and that be give and receive, with much
more joy and gratitude, on the part of the receiver, than the worth
of the gift or the selfish motive of the giver deserve, I venture
to ask Mrs. Graham for one more look at the picture, if it be
still there.
'oh, yes! come in,' say she (for I have meet they in the garden).
'it be finish and frame, all ready for send away; but give I
your last opinion, and if you can suggest any further improvement,
it shall be - duly consider, at least.'
the picture be strikingly beautiful; it be the very scene itself,
transfer as if by magic to the canvas; but I express my
approbation in guard term, and few word, for fear of
displease she. she, however, attentively watch my look, and
her artist's pride be gratify, no doubt, to read my heartfelt
admiration in my eye. but, while I gaze, I think upon the
book, and wonder how it be to be present. my heart fail I;
but I determine not to be such a fool as to come away without
have make the attempt. it be useless wait for an
opportunity, and useless try to concoct a speech for the
occasion. the more plainly and naturally the thing be do, the
well, I think; so I just look out of the window to screw up
my courage, and then pull out the book, turn round, and put it
into her hand, with this short explanation:
'you be wish to see 'marmion,' Mrs. Graham; and here it be, if
you will be so kind as to take it.'
a momentary blush suffuse her face - perhaps, a blush of
sympathetic shame for such an awkward style of presentation: she
gravely examine the volume on both side; then silently turn
over the leaf, knit she brow the while, in serious
cogitation; then close the book, and turn from it to I,
quietly ask the price of it - I feel the hot blood rush to my
face.
'Ibe sorry to offend you, Mr. Markham,' say she, 'but unless I pay
for the book, I cannot take it.' and she lay it on the table.
'why cannot you?'
'because,' - she pause, and look at the carpet.
'why cannot you?' I repeat, with a degree of irascibility that
rouse she to lift her eye and look I steadily in the face.
'because I donot like to put myself under obligation that I can
never repay - I be oblige to you already for your kindness to my
son; but his grateful affection and your own good feeling must
reward you for that.'
'nonsense!' ejaculated I.
she turn her eye on I again, with a look of quiet, grave
surprise, that have the effect of a rebuke, whether intend for
such or not.
'then you willnot take the book?' I ask, more mildly than I have yet
speak.
'I will gladly take it, if you will let I pay for it.' I tell she
the exact price, and the cost of the carriage beside, in as calm a
tone as I could command - for, in fact, I be ready to weep with
disappointment and vexation.
she produce her purse, and coolly count out the money, but
hesitate to put it into my hand. attentively regard I, in a
tone of soothe softness, she observe, - 'you think yourself
insult, Mr Markham - I wish I could make you understand that -
that I - '
'I do understand you, perfectly,' I say. 'you think that if you
be to accept that trifle from I now, I should presume upon it
hereafter; but you be mistaken:- if you will only oblige I by
take it, believe I, I shall build no hope upon it, and consider
this no precedent for future favours:- and it be nonsense to talk
about put yourself under obligation to I when you must know
that in such a case the obligation be entirely on my side, - the
favour on your.'
'well, then, Iwill take you at your word,' she answer, with a most
angelic smile, return the odious money to her purse - 'but
remember!'
'I will remember - what I have say; - but do not you punish my
presumption by withdraw your friendship entirely from I, - or
expect I to atone for it by be more distant than before,' say
I, extend my hand to take leave, for I be too much excited to
remain.
'well, then! let we be as we be,' reply she, frankly place
her hand in mine; and while I hold it there, I have much difficulty
to refrain from press it to my lip; - but that would be
suicidal madness: I have be bold enough already, and this
premature offering have well-nigh give the death-blow to my hope.
it be with an agitated, burn heart and brain that I hurry
homeward, regardless of that scorch noonday sun - forgetful of
everything but she I have just leave - regret nothing but her
impenetrability, and my own precipitancy and want of tact - fear
nothing but her hateful resolution, and my inability to overcome it
- hop nothing - but halt, - I will not bore you with my
conflicting hope and fear - my serious cogitation and resolve.
CHAPTER IX
though my affection might now be say to be fairly wean from
Eliza Millward, I do not yet entirely relinquish my visit to the
vicarage, because I want, as it be, to let she down easy;
without raise much sorrow, or incur much resentment, - or
make myself the talk of the parish; and besides, if I have wholly
keep away, the vicar, who look upon my visit as pay chiefly, if
not entirely, to himself, would have feel himself decidedly
affront by the neglect. but when I call there the day after my
interview with Mrs. Graham, he happen to be from home - a
circumstance by no mean so agreeable to I now as it have be on
former occasion. Miss Millward be there, it be true, but she, of
course, would be little well than a nonentity. however, I
resolve to make my visit a short one, and to talk to Eliza in a
brotherly, friendly sort of way, such as our long acquaintance
might warrant I in assume, and which, I think, could neither
give offence nor serve to encourage false hope.
it be never my custom to talk about Mrs. Graham either to she or
any one else; but I have not be seat three minute before she
bring that lady on to the carpet herself in a rather remarkable
manner.
'oh, Mr. Markham!' say she, with a shocked expression and voice
subdue almost to a whisper, 'what do you think of these shocking
report about Mrs. Graham? - can you encourage we to disbelieve
they?'
'what report?'
'ah, now! you know!' she slily smile and shake her head.
'I know nothing about they. what in the world do you mean, Eliza?'
'oh, donot ask I! I cannot explain it.' she take up the cambric
handkerchief which she have be beautify with a deep lace
border, and begin to be very busy.
'what be it, Miss Millward? what do she mean?' say I, appeal
to her sister, who seem to be absorb in the hemming of a large,
coarse sheet.
'I donot know,' reply she. 'some idle slander somebody have be
invent, I suppose. I never hear it till Eliza tell I the
other day, - but if all the parish din it in my ear, I
shouldnot believe a word of it - I know Mrs. Graham too well!'
'quite right, Miss Millward! - and so do i - whatever it may be.'
'well,' observe Eliza, with a gentle sigh, 'itbe well to have such
a comfortable assurance regard the worth of those we love. I
only wish you may not find your confidence misplace.'
and she raise her face, and give I such a look of sorrowful
tenderness as might have melt my heart, but within those eye
there lurk a something that I do not like; and I wonder how I
ever could have admire they - her sister's honest face and small
grey optic appear far more agreeable. but I be out of temper
with Eliza at that moment for her insinuation against Mrs. Graham,
which be false, I be certain, whether she know it or not.
I say nothing more on the subject, however, at the time, and but
little on any other; for, find I could not well recover my
equanimity, I presently rise and take leave, excuse myself under
the plea of business at the farm; and to the farm I go, not
trouble my mind one whit about the possible truth of these
mysterious report, but only wonder what they be, by whom
originate, and on what foundation raise, and how they could the
most effectually be silence or disprove.
a few day after this we have another of our quiet little party,
to which the usual company of friend and neighbour have be
invite, and Mrs. Graham among the number. she could not now
absent herself under the plea of dark evening or inclement
weather, and, greatly to my relief, she come. without she I should
have find the whole affair an intolerable bore; but the moment of
her arrival bring new life to the house, and though I might not
neglect the other guest for she, or expect to engross much of her
attention and conversation to myself alone, I anticipate an
evening of no common enjoyment.
Mr. Lawrence come too. he do not arrive till some time after the
rest be assemble. I be curious to see how he would comport
himself to Mrs. Graham. a slight bow be all that pass between
they on his entrance; and have politely greet the other member
of the company, he seat himself quite aloof from the young widow,
between my mother and Rose.
'do you ever see such art?' whisper Eliza, who be my near
neighbour. 'would you not say they be perfect stranger?'
'almost; but what then?'
'what then; why, you cannot pretend to be ignorant?'
'ignorant of what?' demand I, so sharply that she start and
reply, -
'oh, hush! donot speak so loud.'
'well, tell I then,' I answer in a low tone, 'what be it you
mean? I hate enigma.'
'well, you know, I donot vouch for the truth of it - indeed, far
from it - but havenot you hear -?'
'Ihave hear nothing, except from you.'
'you must be wilfully deaf then, for anyone will tell you that; but
I shall only anger you by repeat it, I see, so I have well hold
my tongue.'
she close her lip and fold her hand before she, with an air of
injure meekness.
'if you have wish not to anger I, you should have hold your
tongue from the beginning, or else speak out plainly and honestly
all you have to say.'
she turn aside her face, pull out her handkerchief, rise, and
go to the window, where she stand for some time, evidently
dissolve in tear. I be astounded, provoke, ashamed - not so
much of my harshness as for her childish weakness. however, no one
seem to notice she, and shortly after we be summon to the
tea-table: in those part it be customary to sit to the table at
tea-time on all occasion, and make a meal of it, for we din
early. on take my seat, I have Rose on one side of I and an
empty chair on the other.
'may I sit by you?' say a soft voice at my elbow.
'if you like,' be the reply; and Eliza slip into the vacant
chair; then, look up in my face with a half-sad, half-playful
smile, she whisper, - 'yoube so stern, Gilbert.'
I hand down her tea with a slightly contemptuous smile, and say
nothing, for I have nothing to say.
'what have I do to offend you?' say she, more plaintively. 'I
wish I know.'
'come, take your tea, Eliza, and donot be foolish,' respond I,
hand she the sugar and cream.
just then there arise a slight commotion on the other side of I,
occasion by Miss Wilson's come to negotiate an exchange of
seat with Rose.
'will you be so good as to exchange place with I, Miss Markham?'
say she; 'for I donot like to sit by Mrs. Graham. if your mamma
think proper to invite such person to her house, she cannot
object to her daughter's keep company with they.'
this latter clause be add in a sort of soliloquy when Rose be
go; but I be not polite enough to let it pass.
'will you be so good as to tell I what you mean, Miss Wilson?'
say I.
the question startle she a little, but not much.
'why, Mr. Markham,' reply she, coolly, have quickly recover
her self-possession, 'it surprise I rather that Mrs. Markham
should invite such a person as Mrs. Graham to her house; but,
perhaps, she be not aware that the lady's character be consider
scarcely respectable.'
'she be not, nor be I; and therefore you would oblige I by
explain your meaning a little far.'
'this be scarcely the time or the place for such explanation; but
I think you can hardly be so ignorant as you pretend - you must
know she as well as I do.'
'I think I do, perhaps a little well; and therefore, if you will
inform I what you have hear or imagine against she, I shall,
perhaps, be able to set you right.'
'can you tell I, then, who be her husband, or if she ever have
any?'
Indignation keep I silent. at such a time and place I could not
trust myself to answer.
'have you never observe,' say Eliza, 'what a strike likeness
there be between that child of hers and - '
'and whom?' demand Miss Wilson, with an air of cold, but keen
severity.
Eliza be startle; the timidly speak suggestion have be intend
for my ear alone.
'oh, I beg your pardon!' plead she; 'I may be mistake - perhaps
I be mistaken.' but she accompany the word with a sly glance
of derision direct to I from the corner of her disingenuous eye.
'therebe no need to ask my pardon,' reply her friend, 'but I see
no one here that at all resemble that child, except his mother,
and when you hear ill-natured report, Miss Eliza, I will thank
you, that is, I think you will do well, to refrain from repeat
they. I presume the person you allude to be Mr. Lawrence; but I
think I can assure you that your suspicion, in that respect, be
utterly misplace; and if he have any particular connection with the
lady at all (which no one have a right to assert), at least he have
(what cannot be say of some other) sufficient sense of propriety
to withhold he from acknowledge anything more than a bow
acquaintance in the presence of respectable person; he be
evidently both surprised and annoy to find she here.'
'go it!' cry Fergus, who sit on the other side of Eliza, and be
the only individual who share that side of the table with we. 'go
it like brick! mind you donot leave she one stone upon another.'
Miss Wilson draw herself up with a look of freeze scorn, but say
nothing. eliza would have reply, but I interrupt she by say
as calmly as I could, though in a tone which betray, no doubt,
some little of what I feel within, - 'we have have enough of this
subject; if we can only speak to slander our better, let we hold
our tongue.'
'I think youwould well,' observe Fergus, 'and so do our good
parson; he have be address the company in his rich vein all
the while, and eye you, from time to time, with look of stern
distaste, while you sit there, irreverently whispering and
mutter together; and once he pause in the middle of a story or
a sermon, I donot know which, and fix his eye upon you, Gilbert,
as much as to say, "when Mr. Markham have do flirt with those
two lady I will proceed."'
what more be say at the tea-table I cannot tell, nor how I find
patience to sit till the meal be over. I remember, however, that
I swallow with difficulty the remainder of the tea that be in my
cup, and eat nothing; and that the first thing I do be to stare
at Arthur Graham, who sit beside his mother on the opposite side of
the table, and the second to stare at Mr. Lawrence, who sit below;
and, first, it strike I that there be a likeness; but, on further
contemplation, I conclude it be only in imagination.
both, it be true, have more delicate feature and small bone than
commonly fall to the lot of individual of the rougher sex, and
Lawrence's complexion be pale and clear, and Arthur's delicately
fair; but Arthur's tiny, somewhat snubby nose could never become so
long and straight as Mr. Lawrence's; and the outline of his face,
though not full enough to be round, and too finely converge to
the small, dimpled chin to be square, could never be draw out to
the long oval of the other's, while the child's hair be evidently
of a light, warm tint than the eld gentleman's have ever be,
and his large, clear blue eye, though prematurely serious at
time, be utterly dissimilar to the shy hazel eye of Mr.
Lawrence, whence the sensitive soul look so distrustfully forth,
as ever ready to retire within, from the offence of a too rude,
too uncongenial world. wretch that I be to harbour that
detestable idea for a moment! do I not know Mrs. Graham? have I
not see she, converse with her time after time? be I not
certain that she, in intellect, in purity and elevation of soul,
be immeasurably superior to any of her detractor; that she be,
in fact, the noble, the most adorable, of her sex I have ever
beheld, or even imagine to exist? yes, and I would say with Mary
Millward (sensible girl as she be), that if all the parish, ay, or
all the world, should din these horrible lie in my ear, I would
not believe they, for I know she well than they.
meantime, my brain be on fire with indignation, and my heart
seem ready to burst from its prison with conflicting passion. I
regard my two fair neighbour with a feeling of abhorrence and
loathing I scarcely endeavour to conceal. I be rally from
several quarter for my abstraction and ungallant neglect of the
lady; but I care little for that: all I care about, besides
that one grand subject of my thought, be to see the cup travel
up to the tea-tray, and not come down again. I think Mr.
Millward never would cease tell we that he be no tea-drinker,
and that it be highly injurious to keep load the stomach with
slop to the exclusion of more wholesome sustenance, and so give
himself time to finish his fourth cup.
at length it be over; and I rise and leave the table and the guest
without a word of apology - I could endure their company no long.
I rush out to cool my brain in the balmy evening air, and to
compose my mind or indulge my passionate thought in the solitude
of the garden.
to avoid be see from the window I go down a quiet little
avenue that skirt one side of the inclosure, at the bottom of
which be a seat embower in rose and honeysuckle. here I sit
down to think over the virtue and wrong of the lady of Wildfell
Hall; but I have not be so occupy two minute, before voice and
laughter, and glimpse of move object through the tree,
inform I that the whole company have turn out to take an airing
in the garden too. however, I nestle up in a corner of the bower,
and hop to retain possession of it, secure alike from observation
and intrusion. but no - confound it - there be some one come
down the avenue! why couldnot they enjoy the flower and sunshine
of the open garden, and leave that sunless nook to I, and the
gnat and midge?
but, peep through my fragrant screen of the interwoven branch
to discover who the intruder be (for a murmur of voice tell I
it be more than one), my vexation instantly subside, and far
other feeling agitate my still unquiet soul; for there be Mrs.
Graham, slowly move down the walk with Arthur by her side, and no
one else. why be they alone? have the poison of detracting
tongue already spread through all; and have they all turn their
back upon she? I now recollect have see Mrs. Wilson, in the
early part of the evening, edge her chair close up to my mother,
and bend forward, evidently in the delivery of some important
confidential intelligence; and from the incessant wagging of her
head, the frequent distortion of her wrinkle physiognomy, and the
winking and malicious twinkle of her little ugly eye, I judge it
be some spicy piece of scandal that engage her power; and from
the cautious privacy of the communication I suppose some person
then present be the luckless object of her calumny: and from
all these token, together with my mother's look and gesture of
mingle horror and incredulity, I now conclude that object to have
be Mrs. Graham. I do not emerge from my place of concealment
till she have nearly reach the bottom of the walk, lest my
appearance should drive she away; and when I do step forward she
stand still and seem inclined to turn back as it be.
'oh, donot let we disturb you, Mr. Markham!' say she. 'we come
here to seek retirement ourselves, not to intrude on your
seclusion.'
'I be no hermit, Mrs. Graham - though I own it look rather like it
to absent myself in this uncourteous fashion from my guest.'
'I fear you be unwell,' say she, with a look of real concern.
'I be rather, but itbe over now. do sit here a little and rest,
and tell I how you like this arbour,' say I, and, lift Arthur
by the shoulder, I plant he in the middle of the seat by way of
secure his mamma, who, acknowledge it to be a tempting place of
refuge, throw herself back in one corner, while I take possession
of the other.
but that word refuge disturb I. have their unkindness then
really drive she to seek for peace in solitude?
'why have they leave you alone?' I ask.
'it be I who have leave they,' be the smile rejoinder. 'I be
weary to death with small talk - nothing wear I out like that.
I cannot imagine how they can go on as they do.'
I could not help smile at the serious depth of her wonderment.
'be it that they think it a duty to be continually talk,'
pursue she: 'and so never pause to think, but fill up with
aimless trifle and vain repetition when subject of real interest
fail to present themselves, or do they really take a pleasure in
such discourse?'
'very likely they do,' say I; 'their shallow mind can hold no
great idea, and their light head be carry away by triviality
that would not move a well-furnish skull; and their only
alternative to such discourse be to plunge over head and ear into
the slough of scandal - which be their chief delight.'
'not all of they, surely?' cry the lady, astonish at the
bitterness of my remark.
'no, certainly; I exonerate my sister from such degraded taste,
and my mother too, if you include she in your animadversion.'
'I mean no animadversion against any one, and certainly intend
no disrespectful allusion to your mother. I have know some
sensible person great adept in that style of conversation when
circumstance impel they to it; but it be a gift I cannot boast
the possession of. I keep up my attention on this occasion as long
as I could, but when my power be exhaust I steal away to seek
a few minute' repose in this quiet walk. I hate talk where
there be no exchange of idea or sentiment, and no good give or
receive.'
'well,' say I, 'if ever I trouble you with my loquacity, tell I
so at once, and I promise not to be offend; for I possess the
faculty of enjoy the company of those I - of my friend as well
in silence as in conversation.'
'I donot quite believe you; but if it be so you would exactly
suit I for a companion.'
'I be all you wish, then, in other respect?'
'no, I donot mean that. how beautiful those little cluster of
foliage look, where the sun come through behind they!' say she,
on purpose to change the subject.
and they do look beautiful, where at interval the level ray of
the sun penetrate the thickness of tree and shrub on the
opposite side of the path before we, relieve their dusky verdure
by display patch of semi-transparent leaf of resplendent
golden green.
'I almost wish I be not a painter,' observe my companion.
'why so? one would think at such a time you would most exult in
your privilege of be able to imitate the various brilliant and
delightful touch of nature.'
'no; for instead of deliver myself up to the full enjoyment of
they as other do, I be always trouble my head about how I could
produce the same effect upon canvas; and as that can never be do,
it be more vanity and vexation of spirit.'
'perhaps you cannot do it to satisfy yourself, but you may and do
succeed in delight other with the result of your endeavour.'
'well, after all, I should not complain: perhaps few people gain
their livelihood with so much pleasure in their toil as I do. here
be some one come.'
she seem vex at the interruption.
'it be only Mr. Lawrence and Miss Wilson,' say I, 'come to enjoy
a quiet stroll. they will not disturb we.'
I could not quite decipher the expression of her face; but I be
satisfied there be no jealousy therein. what business have I to
look for it?
'what sort of a person be Miss Wilson?' she ask.
'she be elegant and accomplish above the generality of her birth
and station; and some say she be ladylike and agreeable.'
'I think she somewhat frigid and rather supercilious in her
manner to-day.'
'very likely she might be so to you. she have possibly take a
prejudice against you, for I think she regard you in the light of
a rival.'
'I! Impossible, Mr. Markham!' say she, evidently astonish and
annoyed.
'well, I know nothing about it,' return I, rather doggedly; for I
think her annoyance be chiefly against myself.
the pair have now approach within a few pace of we. our arbour
be set snugly back in a corner, before which the avenue at its
termination turn off into the more airy walk along the bottom of
the garden. as they approach this, I see, by the aspect of Jane
Wilson, that she be direct her companion's attention to we;
and, as well by her cold, sarcastic smile as by the few isolated
word of her discourse that reach I, I know full well that she
be impress he with the idea, that we be strongly attach to
each other. I notice that he colour up to the temple, give we
one furtive glance in pass, and walk on, look grave, but
seemingly offer no reply to her remark.
it be true, then, that he have some design upon Mrs. Graham; and,
be they honourable, he would not be so anxious to conceal they.
she be blameless, of course, but he be detestable beyond all
count.
while these thought flash through my mind, my companion abruptly
rise, and call her son, say they would now go in quest of the
company, and depart up the avenue. Doubtless she have hear or
guess something of Miss Wilson's remark, and therefore it be
natural enough she should choose to continue the TETE-e-tete no
long, especially as at that moment my cheek be burn with
indignation against my former friend, the token of which she might
mistake for a blush of stupid embarrassment. for this I owe Miss
Wilson yet another grudge; and still the more I think upon she
conduct the more I hat she.
it be late in the evening before I join the company. I find
Mrs. Graham already equip for departure, and take leave of the
rest, who be now return to the house. I offer, nay, beg
to accompany her home. Mr. Lawrence be stand by at the time
converse with some one else. he do not look at we, but, on
hear my earnest request, he pause in the middle of a sentence
to listen for her reply, and go on, with a look of quiet
satisfaction, the moment he find it be to be a denial.
a denial it be, decide, though not unkind. she could not be
persuade to think there be danger for herself or her child in
traverse those lonely lane and field without attendance. it
be daylight still, and she should meet no one; or if she do, the
people be quiet and harmless she be well assured. in fact, she
would not hear of any one's put himself out of the way to
accompany she, though Fergus vouchsafe to offer his service in
case they should be more acceptable than mine, and my mother beg
she might send one of the farming-man to escort she.
when she be go the rest be all a blank or bad. Lawrence
attempt to draw I into conversation, but I snub he and go
to another part of the room. shortly after the party break up and
he himself take leave. when he come to I I be blind to his
extend hand, and deaf to his good-night till he repeat it a
second time; and then, to get rid of he, I mutter an
inarticulate reply, accompany by a sulky nod.
'what be the matter, Markham?' whisper he.
I reply by a wrathful and contemptuous stare.
'be you angry because Mrs. Graham would not let you go home with
she?' he ask, with a faint smile that nearly exasperate I
beyond control.
but, swallow down all fiercer answer, I merely demand, -
'what business be it of your?'
'why, none,' reply he with provoke quietness; 'only,' - and he
raise his eye to my face, and speak with unusual solemnity, -
'only let I tell you, Markham, that if you have any design in
that quarter, they will certainly fail; and it grieve I to see
you cherish false hope, and waste your strength in useless
effort, for - '
'hypocrite!' I exclaim; and he hold his breath, and look very
blank, turn white about the gill, and go away without another
word.
I have wound he to the quick; and I be glad of it.
CHAPTER X
when all be go, I learn that the vile slander have indeed be
circulate throughout the company, in the very presence of the
victim. Rose, however, vow she do not and would not believe it,
and my mother make the same declaration, though not, I fear, with
the same amount of real, unwavere incredulity. it seem to
dwell continually on her mind, and she keep irritate I from time
to time by such expression as - 'dear, dear, who would have
think it! - well! I always think there be something odd about
she. - you see what it be for woman to affect to be different to
other people.' and once it be, - 'I misdoubte that appearance of
mystery from the very first - I think there would no good come of
it; but this be a sad, sad business, to be sure!'
'why, mother, you say you donot believe these tale,' say
Fergus.
'no more I do, my dear; but then, you know, there must be some
foundation.'
'the foundation be in the wickedness and falsehood of the world,'
say I, 'and in the fact that Mr. Lawrence have be see to go that
way once or twice of an evening - and the village gossip say he
go to pay his address to the strange lady, and the scandal-
monger have greedily seize the rumour, to make it the basis of
their own infernal structure.'
'well, but, Gilbert, there must be something in her manner to
countenance such report.'
'do you see anything in her manner?'
'no, certainly; but then, you know, I always say there be
something strange about she.'
I believe it be on that very evening that I venture on another
invasion of Wildfell Hall. from the time of our party, which be
upwards of a week ago, I have be make daily effort to meet its
mistress in her walk; and always disappoint (she must have
manage it so on purpose), have nightly keep revolve in my mind
some pretext for another call. at length I conclude that the
separation could be endure no long (by this time, you will see,
I be pretty far go); and, take from the book-case an old
volume that I think she might be interested in, though, from its
unsightly and somewhat dilapidated condition, I have not yet
venture to offer it for perusal, I hasten away, - but not
without sundry misgiving as to how she would receive I, or how I
could summon courage to present myself with so slight an excuse.
but, perhaps, I might see she in the field or the garden, and then
there would be no great difficulty: it be the formal knocking at
the door, with the prospect of be gravely usher in by Rachel,
to the presence of a surprised, uncordial mistress, that so greatly
disturb I.
my wish, however, be not gratify. Mrs. Graham herself be not
to be see; but there be Arthur play with his frolicsome little
dog in the garden. I look over the gate and call he to I.
he want I to come in; but I tell he I could not without his
mother's leave.
'Iwill go and ask she,' say the child.
'no, no, Arthur, you mustnot do that; but if shebe not engage,
just ask she to come here a minute. tell she I want to speak to
she.'
he run to perform my bidding, and quickly return with his mother.
how lovely she look with her dark ringlet stream in the light
summer breeze, her fair cheek slightly flushed, and her countenance
radiant with smile. Dear Arthur! what do I not owe to you for
this and every other happy meeting? through he I be at once
deliver from all formality, and terror, and constraint. in love
affair, there be no mediator like a merry, simple-hearted child -
ever ready to cement divide heart, to span the unfriendly gulf of
custom, to melt the ice of cold reserve, and overthrow the
separate wall of dread formality and pride.
'well, Mr. Markham, what be it?' say the young mother, accost
I with a pleasant smile.
'I want you to look at this book, and, if you please, to take it,
and peruse it at your leisure. I make no apology for call you
out on such a lovely evening, though it be for a matter of no
great importance.'
'tell he to come in, mamma,' say Arthur.
'would you like to come in?' ask the lady.
'yes; I should like to see your improvement in the garden.'
'and how your sister's root have prosper in my charge,' add
she, as she open the gate.
and we saunter through the garden, and talk of the flower, the
tree, and the book, and then of other thing. the evening be
kind and genial, and so be my companion. by degree I wax more
warm and tender than, perhaps, I have ever be before; but still I
say nothing tangible, and she attempt no repulse, until, in
pass a moss rose-tree that I have bring she some week since,
in my sister's name, she pluck a beautiful half-open bud and bade
I give it to Rose.
'may I not keep it myself?' I ask.
'no; but here be another for you.'
instead of take it quietly, I likewise take the hand that offer
it, and look into her face. she let I hold it for a moment, and
I see a flash of ecstatic brilliance in her eye, a glow of glad
excitement on her face - I think my hour of victory be come -
but instantly a painful recollection seem to flash upon she; a
cloud of anguish darken her brow, a marble paleness blanch she
cheek and lip; there seem a moment of inward conflict, and, with
a sudden effort, she withdraw her hand, and retreat a step or two
back.
'now, Mr. Markham,' say she, with a kind of desperate calmness, 'I
must tell you plainly that I cannot do with this. I like your
company, because I be alone here, and your conversation please I
more than that of any other person; but if you cannot be content to
regard I as a friend - a plain, cold, motherly, or sisterly friend
- I must beg you to leave I now, and let I alone hereafter: in
fact, we must be stranger for the future.'
'I will, then - be your friend, or brother, or anything you wish,
if you will only let I continue to see you; but tell I why I
cannot be anything more?'
there be a perplexed and thoughtful pause.
'be it in consequence of some rash vow?'
'it be something of the kind,' she answer. 'some day I may tell
you, but at present you have well leave I; and never, Gilbert,
put I to the painful necessity of repeat what I have just now
say to you,' she earnestly add, give I her hand in serious
kindness. how sweet, how musical my own name sound in her mouth!
'I will not,' I reply. 'but you pardon this offence?'
'on condition that you never repeat it.'
'and may I come to see you now and then?'
'perhaps - occasionally; provide you never abuse the privilege.'
'I make no empty promise, but you shall see.'
'the moment you do our intimacy be at an end, thatbe all.'
'and will you always call I Gilbert? it sound more sisterly, and
it will serve to remind I of our contract.'
she smile, and once more bid I go; and at length I judge it
prudent to obey, and she re-enter the house and I go down the
hill. but as I go the tramp of horse' hoof fall on my ear, and
break the stillness of the dewy evening; and, look towards the
lane, I see a solitary equestrian come up. incline to dusk as
it be, I know he at a glance: it be Mr. Lawrence on his grey
pony. I fly across the field, leap the stone fence, and then
walk down the lane to meet he. on see I, he suddenly draw
in his little steed, and seem inclined to turn back, but on
second thought apparently judge it well to continue his course
as before. he accost I with a slight bow, and, edge close to
the wall, endeavour to pass on; but I be not so minded. seize
his horse by the bridle, I exclaim, - 'now, Lawrence, I will have
this mystery explain! tell I where you be go, and what you
mean to do - at once, and distinctly!'
'will you take your hand off the bridle?' say he, quietly -
'yoube hurt my pony's mouth.'
'you and your pony be - '
'what make you so coarse and brutal, Markham? Ibe quite ashamed
of you.'
'you answer my question - before you leave this spot I will know
what you mean by this perfidious duplicity!'
'I shall answer no question till you let go the bridle, - if you
stand till morning.'
'now then,' say I, unclose my hand, but still stand before
he.
'ask I some other time, when you can speak like a gentleman,'
return he, and he make an effort to pass I again; but I quickly
re-capture the pony, scarce less astonished than its master at
such uncivil usage.
'really, Mr. Markham, this be too much!' say the latter. 'can I
not go to see my tenant on matter of business, without be
assault in this manner by -?'
'this be no time for business, sir! - Iwill tell you, now, what I
think of your conduct.'
'youwould well defer your opinion to a more convenient season,'
interrupt he in a low tone - 'herebe the vicar.' and, in truth,
the vicar be just behind I, plod homeward from some remote
corner of his parish. I immediately release the squire; and he
go on his way, salute Mr. Millward as he pass.
'what! quarrelling, Markham?' cry the latter, address himself
to I, - 'and about that young widow, I doubt?' he add,
reproachfully shake his head. 'but let I tell you, young man'
(here he put his face into mine with an important, confidential
air), 'shebe not worth it!' and he confirm the assertion by a
solemn nod.
'MR. MILLWARD,' I exclaim, in a tone of wrathful menace that make
the reverend gentleman look round - aghast - astounded at such
unwonted insolence, and stare I in the face, with a look that
plainly say, 'what, this to I!' but I be too indignant to
apologise, or to speak another word to he: I turn away, and
hastened homeward, descend with rapid stride the steep, rough
lane, and leave he to follow as he please.
CHAPTER XI
you must suppose about three week pass over. Mrs. Graham and I
be now establish friend - or brother and sister, as we rather
choose to consider ourselves. she call I Gilbert, by my express
desire, and I call she Helen, for I have see that name write in
her book. I seldom attempt to see she above twice a week; and
still I make our meeting appear the result of accident as often as
I could - for I find it necessary to be extremely careful - and,
altogether, I behave with such exceed propriety that she never
have occasion to reprove I once. yet I could not but perceive that
she be at time unhappy and dissatisfied with herself or her
position, and truly I myself be not quite content with the
latter: this assumption of brotherly nonchalance be very hard to
sustain, and I often feel myself a most confounded hypocrite with
it all; I see too, or rather I feel, that, in spite of herself, 'I
be not indifferent to she,' as the novel hero modestly express
it, and while I thankfully enjoy my present good fortune, I could
not fail to wish and hope for something well in future; but, of
course, I keep such dream entirely to myself.
'where be you go, Gilbert?' say Rose, one evening, shortly
after tea, when I have be busy with the farm all day.
'to take a walk,' be the reply.
'do you always brush your hat so carefully, and do your hair so
nicely, and put on such smart new glove when you take a walk?'
'not always.'
'yoube go to Wildfell Hall, benot you?'
'what make you think so?'
'because you look as if you be - but I wish you wouldnot go so
often.'
'nonsense, child! I donot go once in six week - what do you
mean?'
'well, but if I be you, I wouldnot have so much to do with Mrs.
Graham.'
'why, Rose, be you, too, give in to the prevail opinion?'
'no,' return she, hesitatingly - 'but Ihave hear so much about
she lately, both at the Wilsons' and the vicarage; - and besides,
mamma say, if she be a proper person she would not be live
there by herself - and donot you remember last winter, Gilbert, all
that about the false name to the picture; and how she explain it
- say she have friend or acquaintance from whom she wish she
present residence to be conceal, and that she be afraid of their
trace she out; - and then, how suddenly she start up and leave
the room when that person come - whom she take good care not to let
we catch a glimpse of, and who Arthur, with such an air of mystery,
tell we be his mamma's friend?'
'yes, Rose, I remember it all; and I can forgive your uncharitable
conclusion; for, perhaps, if I do not know she myself, I should
put all these thing together, and believe the same as you do; but
thank God, I do know she; and I should be unworthy the name of a
man, if I could believe anything that be say against she, unless
I hear it from her own lip. - I should as soon believe such
thing of you, Rose.'
'oh, Gilbert!'
'well, do you think I could believe anything of the kind, -
whatever the Wilsons and Millwards dare to whisper?'
'I should hope not indeed!'
'and why not? - because I know you - well, and I know she just as
well.'
'oh, no! you know nothing of her former life; and last year, at
this time, you do not know that such a person exist.'
'no matter. there be such a thing as look through a person's
eye into the heart, and learn more of the height, and breadth,
and depth of another's soul in one hour than it might take you a
lifetime to discover, if he or she be not disposed to reveal it,
or if you have not the sense to understand it.'
'then you be go to see she this evening?'
'to be sure I be!'
'but what would mamma say, Gilbert!'
'Mamma neednot know.'
'but she must know some time, if you go on.'
'go on! - therebe no go on in the matter. Mrs. Graham and I be
two friend - and will be; and no man breathe shall hinder it, -
or have a right to interfere between we.'
'but if you know how they talk you would be more careful, for her
sake as well as for your own. Jane Wilson think your visit to
the old hall but another proof of her depravity - '
'Confound Jane Wilson!'
'and Eliza Millward be quite grieve about you.'
'I hope she be.'
'but I wouldnot, if I be you.'
'wouldnot what? - how do they know that I go there?'
'therebe nothing hide from they: they spy out everything.'
'oh, I never think of this! - and so they dare to turn my
friendship into food for further scandal against she! - that prove
the falsehood of their other lie, at all event, if any proof be
want. - mind you contradict they, Rose, whenever you can.'
'but they donot speak openly to I about such thing: it be only
by hint and innuendo, and by what I hear other say, that I know
what they think.'
'well, then, I willnot go to-day, as itbe get latish. but oh,
deuce take their curse, envenomed tongue!' I mutter, in the
bitterness of my soul.
and just at that moment the vicar enter the room: we have be
too much absorb in our conversation to observe his knock. after
his customary cheerful and fatherly greeting of Rose, who be
rather a favourite with the old gentleman, he turn somewhat
sternly to me:-
'well, sir!' say he, 'yoube quite a stranger. it be - let - I -
see,' he continue, slowly, as he deposit his ponderous bulk in
the arm-chair that Rose officiously bring towards he; 'it be
just - six-week - by my reckoning, since you darken - my -
door!' he speak it with emphasis, and strike his stick on the
floor.
'be it, sir?' say I.
'ay! it be so!' he add an affirmatory nod, and continue to
gaze upon I with a kind of irate solemnity, hold his
substantial stick between his knee, with his hand clasp upon
its head.
'I have be busy,' I say, for an apology be evidently demand.
'busy!' repeat he, derisively.
'yes, you know Ihave be get in my hay; and now the harvest be
begin.'
'Humph!'
just then my mother come in, and create a diversion in my favour
by her loquacious and animate welcome of the reverend guest. she
regret deeply that he have not come a little early, in time for
tea, but offer to have some immediately prepare, if he would do
she the favour to partake of it.
'not any for I, I thank you,' reply he; 'I shall be at home in a
few minute.'
'oh, but do stay and take a little! it will be ready in five
minute.'
but he reject the offer with a majestic wave of the hand.
'Iwill tell you what Iwill take, Mrs. Markham,' say he: 'Iwill take
a glass of your excellent ale.'
'with pleasure!' cry my mother, proceed with alacrity to pull
the bell and order the favour beverage.
'I think,' continue he, 'Iwould just look in upon you as I pass,
and taste your home-brew ale. Ihave be to call on Mrs. Graham.'
'have you, indeed?'
he nod gravely, and add with awful emphasis - 'I think it
incumbent upon I to do so.'
'really!' ejaculate my mother.
'why so, Mr. Millward?' ask I.
he look at I with some severity, and turn again to my mother,
repeat, - 'I think it incumbent upon I!' and strike his stick
on the floor again. my mother sit opposite, an awe-strike but
admire auditor.
'"Mrs. Graham," say I,' he continue, shake his head as he
speak, '"these be terrible report!" "what, sir?" say she,
affect to be ignorant of my meaning. "it be my - duty - as -
your pastor," say I, "to tell you both everything that I myself
see reprehensible in your conduct, and all I have reason to
suspect, and what other tell I concern you." - so I tell she!'
'you do, sir?' cry I, start from my seat and strike my fist
on the table. he merely glance towards I, and continue -
address his hostess:-
'it be a painful duty, Mrs. Markham - but I tell she!'
'and how do she take it?' ask my mother.
'harden, I fear - harden!' he reply, with a despondent shake
of the head; 'and, at the same time, there be a strong display of
unchastene, misdirect passion. she turn white in the face,
and draw she breath through her tooth in a savage sort of way; -
but she offer no extenuation or defence; and with a kind of
shameless calmness - shock indeed to witness in one so young -
as good as tell I that my remonstrance be unavaile, and my
pastoral advice quite throw away upon she - nay, that my very
presence be displease while I speak such thing. and I withdraw
at length, too plainly see that nothing could be do - and
sadly grieve to find her case so hopeless. but I be fully
determine, Mrs. Markham, that my daughter - shall - not - consort
with she. do you adopt the same resolution with regard to your! -
as for your son - as for you, young man,' he continue, sternly
turn to I -
'as for ME, sir,' I begin, but check by some impediment in my
utterance, and find that my whole frame tremble with fury, I
say no more, but take the wise part of snatch up my hat and
bolt from the room, slam the door behind I, with a bang
that shake the house to its foundation, and make my mother scream,
and give a momentary relief to my excited feeling.
the next minute see I hurry with rapid stride in the direction
of Wildfell Hall - to what intent or purpose I could scarcely tell,
but I must be move somewhere, and no other goal would do - I must
see she too, and speak to she - that be certain; but what to say,
or how to act, I have no definite idea. such stormy thought - so
many different resolution crowd in upon I, that my mind be
little well than a chaos of conflict passion.
CHAPTER XII
in little more than twenty minute the journey be accomplish. I
pause at the gate to wipe my streaming forehead, and recover my
breath and some degree of composure. already the rapid walking have
somewhat mitigate my excitement; and with a firm and steady tread
I pace the garden-walk. in pass the inhabited wing of the
building, I catch a sight of Mrs. Graham, through the open window,
slowly pace up and down her lonely room.
she seem agitated and even dismay at my arrival, as if she
think I too be come to accuse she. I have enter her presence
intend to condole with she upon the wickedness of the world, and
help she to abuse the vicar and his vile informant, but now I feel
positively ashamed to mention the subject, and determine not to
refer to it, unless she lead the way.
'I be come at an unseasonable hour,' say I, assume a
cheerfulness I do not feel, in order to reassure she; 'but I willnot
stay many minute.'
she smile upon I, faintly it be true, but most kindly - I have
almost say thankfully, as her apprehension be remove.
'how dismal you be, Helen! why have you no fire?' I say, look
round on the gloomy apartment.
'it be summer yet,' she reply.
'but we always have a fire in the evening, if we can bear it; and
you especially require one in this cold house and dreary room.'
'you should have come a little soon, and I would have have one
light for you: but it be not worth while now - you willnot stay
many minute, you say, and Arthur be go to bed.'
'but I have a fancy for a fire, nevertheless. will you order one,
if I ring?'
'why, Gilbert, you donot look cold!' say she, smilingly regard
my face, which no doubt seem warm enough.
'no,' reply I, 'but I want to see you comfortable before I go.'
'I comfortable!' repeat she, with a bitter laugh, as if there
be something amusingly absurd in the idea. 'it suit I well
as it be,' she add, in a tone of mournful resignation.
but determine to have my own way, I pull the bell.
'there now, Helen!' I say, as the approach step of Rachel be
hear in answer to the summon. there be nothing for it but to
turn round and desire the maid to light the fire.
I owe Rachel a grudge to this day for the look she cast upon I ere
she depart on her mission, the sour, suspicious, inquisitorial
look that plainly demand, 'what be you here for, I wonder?' her
mistress do not fail to notice it, and a shade of uneasiness
darken her brow.
'you must not stay long, Gilbert,' say she, when the door be
close upon we.
'Ibe not go to,' say I, somewhat testily, though without a
grain of anger in my heart against any one but the meddle old
woman. 'but, Helen, Ihave something to say to you before I go.'
'what be it?'
'no, not now - I donot know yet precisely what it be, or how to say
it,' reply I, with more truth than wisdom; and then, fear lest
she should turn I out of the house, I begin talk about
indifferent matter in order to gain time. meanwhile Rachel come
in to kindle the fire, which be soon effect by thrust a red-
hot poker between the bar of the grate, where the fuel be already
dispose for ignition. she honour I with another of her hard,
inhospitable look in depart, but, little move thereby, I go
on talk; and set a chair for Mrs. Graham on one side of the
hearth, and one for myself on the other, I venture to sit down,
though half suspecting she would rather see I go.
in a little while we both relapse into silence, and continue for
several minute gaze abstractedly into the fire - she intent upon
her own sad thought, and I reflect how delightful it would be
to be seat thus beside she with no other presence to restrain our
intercourse - not even that of Arthur, our mutual friend, without
whom we have never meet before - if only I could venture to speak my
mind, and disburden my full heart of the feeling that have so long
oppress it, and which it now struggle to retain, with an effort
that it seem impossible to continue much long, - and revolve
the pro and con for open my heart to she there and then, and
implore a return of affection, the permission to regard she
thenceforth as my own, and the right and the power to defend she
from the calumny of malicious tongue. on the one hand, I feel a
new-bear confidence in my power of persuasion - a strong
conviction that my own fervour of spirit would grant I eloquence -
that my very determination - the absolute necessity for succeed,
that I feel must win I what I seek; while, on the other, I
fear to lose the ground I have already gain with so much toil
and skill, and destroy all future hope by one rash effort, when
time and patience might have win success. it be like set my
life upon the cast of a die; and yet I be ready to resolve upon
the attempt. at any rate, I would entreat the explanation she have
half promise to give I before; I would demand the reason of this
hateful barrier, this mysterious impediment to my happiness, and,
as I trust, to her own.
but while I consider in what manner I could well frame my
request, my companion, waken from her reverie with a scarcely
audible sigh, and look towards the window, where the blood-red
harvest moon, just rise over one of the grim, fantastic
evergreen, be shin in upon we, say, - 'Gilbert, it be get
late.'
'I see,' say I. 'you want I to go, I suppose?'
'I think you ought. if my kind neighbour get to know of this
visit - as no doubt they will - they will not turn it much to my
advantage.'
it be with what the vicar would doubtless have call a savage
sort of smile that she say this.
'let they turn it as they will,' say I. 'what be their thought
to you or I, so long as we be satisfied with ourselves - and each
other. let they go to the deuce with their vile construction and
their lie invention!'
this outburst bring a flush of colour to her face.
'you have hear, then, what they say of I?'
'I hear some detestable falsehood; but none but fool would
credit they for a moment, Helen, so donot let they trouble you.'
'I do not think Mr. Millward a fool, and he believe it all; but
however little you may value the opinion of those about you -
however little you may esteem they as individual, it be not
pleasant to be look upon as a liar and a hypocrite, to be think
to practise what you abhor, and to encourage the vice you would
discountenance, to find your good intention frustrate, and your
hand cripple by your suppose unworthiness, and to bring disgrace
on the principle you profess.'
'true; and if I, by my thoughtlessness and selfish disregard to
appearance, have at all assist to expose you to these evil, let
I entreat you not only to pardon I, but to enable I to make
reparation; authorise I to clear your name from every imputation:
give I the right to identify your honour with my own, and to
defend your reputation as more precious than my life!'
'be you hero enough to unite yourself to one whom you know to be
suspect and despise by all around you, and identify your
interest and your honour with her? think! it be a serious
thing.'
'I should be proud to do it, Helen! - most happy - delighted beyond
expression! - and if that be all the obstacle to our union, it be
demolish, and you must - you shall be mine!'
and start from my seat in a frenzy of ardour, I seize her hand
and would have press it to my lip, but she as suddenly catch it
away, exclaim in the bitterness of intense affliction, - 'no,
no, it be not all!'
'what be it, then? you promise I should know some time, and - '
'you shall know some time - but not now - my head ache terribly,'
she say, press her hand to her forehead, 'and I must have some
repose - and surely I have have misery enough to-day!' she add,
almost wildly.
'but it could not harm you to tell it,' I persist: 'it would
ease your mind; and I should then know how to comfort you.'
she shake her head despondingly. 'if you know all, you, too, would
blame I - perhaps even more than I deserve - though I have cruelly
wrong you,' she add in a low murmur, as if she muse aloud.
'you, Helen? impossible?'
'yes, not willingly; for I do not know the strength and depth of
your attachment. I think - at least I endeavour to think your
regard for I be as cold and fraternal as you profess it to be.'
'or as your?'
'or as mine - ought to have be - of such a light and selfish,
superficial nature, that - '
'there, indeed, you wrong I.'
I know I do; and, sometimes, I suspect it then; but I think,
upon the whole, there could be no great harm in leave your
fancy and your hope to dream themselves to nothing - or flutter
away to some more fitting object, while your friendly sympathy
remain with I; but if I have know the depth of your regard, the
generous, disinterested affection you seem to feel - '
'Seem, Helen?'
'that you do feel, then, I would have act differently.'
'how? you could not have give I less encouragement, or treat
I with great severity than you do! and if you think you have
wrong I by give I your friendship, and occasionally admit
I to the enjoyment of your company and conversation, when all
hope of close intimacy be vain - as indeed you always give I
to understand - if you think you have wrong I by this, you be
mistaken; for such favour, in themselves alone, be not only
delightful to my heart, but purifying, exalt, ennoble to my
soul; and I would rather have your friendship than the love of any
other woman in the world!'
little comfort by this, she clasp her hand upon her knee, and
glance upward, seem, in silent anguish, to implore divine
assistance; then, turn to I, she calmly say, - 'to-morrow, if
you meet I on the moor about mid-day, I will tell you all you seek
to know; and perhaps you will then see the necessity of
discontinue our intimacy - if, indeed, you do not willingly
resign I as one no long worthy of regard.'
'I can safely answer no to that: you cannot have such grave
confession to make - you must be try my faith, Helen.'
'no, no, no,' she earnestly repeat - 'I wish it be so! thank
heaven!' she add, 'I have no great crime to confess; but I have
more than you will like to hear, or, perhaps, can readily excuse, -
and more than I can tell you now; so let I entreat you to leave
I!'
'I will; but answer I this one question first; - do you love I?'
'I will not answer it!'
'then I will conclude you do; and so good-night.'
she turn from I to hide the emotion she could not quite control;
but I take her hand and fervently kiss it.
'Gilbert, do leave I!' she cry, in a tone of such thrilling
anguish that I feel it would be cruel to disobey.
but I give one look back before I close the door, and see she
lean forward on the table, with her hand press against her
eye, sob convulsively; yet I withdraw in silence. I feel that
to obtrude my consolation on she then would only serve to
aggravate her suffering.
to tell you all the questioning and conjecture - the fear, and
hope, and wild emotion that jostle and chase each other through
my mind as I descend the hill, would almost fill a volume in
itself. but before I be half-way down, a sentiment of strong
sympathy for she I have leave behind I have displace all other
feeling, and seem imperatively to draw I back: I begin to
think, 'why be I hurry so fast in this direction? can I find
comfort or consolation - peace, certainty, contentment, all - or
anything that I want at home? and can I leave all perturbation,
sorrow, and anxiety behind I there?'
and I turn round to look at the old Hall. there be little
besides the chimney visible above my contract horizon. I walk
back to get a well view of it. when it rise in sight, I stand
still a moment to look, and then continue move towards the
gloomy object of attraction. something call I nearer - nearer
still - and why not, pray? might I not find more benefit in the
contemplation of that venerable pile with the full moon in the
cloudless heaven shin so calmly above it - with that warm yellow
lustre peculiar to an August night - and the mistress of my soul
within, than in return to my home, where all comparatively be
light, and life, and cheerfulness, and therefore inimical to I in
my present frame of mind, - and the more so that its inmate all
be more or less imbue with that detestable belief, the very
thought of which make my blood boil in my vein - and how could I
endure to hear it openly declare, or cautiously insinuate - which
be bad? - I have have trouble enough already, with some babbling
fiend that would keep whispering in my ear, 'it may be true,' till
I have shout aloud, 'it be false! I defy you to make I suppose
it!'
I could see the red firelight dimly gleam from her parlour
window. I go up to the garden wall, and stand lean over it,
with my eye fix upon the lattice, wonder what she be do,
thinking, or suffer now, and wish I could speak to she but
one word, or even catch one glimpse of she, before I go.
I have not thus look, and wish, and wonder long, before I
vault over the barrier, unable to resist the temptation of take
one glance through the window, just to if she be more compose
than when we part; - and if I find she still in deep distress,
perhaps I might venture attempt a word of comfort - to utter one of
the many thing I should have say before, instead of aggravate
her suffering by my stupid impetuosity. I look. her chair be
vacant: so be the room. but at that moment some one open the
outer door, and a voice - her voice - say, - 'come out - I want to
see the moon, and breathe the evening air: they will do I good -
if anything will.'
here, then, be she and Rachel come to take a walk in the
garden. I wish myself safe back over the wall. I stand,
however, in the shadow of the tall holly-bush, which, stand
between the window and the porch, at present screen I from
observation, but do not prevent I from see two figure come
forth into the moonlight: Mrs. Graham follow by another - not
Rachel, but a young man, slender and rather tall. o heaven, how
my temple throb! intense anxiety darken my sight; but I
think - yes, and the voice confirm it - it be Mr. Lawrence!
'you should not let it worry you so much, Helen,' say he; 'I will
be more cautious in future; and in time - '
I do not hear the rest of the sentence; for he walk close beside
she and speak so gently that I could not catch the word. my heart
be split with hatred; but I listen intently for her reply.
I hear it plainly enough.
'but I must leave this place, Frederick,' she say - 'I never can
be happy here, - nor anywhere else, indeed,' she add, with a
mirthless laugh, - 'but I cannot rest here.'
'but where could you find a well place?' reply he, 'so seclude
- so near I, if you think anything of that.'
'yes,' interrupt she, 'it be all I could wish, if they could only
have leave I alone.'
'but wherever you go, Helen, there will be the same source of
annoyance. I cannot consent to lose you: I must go with you, or
come to you; and there be meddle fool elsewhere, as well as
here.'
while thus converse they have saunter slowly past I, down the
walk, and I hear no more of their discourse; but I see he put his
arm round her waist, while she lovingly rest her hand on his
shoulder; - and then, a tremulous darkness obscure my sight, my
heart sicken and my head burn like fire: I half rush, half
stagger from the spot, where horror have keep I root, and
leap or tumble over the wall - I hardly know which - but I know
that, afterwards, like a passionate child, I dash myself on the
ground and lie there in a paroxysm of anger and despair - how long,
I cannot undertake to say; but it must have be a considerable
time; for when, have partially relieve myself by a torment of
tear, and look up at the moon, shin so calmly and carelessly
on, as little influence by my misery as I be by its peaceful
radiance, and earnestly pray for death or forgetfulness, I have
rise and journey homeward - little regard the way, but
carry instinctively by my foot to the door, I find it bolt
against I, and every one in bed except my mother, who hasten to
answer my impatient knocking, and receive I with a shower of
question and rebuke.
'oh, Gilbert! how could you do so? where have you be? do come
in and take your supper. Ihave get it all ready, though you donot
deserve it, for keep I in such a fright, after the strange
manner you leave the house this evening. Mr. Millward be quite -
Bless the boy! how ill he look. oh, gracious! what be the
matter?'
'nothing, nothing - give I a candle.'
'but willnot you take some supper?'
'no; I want to go to bed,' say I, take a candle and light it
at the one she hold in her hand.
'oh, Gilbert, how you tremble!' exclaim my anxious parent. 'how
white you look! do tell I what it be? have anything happen?'
'itbe nothing,' cry I, ready to stamp with vexation because the
candle would not light. then, suppress my irritation, I add,
'Ihave be walk too fast, thatbe all. good-night,' and march
off to bed, regardless of the 'walk too fast! where have you
be?' that be call after I from below.
my mother follow I to the very door of my room with her
questioning and advice concern my health and my conduct; but I
implore she to let I alone till morning; and she withdraw, and at
length I have the satisfaction to hear she close her own door.
there be no sleep for I, however, that night as I think; and
instead of attempt to solicit it, I employ myself in rapidly
pace the chamber, have first remove my boot, lest my mother
should hear I. but the board creak, and she be watchful. I
have not walk above a quarter of an hour before she be at the
door again.
'Gilbert, why be you not in bed - you say you want to go?'
'confound it! Ibe go,' say I.
'but why be you so long about it? you must have something on your
mind - '
'for heaven's sake, let I alone, and get to bed yourself.'
'can it be that Mrs. Graham that distress you so?'
'no, no, I tell you - itbe nothing.'
'I wish to goodness it maynot,' murmur she, with a sigh, as she
return to her own apartment, while I throw myself on the bed,
feel most undutifully disaffect towards she for have
deprive I of what seem the only shadow of a consolation that
remain, and chain I to that wretched couch of thorn.
never do I endure so long, so miserable a night as that. and yet
it be not wholly sleepless. towards morning my distracting
thought begin to lose all pretension to coherency, and shape
themselves into confused and feverish dream, and, at length, there
follow an interval of unconscious slumber. but then the dawn of
bitter recollection that succeed - the waking to find life a
blank, and bad than a blank, teem with torment and misery -
not a mere barren wilderness, but full of thorn and brier - to
find myself deceive, dupe, hopeless, my affection trample upon,
my angel not an angel, and my friend a fiend incarnate - it be
bad than if I have not sleep at all.
it be a dull, gloomy morning; the weather have change like my
prospect, and the rain be pattering against the window. I rise,
nevertheless, and go out; not to look after the farm, though that
would serve as my excuse, but to cool my brain, and regain, if
possible, a sufficient degree of composure to meet the family at
the morning meal without exciting inconvenient remark. if I get a
wetting, that, in conjunction with a pretend over-exertion before
breakfast, might excuse my sudden loss of appetite; and if a cold
ensue, the severer the well - it would help to account for the
sullen mood and mop melancholy likely to cloud my brow for long
enough.
CHAPTER XIII
'my dear Gilbert, I wish you would try to be a little more
amiable,' say my mother one morning after some display of
unjustifiable ill-humour on my part. 'you say there be nothing the
matter with you, and nothing have happen to grieve you, and yet I
never see anyone so altered as you within these last few day. you
havenot a good word for anybody - friend and stranger, equal and
inferior - itbe all the same. I do wish youwould try to check it.'
'check what?'
'why, your strange temper. you donot know how it spoil you. Ibe
sure a fine disposition than your by nature could not be, if
youwould let it have fair play: so youhave no excuse that way.'
while she thus remonstrate, I take up a book, and lay it open
on the table before I, pretend to be deeply absorb in its
perusal, for I be equally unable to justify myself and unwilling
to acknowledge my error; and I wish to have nothing to say on
the matter. but my excellent parent go on lecturing, and then
come to coax, and begin to stroke my hair; and I be get to
feel quite a good boy, but my mischievous brother, who be idle
about the room, revive my corruption by suddenly call out, -
'donot touch he, mother! hewill bite! hebe a very tiger in human
form. Ihave give he up for my part - fairly disown he - cast
he off, root and branch. itbe as much as my life be worth to come
within six yard of he. the other day he nearly fracture my
skull for sing a pretty, inoffensive love-song, on purpose to
amuse he.'
'oh, Gilbert! how could you?' exclaim my mother.
'I tell you to hold your noise first, you know, Fergus,' say I.
'yes, but when I assure you it be no trouble and go on with the
next verse, think you might like it well, you clutch I by
the shoulder and dash I away, right against the wall there, with
such force that I think I have bite my tongue in two, and
expect to see the place plaster with my brain; and when I put
my hand to my head, and find my skull not break, I think it be
a miracle, and no mistake. but, poor fellow!' add he, with a
sentimental sigh - 'his heart's break - thatbe the truth of it -
and his head's - '
'will you be silent now?' cry I, start up, and eye the
fellow so fiercely that my mother, think I mean to inflict some
grievous bodily injury, lay her hand on my arm, and besought I to
let he alone, and he walk leisurely out, with his hand in his
pocket, sing provokingly - 'Shall I, because a woman's fair,'
&c.
'Ibe not go to defile my finger with he,' say I, in answer to
the maternal intercession. 'I wouldnot touch he with the tong.'
I now recollect that I have business with Robert Wilson,
concern the purchase of a certain field adjoin my farm - a
business I have be put off from day to day; for I have no
interest in anything now; and besides, I be misanthropically
inclined, and, moreover, have a particular objection to meet Jane
Wilson or her mother; for though I have too good reason, now, to
credit their report concern Mrs. Graham, I do not like they a
bit the well for it - or Eliza Millward either - and the thought
of meet they be the more repugnant to I that I could not, now,
defy their seem calumny and triumph in my own conviction as
before. but to-day I determine to make an effort to return to my
duty. though I find no pleasure in it, it would be less irksome
than idleness - at all event it would be more profitable. if life
promise no enjoyment within my vocation, at least it offer no
allurement out of it; and henceforth I would put my shoulder to
the wheel and toil away, like any poor drudge of a cart-horse that
be fairly break in to its labour, and plod through life, not
wholly useless if not agreeable, and uncomplaine if not content
with my lot.
thus resolve, with a kind of sullen resignation, if such a term
may be allow, I wend my way to Ryecote Farm, scarcely expect
to find its owner within at this time of day, but hop to learn
in what part of the premise he be most likely to be find.
Absent he be, but expect home in a few minute; and I be
desire to step into the parlour and wait. Mrs. Wilson be busy in
the kitchen, but the room be not empty; and I scarcely check an
involuntary recoil as I enter it; for there sit Miss Wilson
chattering with Eliza Millward. however, I determine to be cool
and civil. Eliza seem to have make the same resolution on her
part. we have not meet since the evening of the tea-party; but there
be no visible emotion either of pleasure or pain, no attempt at
pathos, no display of injure pride: she be cool in temper, civil
in demeanour. there be even an ease and cheerfulness about her
air and manner that I make no pretension to; but there be a depth
of malice in her too expressive eye that plainly tell I I be not
forgive; for, though she no long hop to win I to herself, she
still hat her rival, and evidently delight to wreak her spite
on I. on the other hand, Miss Wilson be as affable and courteous
as heart could wish, and though I be in no very conversable humour
myself, the two lady between they manage to keep up a pretty
continuous fire of small talk. but Eliza take advantage of the
first convenient pause to ask if I have lately see Mrs. Graham, in
a tone of merely casual inquiry, but with a sidelong glance -
intend to be playfully mischievous - really, brimful and run
over with malice.
'not lately,' I reply, in a careless tone, but sternly repel
her odious glance with my eye; for I be vex to feel the colour
mount to my forehead, despite my strenuous effort to appear
unmoved.
'what! be you begin to tire already? I think so noble a
creature would have power to attach you for a year at least!'
'I would rather not speak of she now.'
'ah! then you be convince, at last, of your mistake - you have at
length discover that your divinity be not quite the immaculate -
'
'I desire you not to speak of she, Miss Eliza.'
'oh, I beg your pardon! I perceive Cupid's arrow have be too
sharp for you: the wound, be more than skin-deep, be not yet
heal, and blee afresh at every mention of the love one's name.'
'say, rather,' interpose Miss Wilson, 'that Mr. Markham feel that
name be unworthy to be mention in the presence of right-minded
female. I wonder, Eliza, you should think of refer to that
unfortunate person - you might know the mention of she would be
anything but agreeable to any one here present.'
how could this be bear? I rise and be about to clap my hat upon
my head and burst away, in wrathful indignation from the house; but
recollect - just in time to save my dignity - the folly of such
a proceeding, and how it would only give my fair tormentor a merry
laugh at my expense, for the sake of one I acknowledge in my own
heart to be unworthy of the slight sacrifice - though the ghost
of my former reverence and love so hang about I still, that I
could not bear to hear her name asperse by other - I merely
walk to the window, and have spend a few second in vengibly
bite my lip and sternly repress the passionate heaving of my
chest, I observe to Miss Wilson, that I could see nothing of her
brother, and add that, as my time be precious, it would perhaps
be well to call again to-morrow, at some time when I should be
sure to find he at home.
'oh, no!' say she; 'if you wait a minute, he will be sure to come;
for he have business at L-' (that be our market-town), 'and will
require a little refreshment before he go.'
I submit accordingly, with the good grace I could; and, happily,
I have not long to wait. Mr. Wilson soon arrive, and, indispose
for business as I be at that moment, and little as I care for the
field or its owner, I force my attention to the matter in hand,
with very creditable determination, and quickly conclude the
bargain - perhaps more to the thrifty farmer's satisfaction than he
care to acknowledge. then, leave he to the discussion of his
substantial 'refreshment,' I gladly quit the house, and go to
look after my reaper.
leave they busy at work on the side of the valley, I ascend the
hill, intend to visit a corn-field in the more elevated region,
and see when it would be ripe for the sickle. but I do not visit
it that day; for, as I approach, I behold, at no great distance,
Mrs. Graham and her son come down in the opposite direction.
they see I; and Arthur already be run to meet I; but I
immediately turn back and walk steadily homeward; for I have
fully determined never to encounter his mother again; and
regardless of the shrill voice in my ear, call upon I to 'wait
a moment,' I pursue the even tenor of my way; and he soon
relinquish the pursuit as hopeless, or be call away by his
mother. at all event, when I look back, five minute after, not
a trace of either be to be see.
this incident agitated and disturb I most unaccountably - unless
you would account for it by say that Cupid's arrow not only have
be too sharp for I, but they be barb and deeply rooted, and
I have not yet be able to wrench they from my heart. however that
be, I be render doubly miserable for the remainder of the day.
CHAPTER XIV
next morning, I bethink I, I, too, have business at L-; so I
mount my horse, and set forth on the expedition soon after
breakfast. it be a dull, drizzly day; but that be no matter: it
be all the more suitable to my frame of mind. it be likely to be
a lonely journey; for it be no market-day, and the road I
traverse be little frequent at any other time; but that suit
I all the well too.
as I trot along, however, chew the cud of - bitter fancy, I
hear another horse at no great distance behind I; but I never
conjecture who the rider might be, or trouble my head about he,
till, on slacken my pace to ascend a gentle acclivity, or
rather, suffer my horse to slacken his pace into a lazy walk -
for, rapt in my own reflection, I be let it jog on as
leisurely as it think proper - I lose ground, and my fellow-
traveller overtake I. he accost I by name, for it be no
stranger - it be Mr. Lawrence! instinctively the finger of my
whip-hand tingle, and grasp their charge with convulsive energy;
but I restrain the impulse, and answer his salutation with a
nod, attempt to push on; but he push on beside I, and begin to
talk about the weather and the crop. I give the brief possible
answer to his query and observation, and fall back. he fall
back too, and ask if my horse be lame. I reply with a look,
at which he placidly smile.
I be as much astonish as exasperate at this singular
pertinacity and imperturbable assurance on his part. I have think
the circumstance of our last meeting would have leave such an
impression on his mind as to render he cold and distant ever
after: instead of that, he appear not only to have forget all
former offence, but to be impenetrable to all present
incivility. formerly, the slight hint, or mere fancied
coldness in tone or glance, have suffice to repulse he: now,
positive rudeness could not drive he away. have he hear of my
disappointment; and be he come to witness the result, and triumph
in my despair? I grasp my whip with more determined energy than
before - but still forbore to raise it, and ride on in silence,
wait for some more tangible cause of offence, before I open
the floodgate of my soul and pour out the dam-up fury that
be foam and swell within.
'Markham,' say he, in his usual quiet tone, 'why do you quarrel
with your friend, because you have be disappoint in one
quarter? you have find your hope defeat; but how be I to blame
for it? I warn you beforehand, you know, but you would not - '
he say no more; for, impel by some fiend at my elbow, I have
seize my whip by the small end, and - swift and sudden as a flash
of lightning - bring the other down upon his head. it be not
without a feeling of savage satisfaction that I behold the instant,
deadly pallor that overspread his face, and the few red drop that
trickle down his forehead, while he reel a moment in his saddle,
and then fall backward to the ground. the pony, surprised to be so
strangely relieve of its burden, start and capered, and kick a
little, and then make use of its freedom to go and crop the grass
of the hedge-bank: while its master lie as still and silent as a
corpse. have I kill he? - an icy hand seem to grasp my heart
and check its pulsation, as I bent over he, gaze with breathless
intensity upon the ghastly, upturned face. but no; he move his
eyelid and utter a slight groan. I breathe again - he be only
stun by the fall. it serve he right - it would teach he
well manner in future. should I help he to his horse? no.
for any other combination of offence I would; but his be too
unpardonable. he might mount it himself, if he like - in a while:
already he be begin to stir and look about he - and there it
be for he, quietly browse on the road-side.
so with a muttered execration I leave the fellow to his fate, and
clapping spur to my own horse, gallop away, excite by a
combination of feeling it would not be easy to analyse; and
perhaps, if I do so, the result would not be very creditable to my
disposition; for I be not sure that a species of exultation in what
I have do be not one principal concomitant.
shortly, however, the effervescence begin to abate, and not many
minute elapse before I have turn and go back to look after the
fate of my victim. it be no generous impulse - no kind relenting
that lead I to this - nor even the fear of what might be the
consequence to myself, if I finish my assault upon the squire by
leave he thus neglect, and expose to further injury; it be,
simply, the voice of conscience; and I take great credit to myself
for attend so promptly to its dictate - and judge the merit
of the deed by the sacrifice it cost, I be not far wrong.
Mr. Lawrence and his pony have both alter their position in some
degree. the pony have wander eight or ten yard far away; and
he have manage, somehow, to remove himself from the middle of the
road: I find he seat in a recumbent position on the bank, -
look very white and sickly still, and hold his cambric
handkerchief (now more red than white) to his head. it must have
be a powerful blow; but half the credit - or the blame of it
(which you please) must be attribute to the whip, which be
garnish with a massive horse's head of plat metal. the grass,
be sodden with rain, afford the young gentleman a rather
inhospitable couch; his clothe be considerably bemire; and his
hat be roll in the mud on the other side of the road. but his
thought seem chiefly bent upon his pony, on which he be
wistfully gaze - half in helpless anxiety, and half in hopeless
abandonment to his fate.
I dismount, however, and have fasten my own animal to the
near tree, first pick up his hat, intend to clap it on his
head; but either he consider his head unfit for a hat, or the
hat, in its present condition, unfit for his head; for shrink
away the one, he take the other from my hand, and scornfully cast
it aside.
'itbe good enough for you,' I mutter.
my next good office be to catch his pony and bring it to he,
which be soon accomplish; for the beast be quiet enough in the
main, and only wince and flirt a trifle till I get hold of the
bridle - but then, I must see he in the saddle.
'here, you fellow - scoundrel - dog - give I your hand, and Iwill
help you to mount.'
no; he turn from I in disgust. I attempt to take he by the
arm. he shrink away as if there have be contamination in my
touch.
'what, you willnot! well! you may sit there till doomsday, for what
I care. but I suppose you donot want to lose all the blood in your
body - Iwill just condescend to bind that up for you.'
'let I alone, if you please.'
'Humph; with all my heart. you may go to the d-l, if you choose -
and say I send you.'
but before I abandon he to his fate I fling his pony's bridle
over a stake in the hedge, and throw he my handkerchief, as his
own be now saturate with blood. he take it and cast it back to
I in abhorrence and contempt, with all the strength he could
muster. it want but this to fill the measure of his offence.
with execration not loud but deep I leave he to live or die as he
could, well satisfied that I have do my duty in attempt to save
he - but forget how I have err in bring he into such a
condition, and how insultingly my after-service have be offer -
and sullenly prepared to meet the consequence if he should choose
to say I have attempt to murder he - which I think not
unlikely, as it seem probable he be actuate by such spiteful
motif in so perseveringly refuse my assistance.
have remount my horse, I just look back to see how he be
get on, before I ride away. he have rise from the ground, and
grasp his pony's mane, be attempt to resume his seat in the
saddle; but scarcely have he put his foot in the stirrup, when a
sickness or dizziness seem to overpower he: he leant forward a
moment, with his head droop on the animal's back, and then make
one more effort, which prove ineffectual, he sink back on the
bank, where I leave he, repose his head on the oozy turf, and to
all appearance, as calmly recline as if he have be take his
rest on his sofa at home.
I ought to have help he in spite of himself - to have bind up
the wound he be unable to staunch, and insist upon get he
on his horse and see he safe home; but, besides my bitter
indignation against himself, there be the question what to say to
his servant - and what to my own family. either I should have to
acknowledge the deed, which would set I down as a madman, unless I
acknowledge the motive too - and that seem impossible - or I
must get up a lie, which seem equally out of the question -
especially as Mr. Lawrence would probably reveal the whole truth,
and thereby bring I to tenfold disgrace - unless I be villain
enough, presume on the absence of witness, to persist in my own
version of the case, and make he out a still great scoundrel
than he be. no; he have only receive a cut above the temple, and
perhaps a few bruise from the fall, or the hoof of his own pony:
that could not kill he if he lie there half the day; and, if he
could not help himself, surely some one would be come by: it
would be impossible that a whole day should pass and no one
traverse the road but ourselves. as for what he might choose to
say hereafter, I would take my chance about it: if he tell lie, I
would contradict he; if he tell the truth, I would bear it as well
I could. I be not oblige to enter into explanation far than
I think proper. perhaps he might choose to be silent on the
subject, for fear of raise inquiry as to the cause of the
quarrel, and draw the public attention to his connection with
Mrs. Graham, which, whether for her sake or his own, he seem so
very desirous to conceal.
thus reasoning, I trot away to the town, where I duly transact
my business, and perform various little commission for my mother
and Rose, with very laudable exactitude, consider the different
circumstance of the case. in return home, I be trouble with
sundry misgiving about the unfortunate Lawrence. the question,
what if I should find he lie still on the damp earth, fairly
dying of cold and exhaustion - or already stark and chill? thrust
itself most unpleasantly upon my mind, and the appalling
possibility picture itself with painful vividness to my
imagination as I approach the spot where I have leave he. but no,
thank heaven, both man and horse be go, and nothing be leave to
witness against I but two object - unpleasant enough in
themselves to be sure, and present a very ugly, not to say
murderous appearance - in one place, the hat saturate with rain
and coat with mud, indent and break above the brim by that
villainous whip-handle; in another, the crimson handkerchief,
soak in a deeply tincture pool of water - for much rain have
fall in the interim.
bad news fly fast: it be hardly four o'clock when I get home,
but my mother gravely accost I with - 'oh, Gilbert! - such an
accident! Rose have be shop in the village, and shebe hear
that Mr. Lawrence have be throw from his horse and bring home
die!'
this shock I a trifle, as you may suppose; but I be comfort
to hear that he have frightfully fracture his skull and break a
leg; for, assure of the falsehood of this, I trust the rest of
the story be equally exaggerated; and when I hear my mother and
sister so feelingly deplore his condition, I have considerable
difficulty in prevent myself from tell they the real extent
of the injury, as far as I know they.
'you must go and see he to-morrow,' say my mother.
'or to-day,' suggest Rose: 'therebe plenty of time; and you can
have the pony, as your horse be tired. willnot you, Gilbert - as
soon as youhave have something to eat?'
'no, no - how can we tell that it benot all a false report? itbe
highly im-'
'oh, Ibe sure it benot; for the village be all alive about it; and
I see two people that have see other that have see the man that
find he. that sound far-fetched; but it benot so when you think
of it.'
'well, but Lawrence be a good rider; it be not likely he would fall
from his horse at all; and if he do, it be highly improbable he
would break his bone in that way. it must be a gross exaggeration
at least.'
'no; but the horse kick he - or something.'
'what, his quiet little pony?'
'how do you know it be that?'
'he seldom rid any other.'
'at any rate,' say my mother, 'you will call to-morrow. whether
it be true or false, exaggerated or otherwise, we shall like to
know how he be.'
'fergus may go.'
'why not you?'
'he have more time. I be busy just now.'
'oh! but, Gilbert, how can you be so composed about it? you willnot
mind business for an hour or two in a case of this sort, when your
friend be at the point of death.'
'he be not, I tell you.'
'for anything you know, he may be: you cannot tell till you have
see he. at all event, he must have meet with some terrible
accident, and you ought to see he: hewill take it very unkind if
you donot.'
'confound it! I cannot. he and I have not be on good term of
late.'
'oh, my dear boy! surely, surely you be not so unforgiving as to
carry your little difference to such a length as - '
'little difference, indeed!' I mutter.
'well, but only remember the occasion. think how - '
'well, well, donot bother I now - Iwill see about it,' I reply.
and my seeing about it be to send Fergus next morning, with my
mother's compliment, to make the requisite inquiry; for, of
course, my going be out of the question - or send a message
either. he bring back intelligence that the young squire be
lay up with the complicated evil of a broken head and certain
contusion (occasion by a fall - of which he do not trouble
himself to relate the particular - and the subsequent misconduct
of his horse), and a severe cold, the consequence of lie on the
wet ground in the rain; but there be no broken bone, and no
immediate prospect of dissolution.
it be evident, then, that for Mrs. Graham's sake it be not his
intention to criminate I.
CHAPTER XV
that day be rainy like its predecessor; but towards evening it
begin to clear up a little, and the next morning be fair and
promising. I be out on the hill with the reaper. a light wind
sweep over the corn, and all nature laugh in the sunshine. the
lark be rejoice among the silvery float cloud. the late
rain have so sweetly freshen and clear the air, and wash the
sky, and leave such glitter gem on branch and blade, that not
even the farmer could have the heart to blame it. but no ray of
sunshine could reach my heart, no breeze could freshen it; nothing
could fill the void my faith, and hope, and joy in Helen Graham have
leave, or drive away the keen regret and bitter dreg of linger
love that still oppress it.
while I stand with fold arm abstractedly gaze on the
undulating swell of the corn, not yet disturb by the reaper,
something gently pull my skirt, and a small voice, no long
welcome to my ear, arouse I with the startling word, - 'Mr.
Markham, mamma want you.'
'want I, Arthur?'
'yes. why do you look so queer?' say he, half laugh, half
frighten at the unexpected aspect of my face in suddenly turn
towards he, - 'and why have you keep so long away? come! willnot
you come?'
'Ibe busy just now,' I reply, scarce know what to answer.
he look up in childish bewilderment; but before I could speak
again the lady herself be at my side.
'Gilbert, I must speak with you!' say she, in a tone of suppress
vehemence.
I look at her pale cheek and glitter eye, but answer
nothing.
'only for a moment,' plead she. 'just step aside into this other
field.' she glance at the reaper, some of whom be direct
look of impertinent curiosity towards she. 'I willnot keep you a
minute.'
I accompany she through the gap.
'Arthur, darling, run and gather those bluebell,' say she,
point to some that be gleam at some distance under the
hedge along which we walk. the child hesitate, as if unwilling
to quit my side. 'go, love!' repeat she more urgently, and in a
tone which, though not unkind, demand prompt obedience, and
obtain it.
'well, Mrs. Graham?' say I, calmly and coldly; for, though I see
she be miserable, and pity she, I feel glad to have it in my
power to torment she.
she fix her eye upon I with a look that pierce I to the
heart; and yet it make I smile.
'I donot ask the reason of this change, Gilbert,' say she, with
bitter calmness: 'I know it too well; but though I could see
myself suspect and condemn by every one else, and bear it with
calmness, I cannot endure it from you. - why do you not come to
hear my explanation on the day I appoint to give it?'
'because I happen, in the interim, to learn all you would have
tell I - and a trifle more, I imagine.'
'impossible, for I would have tell you all!' cry she,
passionately - 'but I willnot now, for I see you be not worthy of
it!'
and her pale lip quiver with agitation.
'why not, may I ask?'
she repel my mocking smile with a glance of scornful
indignation.
'because you never understand I, or you would not soon have
listen to my traducer - my confidence would be misplace in you
- you be not the man I think you. go! I willnot care what you
think of I.'
she turn away, and I go; for I think that would torment she
as much as anything; and I believe I be right; for, look back a
minute after, I see her turn half round, as if hop or expect
to find I still beside she; and then she stand still, and cast one
look behind. it be a look less expressive of anger than of bitter
anguish and despair; but I immediately assume an aspect of
indifference, and affect to be gaze carelessly around I, and I
suppose she go on; for after linger awhile to see if she would
come back or call, I venture one more glance, and see she a good
way off, move rapidly up the field, with little Arthur run by
her side and apparently talk as he go; but she keep her face
avert from he, as if to hide some uncontrollable emotion. and I
return to my business.
but I soon begin to regret my precipitancy in leave she so soon.
it be evident she love I - probably she be tired of Mr.
Lawrence, and wish to exchange he for I; and if I have love and
reverence she less to begin with, the preference might have
gratify and amuse I; but now the contrast between her outward
seeming and her inward mind, as I suppose, - between my former and
my present opinion of she, be so harrowing - so distressing to my
feeling, that it swallow up every light consideration.
but still I be curious to know what sort of an explanation she
would have give I - or would give now, if I press she for it -
how much she would confess, and how she would endeavour to excuse
herself. I long to know what to despise, and what to admire in
she; how much to pity, and how much to hate; - and, what be more,
I would know. I would see she once more, and fairly satisfy myself
in what light to regard she, before we part. lose to I she be,
for ever, of course; but still I could not bear to think that we
have part, for the last time, with so much unkindness and misery
on both side. that last look of hers have sink into my heart; I
could not forget it. but what a fool I be! have she not deceive
I, injure I - blight my happiness for life? 'well, Iwill see
she, however,' be my concluding resolve, 'but not to-day: to-day
and to-night she may think upon her sin, and be as miserable as
she will: to-morrow I will see she once again, and know something
more about she. the interview may be serviceable to she, or it may
not. at any rate, it will give a breath of excitement to the life
she have doom to stagnation, and may calm with certainty some
agitate thought.'
I do go on the morrow, but not till towards evening, after the
business of the day be conclude, that is, between six and seven;
and the westere sun be gleam redly on the old Hall, and
flame in the latticed window, as I reach it, impart to the
place a cheerfulness not its own. I need not dilate upon the
feeling with which I approach the shrine of my former divinity -
that spot teem with a thousand delightful recollection and
glorious dream - all darken now by one disastrous truth
Rachel admit I into the parlour, and go to call her mistress,
for she be not there: but there be her desk leave open on the
little round table beside the high-back chair, with a book lay
upon it. her limited but choice collection of book be almost as
familiar to I as my own; but this volume I have not see before. I
take it up. it be Sir Humphry Davy's 'last day of a
Philosopher,' and on the first leaf be write, 'Frederick
Lawrence.' I close the book, but keep it in my hand, and stand
face the door, with my back to the fire-place, calmly wait her
arrival; for I do not doubt she would come. and soon I hear she
step in the hall. my heart be begin to throb, but I check
it with an internal rebuke, and maintain my composure - outwardly
at least. she enter, calm, pale, collect.
'to what be I indebted for this favour, Mr. Markham?' say she,
with such severe but quiet dignity as almost disconcert I; but I
answer with a smile, and impudently enough, -
'well, I be come to hear your explanation.'
'I tell you I would not give it,' say she. 'I say you be
unworthy of my confidence.'
'oh, very well,' reply I, move to the door.
'stay a moment,' say she. 'this be the last time I shall see you:
donot go just yet.'
I remain, await her further command.
'tell I,' resume she, 'on what ground you believe these thing
against I; who tell you; and what do they say?'
I pause a moment. she meet my eye as unflinchingly as if her bosom
have be steel with conscious innocence. she be resolve to
know the bad, and determine to dare it too. 'I can crush that
bold spirit,' think i. but while I secretly exult in my power,
I feel disposed to dally with my victim like a cat. show she
the book that I still hold, in my hand, and point to the name on
the fly-leaf, but fix my eye upon her face, I ask, - 'do you
know that gentleman?'
'of course I do,' reply she; and a sudden flush suffuse she
feature - whether of shame or anger I could not tell: it rather
resemble the latter. 'what next, sir?'
'how long be it since you see he?'
'who give you the right to catechize I on this or any other
subject?'
'oh, no one! - itbe quite at your option whether to answer or not.
and now, let I ask - have you hear what have lately befall this
friend of your? - because, if you have not - '
'I will not be insult, Mr. Markham!' cry she, almost infuriate
at my manner. 'so you have well leave the house at once, if you
come only for that.'
'I do not come to insult you: I come to hear your explanation.'
'and I tell you I willnot give it!' retort she, pace the room in
a state of strong excitement, with her hand clasp tightly
together, breathe short, and flash fire of indignation from
her eye. 'I will not condescend to explain myself to one that can
make a jest of such horrible suspicion, and be so easily lead to
entertain they.'
'I do not make a jest of they, Mrs. Graham,' return I, drop
at once my tone of taunt sarcasm. 'I heartily wish I could find
they a jesting matter. and as to be easily lead to suspect, God
only know what a blind, incredulous fool I have hitherto be,
perseveringly shut my eye and stop my ear against
everything that threaten to shake my confidence in you, till
proof itself confound my infatuation!'
'what proof, sir?'
'well, Iwill tell you. you remember that evening when I be here
last?'
'I do.'
'even then you drop some hint that might have open the eye
of a wise man; but they have no such effect upon I: I go on
trusting and believe, hop against hope, and adore where I
could not comprehend. it so happen, however, that after I leave
you I turn back - draw by pure depth of sympathy and ardour of
affection - not dare to intrude my presence openly upon you, but
unable to resist the temptation of catch one glimpse through the
window, just to see how you be: for I have leave you apparently in
great affliction, and I partly blame my own want of forbearance
and discretion as the cause of it. if I do wrong, love alone be
my incentive, and the punishment be severe enough; for it be just
as I have reach that tree, that you come out into the garden with
your friend. not choose to show myself, under the circumstance,
I stand still, in the shadow, till you have both pass by.'
'and how much of our conversation do you hear?'
'I hear quite enough, Helen. and it be well for I that I do
hear it; for nothing less could have cure my infatuation. I
always say and think, that I would never believe a word against
you, unless I hear it from your own lip. all the hint and
affirmation of other I treat as malignant, baseless slander;
your own self-accusation I believe to be overstrain; and all
that seem unaccountable in your position I trust that you could
account for if you choose.'
Mrs. Graham have discontinue her walk. she leant against one end
of the chimney-piece, opposite that near which I be stand, with
her chin rest on her closed hand, her eye - no long burn
with anger, but gleam with restless excitement - sometimes
glance at I while I speak, then course the opposite wall, or
fix upon the carpet.
'you should have come to I after all,' say she, 'and hear what I
have to say in my own justification. it be ungenerous and wrong to
withdraw yourself so secretly and suddenly, immediately after such
ardent protestation of attachment, without ever assign a reason
for the change. you should have tell I all-no matter how
bitterly. it would have be well than this silence.'
'to what end should I have do so? you could not have enlighten
I far, on the subject which alone concern I; nor could you
have make I discredit the evidence of my sens. I desire our
intimacy to be discontinue at once, as you yourself have
acknowledge would probably be the case if I know all; but I do
not wish to upbraid you, - though (as you also acknowledge) you
have deeply wrong I. yes, you have do I an injury you can
never repair - or any other either - you have blight the
freshness and promise of youth, and make my life a wilderness! I
might live a hundred year, but I could never recover from the
effect of this wither blow - and never forget it! Hereafter -
you smile, Mrs. Graham,' say I, suddenly stop short, check
in my passionate declamation by unutterable feeling to behold she
actually smile at the picture of the ruin she have work.
'do I?' reply she, look seriously up; 'I be not aware of it.
if I do, it be not for pleasure at the thought of the harm I have
do you. Heaven know I have have torment enough at the bare
possibility of that; it be for joy to find that you have some depth
of soul and feeling after all, and to hope that I have not be
utterly mistaken in your worth. but smile and tear be so alike
with I, they be neither of they confine to any particular
feeling: I often cry when I be happy, and smile when I be sad.'
she look at I again, and seem to expect a reply; but I
continue silent.
'would you be very glad,' resume she, 'to find that you be
mistaken in your conclusion?'
'how can you ask it, Helen?'
'I donot say I can clear myself altogether,' say she, speak low
and fast, while her heart beat visibly and her bosom heave with
excitement, - 'but would you be glad to discover I be well than
you think I?'
'anything that could in the least degree tend to restore my former
opinion of you, to excuse the regard I still feel for you, and
alleviate the pang of unutterable regret that accompany it, would
be only too gladly, too eagerly receive!' her cheek burn, and
her whole frame tremble, now, with excess of agitation. she do
not speak, but fly to her desk, and snatch thence what seem a
thick album or manuscript volume, hastily tear away a few leaf
from the end, and thrust the rest into my hand, say, 'you
neednot read it all; but take it home with you,' and hurry from
the room. but when I have leave the house, and be proceed down
the walk, she open the window and call I back. it be only to
say, - 'bring it back when you have read it; and donot breathe a
word of what it tell you to any living being. I trust to your
honour.'
before I could answer she have close the casement and turn away.
I see she cast herself back in the old oak chair, and cover she
face with her hand. her feeling have be work to a pitch that
render it necessary to seek relief in tear.
pant with eagerness, and struggle to suppress my hope, I
hurry home, and rush up-stair to my room, have first
provide myself with a candle, though it be scarcely twilight yet
- then, shut and bolt the door, determine to tolerate no
interruption; and sit down before the table, open out my
prize and deliver myself up to its perusal - first hastily
turn over the leaf and snatch a sentence here and there,
and then set myself steadily to read it through.
I have it now before I; and though you could not, of course,
peruse it with half the interest that I do, I know you would not
be satisfied with an abbreviation of its content, and you shall
have the whole, save, perhaps, a few passage here and there of
merely temporary interest to the writer, or such as would serve to
encumber the story rather than elucidate it. it begin somewhat
abruptly, thus - but we will reserve its commencement for another
chapter.
CHAPTER XVI
June 1st, 1821. - we have just return to Staningley - that be, we
return some day ago, and I be not yet settle, and feel as if I
never should be. we leave town soon than be intend, in
consequence of my uncle's indisposition; - I wonder what would have
be the result if we have stay the full time. I be quite ashamed
of my new-sprung distaste for country life. all my former
occupation seem so tedious and dull, my former amusement so
insipid and unprofitable. I cannot enjoy my music, because there
be no one to hear it. I cannot enjoy my walk, because there be no
one to meet. I cannot enjoy my book, because they have not power
to arrest my attention: my head be so haunted with the
recollection of the last few week, that I cannot attend to they.
my drawing suit I well, for I can draw and think at the same
time; and if my production cannot now be see by any one but
myself, and those who do not care about they, they, possibly, may
be, hereafter. but, then, there be one face I be always try to
paint or to sketch, and always without success; and that vex I.
as for the owner of that face, I cannot get he out of my mind -
and, indeed, I never try. I wonder whether he ever think of I;
and I wonder whether I shall ever see he again. and then might
follow a train of other wonderment - question for time and fate
to answer - conclude with - suppose all the rest be answer in
the affirmative, I wonder whether I shall ever repent it? as my
aunt would tell I I should, if she know what I be think about.
how distinctly I remember our conversation that evening before our
departure for town, when we be sit together over the fire, my
uncle have go to bed with a slight attack of the gout.
'Helen,' say she, after a thoughtful silence, 'do you ever think
about marriage?'
'yes, aunt, often.'
'and do you ever contemplate the possibility of be marry
yourself, or engage, before the season be over?'
'sometimes; but I donot think it at all likely that I ever shall.'
'why so?'
'because, I imagine, there must be only a very, very few man in the
world that I should like to marry; and of those few, it be ten to
one I may never be acquaint with one; or if I should, it be
twenty to one he may not happen to be single, or to take a fancy to
I.'
'that be no argument at all. it may be very true - and I hope be
true, that there be very few man whom you would choose to marry,
of yourself. it be not, indeed, to be suppose that you would wish
to marry any one till you be ask: a girl's affection should
never be win unsought. but when they be seek - when the citadel
of the heart be fairly besiege - it be apt to surrender soon
than the owner be aware of, and often against her well judgment,
and in opposition to all her preconceive idea of what she could
have love, unless she be extremely careful and discreet. now, I
want to warn you, Helen, of these thing, and to exhort you to be
watchful and circumspect from the very commencement of your career,
and not to suffer your heart to be steal from you by the first
foolish or unprincipled person that covet the possession of it. -
you know, my dear, you be only just eighteen; there be plenty of
time before you, and neither your uncle nor I be in any hurry to
get you off our hand, and I may venture to say, there will be no
lack of suitor; for you can boast a good family, a pretty
considerable fortune and expectation, and, I may as well tell you
likewise - for, if I donot, other will - that you have a fair
share of beauty besides - and I hope you may never have cause to
regret it!'
'I hope not, aunt; but why should you fear it?'
'because, my dear, beauty be that quality which, next to money, be
generally the most attractive to the bad kind of man; and,
therefore, it be likely to entail a great deal of trouble on the
possessor.'
'have you be trouble in that way, aunt?'
'no, Helen,' say she, with reproachful gravity, 'but I know many
that have; and some, through carelessness, have be the wretched
victim of deceit; and some, through weakness, have fall into
snare and temptation terrible to relate.'
'well, I shall be neither careless nor weak.'
'remember Peter, Helen! donot boast, but watch. keep a guard over
your eye and ear as the inlet of your heart, and over your lip
as the outlet, lest they betray you in a moment of unwariness.
receive, coldly and dispassionately, every attention, till you have
ascertain and duly consider the worth of the aspirant; and let
your affection be consequent upon approbation alone. first study;
then approve; then love. let your eye be blind to all external
attraction, your ear deaf to all the fascination of flattery and
light discourse. - these be nothing - and bad than nothing -
snare and wile of the tempter, to lure the thoughtless to their
own destruction. Principle be the first thing, after all; and next
to that, good sense, respectability, and moderate wealth. if you
should marry the handsome, and most accomplished and
superficially agreeable man in the world, you little know the
misery that would overwhelm you if, after all, you should find he
to be a worthless reprobate, or even an impracticable fool.'
'but what be all the poor fool and reprobate to do, aunt? if
everybody follow your advice, the world would soon come to an
end.'
'never fear, my dear! the male fool and reprobate will never want
for partner, while there be so many of the other sex to match
they; but do you follow my advice. and this be no subject for
jesting, Helen - I be sorry to see you treat the matter in that
light way. believe I, matrimony be a serious thing.' and she
speak it so seriously, that one might have fancy she have know it
to her cost; but I ask no more impertinent question, and merely
answer, - 'I know it be; and I know there be truth and sense in
what you say; but you need not fear I, for I not only should think
it wrong to marry a man that be deficient in sense or in
principle, but I should never be tempt to do it; for I could not
like he, if he be ever so handsome, and ever so charming, in
other respect; I should hate he - despise he - pity him -
anything but love he. my affection not only ought to be found
on approbation, but they will and must be so: for, without
approve, I cannot love. it be needless to say, I ought to be
able to respect and honour the man I marry, as well as love he,
for I cannot love he without. so set your mind at rest.'
'I hope it may be so,' answer she.
'I know it be so,' persist I.
'you have not be try yet, Helen - we can but hope,' say she in
her cold, cautious way.
'I be vex at her incredulity; but I be not sure her doubt be
entirely without sagacity; I fear I have find it much easy to
remember her advice than to profit by it; - indeed, I have
sometimes be lead to question the soundness of her doctrine on
those subject. her counsel may be good, as far as they go - in
the main point at least; - but there be some thing she have
overlook in her calculation. I wonder if she be ever in love.
I commence my career - or my first campaign, as my uncle call it
- kindling with bright hope and fancy - chiefly raise by this
conversation - and full of confidence in my own discretion. at
first, I be delighted with the novelty and excitement of our
London life; but soon I begin to weary of its mingled turbulence
and constraint, and sigh for the freshness and freedom of home. my
new acquaintance, both male and female, disappoint my
expectation, and vex and depress I by turn; I for I soon
grow tired of study their peculiarity, and laugh at their
foible - particularly as I be oblige to keep my criticism to
myself, for my aunt would not hear they - and they - the lady
especially - appear so provokingly mindless, and heartless, and
artificial. the gentleman scorn well, but, perhaps, it be
because I know they less - perhaps, because they flatter I; but
I do not fall in love with any of they; and, if their attention
please I one moment, they provoke I the next, because they put
I out of humour with myself, by reveal my vanity and make I
fear I be become like some of the lady I so heartily despise.
there be one elderly gentleman that annoy I very much; a rich
old friend of my uncle's, who, I believe, think I could not do
well than marry he; but, besides be old, he be ugly and
disagreeable, - and wicked, I be sure, though my aunt scold I
for say so; but she allow he be no saint. and there be
another, less hateful, but still more tiresome, because she
favour he, and be always thrust he upon I, and sound
his praise in my ear - Mr. Boarham by name, Bore'em, as I prefer
spell it, for a terrible bore he be: I shudder still at the
remembrance of his voice - drone, drone, drone, in my ear - while
he sit beside I, prose away by the half-hour together, and
beguile himself with the notion that he be improve my mind by
useful information, or impress his dogma upon I and reform
my error of judgment, or perhaps that he be talk down to my
level, and amuse I with entertain discourse. yet he be a
decent man enough in the main, I daresay; and if he have keep his
distance, I never would have hat he. as it be, it be almost
impossible to help it, for he not only bother I with the
infliction of his own presence, but he keep I from the enjoyment
of more agreeable society.
one night, however, at a ball, he have be more than usually
tormenting, and my patience be quite exhausted. it appear as if
the whole evening be fat to be insupportable: I have just have
one dance with an empty-headed coxcomb, and then Mr. Boarham have
come upon I and seem determined to cling to I for the rest of
the night. he never dance himself, and there he sit, poke his
head in my face, and impress all beholder with the idea that he
be a confirm, acknowledge lover; my aunt look complacently
on all the time, and wish he God-speed. in vain I attempt to
drive he away by give a loose to my exasperate feeling, even
to positive rudeness: nothing could convince he that his presence
be disagreeable. sullen silence be take for rapt attention, and
give he great room to talk; sharp answer be receive as smart
sally of girlish vivacity, that only require an indulgent
rebuke; and flat contradiction be but as oil to the flame,
call forth new strain of argument to support his dogma, and
bring down upon I endless flood of reasoning to overwhelm I
with conviction.
but there be one present who seem to have a well appreciation
of my frame of mind. a gentleman stand by, who have be watch
our conference for some time, evidently much amuse at my
companion's remorseless pertinacity and my manifest annoyance, and
laugh to himself at the asperity and uncompromise spirit of my
reply. at length, however, he withdraw, and go to the lady of
the house, apparently for the purpose of ask an introduction to
I, for, shortly after, they both come up, and she introduce he
as Mr. Huntingdon, the son of a late friend of my uncle's. he
ask I to dance. I gladly consent, of course; and he be my
companion during the remainder of my stay, which be not long, for
my aunt, as usual, insist upon an early departure.
I be sorry to go, for I have find my new acquaintance a very
lively and entertaining companion. there be a certain graceful
ease and freedom about all he say and do, that give a sense of
repose and expansion to the mind, after so much constraint and
formality as I have be doom to suffer. there might be, it be
true, a little too much careless boldness in his manner and
address, but I be in so good a humour, and so grateful for my late
deliverance from Mr. Boarham, that it do not anger I.
'well, Helen, how do you like Mr. Boarham now?' say my aunt, as we
take our seat in the carriage and drive away.
'bad than ever,' I reply.
she look displeased, but say no more on that subject.
'who be the gentleman you dance with last,' resume she, after a
pause - 'that be so officious in help you on with your shawl?'
'he be not officious at all, aunt: he never attempt to help I
till he see Mr. Boarham come to do so; and then he step
laughingly forward and say, "come, Iwill preserve you from that
infliction."'
'who be it, I ask?' say she, with frigid gravity.
'it be Mr. Huntingdon, the son of uncle's old friend.'
'I have hear your uncle speak of young Mr. Huntingdon. Ihave hear
he say, "hebe a fine lad, that young Huntingdon, but a bit
wildish, I fancy." so Iwould have you beware.'
'what do "a bit wildish" mean?' I inquire.
'it mean destitute of principle, and prone to every vice that be
common to youth.'
'but Ihave hear uncle say he be a sad wild fellow himself, when he
be young.'
she sternly shake her head.
'he be jest then, I suppose,' say I, 'and here he be speak
at random - at least, I cannot believe there be any harm in those
laugh blue eye.'
'false reasoning, Helen!' say she, with a sigh.
'well, we ought to be charitable, you know, aunt - besides, I donot
think it be false: I be an excellent physiognomist, and I always
judge of people's character by their look - not by whether they
be handsome or ugly, but by the general cast of the countenance.
for instance, I should know by your countenance that you be not
of a cheerful, sanguine disposition; and I should know by Mr.
Wilmot's, that he be a worthless old reprobate; and by Mr.
Boarham's, that he be not an agreeable companion; and by Mr.
Huntingdon's, that he be neither a fool nor a knave, though,
possibly, neither a sage nor a saint - but that be no matter to I,
as I be not likely to meet he again - unless as an occasional
partner in the ball-room.'
it be not so, however, for I meet he again next morning. he come
to call upon my uncle, apologise for not have do so before,
by say he be only lately return from the continent, and have
not hear, till the previous night, of my uncle's arrival in town;
and after that I often meet he; sometimes in public, sometimes at
home; for he be very assiduous in pay his respect to his old
friend, who do not, however, consider himself greatly oblige by
the attention.
'I wonder what the deuce the lad mean by come so often,' he
would say, - 'can you tell, Helen? - hey? he want none o' my
company, nor I his - thatbe certain.'
'I wish youwould tell he so, then,' say my aunt.
'why, what for? if I donot want he, somebody do, mayhap'
(wink at I). 'besides, hebe a pretty tidy fortune, Peggy, you
know - not such a catch as Wilmot; but then Helen willnot hear of
that match: for, somehow, these old chap donot go down with the
girl - with all their money, and their experience to boot. Iwill
bet anything shewould rather have this young fellow without a penny,
than Wilmot with his house full of gold. wouldnot you, Nell?'
'yes, uncle; but thatbe not say much for Mr. Huntingdon; for Iwould
rather be an old maid and a pauper than Mrs. Wilmot.'
'and Mrs. Huntingdon? what would you rather be than Mrs.
Huntingdon - eh?'
'Iwill tell you when Ihave consider the matter.'
'ah! it need consideration, then? but come, now - would you
rather be an old maid - let alone the pauper?'
'I cannot tell till Ibe ask.'
and I leave the room immediately, to escape further examination.
but five minute after, in look from my window, I behold Mr.
Boarham come up to the door. I wait nearly half-an-hour in
uncomfortable suspense, expect every minute to be call, and
vainly long to hear he go. then footstep be hear on the
stair, and my aunt enter the room with a solemn countenance, and
close the door behind she.
'here be Mr. Boarham, Helen,' say she. 'he wish to see you.'
'oh, aunt! - cannot you tell he Ibe indisposed? - Ibe sure I be -
to see he.'
'Nonsense, my dear! this be no trifling matter. he be come on a
very important errand - to ask your hand in marriage of your uncle
and I.'
'I hope my uncle and you tell he it be not in your power to give
it. what right have he to ask any one before I?'
'Helen!'
'what do my uncle say?'
'he say he would not interfere in the matter; if you like to
accept Mr. Boarham's oblige offer, you - '
'do he say oblige offer?'
'no; he say if you like to take he you might; and if not, you
might please yourself.'
'he say right; and what do you say?'
'it be no matter what I say. what will you say? - that be the
question. he be now wait to ask you himself; but consider well
before you go; and if you intend to refuse he, give I your
reason.'
'I shall refuse he, of course; but you must tell I how, for I
want to be civil and yet decide - and when Ihave get rid of he,
Iwill give you my reason afterwards.'
'but stay, Helen; sit down a little and compose yourself. Mr.
Boarham be in no particular hurry, for he have little doubt of your
acceptance; and I want to speak with you. tell I, my dear, what
be your objection to he? do you deny that he be an upright,
honourable man?'
'no.'
'do you deny that he be sensible, sober, respectable?'
'no; he may be all this, but - '
'but, Helen! how many such man do you expect to meet with in the
world? upright, honourable, sensible, sober, respectable! be this
such an every-day character that you should reject the possessor of
such noble quality without a moment's hesitation? yes, noble I
may call they; for think of the full meaning of each, and how many
inestimable virtue they include (and I might add many more to the
list), and consider that all this be lay at your foot. it be in
your power to secure this inestimable blessing for life - a worthy
and excellent husband, who love you tenderly, but not too fondly
so as to blind he to your fault, and will be your guide
throughout life's pilgrimage, and your partner in eternal bliss.
think how - '
'but I hate he, aunt,' say I, interrupt this unusual flow of
eloquence.
'hate he, Helen! be this a christian spirit? - you hate he? and
he so good a man!'
'I donot hate he as a man, but as a husband. as a man, I love he
so much that I wish he a well wife than i - one as good as
himself, or well - if you think that possible - provide she
could like he; but I never could, and therefore - '
'but why not? what objection do you find?'
'firstly, he be at least forty year old - considerably more, I
should think - and I be but eighteen; secondly, he be narrow-minded
and bigote in the extreme; thirdly, his taste and feeling be
wholly dissimilar to mine; fourthly, his look, voice, and manner
be particularly displease to I; and, finally, I have an
aversion to his whole person that I never can surmount.'
'then you ought to surmount it. and please to compare he for a
moment with Mr. Huntingdon, and, good look apart (which contribute
nothing to the merit of the man, or to the happiness of married
life, and which you have so often profess to hold in light
esteem), tell I which be the well man.'
'I have no doubt Mr. Huntingdon be a much well man than you think
he; but we be not talk about he now, but about Mr. Boarham;
and as I would rather grow, live, and die in single blessedness -
than be his wife, it be but right that I should tell he so at
once, and put he out of suspense - so let I go.'
'but donot give he a flat denial; he have no idea of such a thing,
and it would offend he greatly: say you have no thought of
matrimony at present - '
'but I have thought of it.'
'or that you desire a further acquaintance.'
'but I donot desire a further acquaintance - quite the contrary.'
and without wait for further admonition I leave the room and
go to seek Mr. Boarham. he be walk up and down the drawing-
room, hum snatch of tune and nibble the end of his cane.
'my dear young lady,' say he, bow and smirk with great
complacency, 'I have your kind guardian's permission - '
'I know, sir,' say I, wish to shorten the scene as much as
possible, 'and I be greatly oblige for your preference, but must
beg to decline the honour you wish to confer, for I think we be
not make for each other, as you yourself would shortly discover if
the experiment be try.'
my aunt be right. it be quite evident he have have little doubt of
my acceptance, and no idea of a positive denial. he be amazed,
astounded at such an answer, but too incredulous to be much
offend; and after a little humming and hawing, he return to the
attack.
'I know, my dear, that there exist a considerable disparity
between we in year, in temperament, and perhaps some other thing;
but let I assure you, I shall not be severe to mark the fault and
foible of a young and ardent nature such as your, and while I
acknowledge they to myself, and even rebuke they with all a
father's care, believe I, no youthful lover could be more tenderly
indulgent towards the object of his affection than I to you; and,
on the other hand, let I hope that my more experienced year and
graver habit of reflection will be no disparagement in your eye,
as I shall endeavour to make they all conducive to your happiness.
come, now! what do you say? let we have no young lady's
affectation and caprice, but speak out at once.'
'I will, but only to repeat what I say before, that I be certain
we be not make for each other.'
'you really think so?'
'I do.'
'but you donot know I - you wish for a further acquaintance - a
long time to - '
'no, I donot. I know you as well as I ever shall, and well than
you know I, or you would never dream of unite yourself to one so
incongruous - so utterly unsuitable to you in every way.'
'but, my dear young lady, I donot look for perfection; I can excuse
- '
'thank you, Mr. Boarham, but I willnot trespass upon your goodness.
you may save your indulgence and consideration for some more worthy
object, that willnot tax they so heavily.'
'but let I beg you to consult your aunt; that excellent lady, I be
sure, will - '
'I have consult she; and I know she wish coincide with your;
but in such important matter, I take the liberty of judge for
myself; and no persuasion can alter my inclination, or induce I
to believe that such a step would be conducive to my happiness or
yours - and I wonder that a man of your experience and discretion
should think of choose such a wife.'
'ah, well!' say he, 'I have sometimes wonder at that myself. I
have sometimes say to myself, "now Boarham, what be this yoube
after? take care, man - look before you leap! this be a sweet,
bewitch creature, but remember, the bright attraction to the
lover too often prove the husband's great torment!" I assure
you my choice have not be make without much reasoning and
reflection. the seeming imprudence of the match have cost I many
an anxious thought by day, and many a sleepless hour by night; but
at length I satisfy myself that it be not, in very deed,
imprudent. I see my sweet girl be not without her fault, but of
these her youth, I trust, be not one, but rather an earnest of
virtue yet unblown - a strong ground of presumption that her
little defect of temper and error of judgment, opinion, or manner
be not irremediable, but might easily be remove or mitigate by
the patient effort of a watchful and judicious adviser, and where
I fail to enlighten and control, I think I might safely
undertake to pardon, for the sake of her many excellence.
therefore, my dear girl, since I be satisfied, why should you
object - on my account, at least?'
'but to tell you the truth, Mr. Boarham, it be on my own account I
principally object; so let we - drop the subject,' I would have
say, 'for it be bad than useless to pursue it any far,' but
he pertinaciously interrupt I with, - 'but why so? I would love
you, cherish you, protect you,' &c., &c.
I shall not trouble myself to put down all that pass between we.
suffice it to say, that I find he very troublesome, and very hard
to convince that I really mean what I say, and really be so
obstinate and blind to my own interest, that there be no shadow
of a chance that either he or my aunt would ever be able to
overcome my objection. indeed, I be not sure that I succeed
after all; though weary with his so pertinaciously return to
the same point and repeat the same argument over and over
again, force I to reiterate the same reply, I at length turn
short and sharp upon he, and my last word be, - 'I tell you
plainly, that it cannot be. no consideration can induce I to
marry against my inclination. I respect you - at least, I would
respect you, if you would behave like a sensible man - but I cannot
love you, and never could - and the more you talk the further you
repel I; so pray donot say any more about it.'
whereupon he wish I a good-morning, and withdraw, disconcert
and offend, no doubt; but surely it be not my fault.
CHAPTER XVII
the next day I accompany my uncle and aunt to a dinner-party at
Mr. Wilmot's. he have two lady stay with he: his niece
Annabella, a fine dash girl, or rather young woman, - of some
five-and-twenty, too great a flirt to be marry, accord to her
own assertion, but greatly admire by the gentleman, who
universally pronounce she a splendid woman; and her gentle cousin,
Milicent Hargrave, who have take a violent fancy to I, mistake
I for something vastly well than I be. and I, in return, be
very fond of she. I should entirely exclude poor Milicent in my
general animadversion against the lady of my acquaintance. but
it be not on her account, or her cousin's, that I have mention
the party: it be for the sake of another of Mr. Wilmot's guest,
to wit Mr. Huntingdon. I have good reason to remember his presence
there, for this be the last time I see he.
he do not sit near I at dinner; for it be his fate to hand in a
capacious old dowager, and mine to be hand in by Mr. Grimsby, a
friend of his, but a man I very greatly dislike: there be a
sinister cast in his countenance, and a mixture of lurk ferocity
and fulsome insincerity in his demeanour, that I could not away
with. what a tiresome custom that be, by-the-by - one among the
many source of factitious annoyance of this ultra-civilised life.
if the gentleman must lead the lady into the dining-room, why
cannot they take those they like good?
I be not sure, however, that Mr. Huntingdon would have take I, if
he have be at liberty to make his own selection. it be quite
possible he might have choose Miss Wilmot; for she seem bent upon
engross his attention to herself, and he seem nothing loth to
pay the homage she demand. I think so, at least, when I see
how they talk and laugh, and glance across the table, to the
neglect and evident umbrage of their respective neighbour - and
afterwards, as the gentleman join we in the drawing-room, when
she, immediately upon his entrance, loudly call upon he to be
the arbiter of a dispute between herself and another lady, and he
answer the summon with alacrity, and decide the question
without a moment's hesitation in her favour - though, to my
thinking, she be obviously in the wrong - and then stand chat
familiarly with she and a group of other lady; while I sit with
Milicent Hargrave at the opposite end of the room, look over the
latter's drawing, and aid she with my critical observation and
advice, at her particular desire. but in spite of my effort to
remain compose, my attention wander from the drawing to the
merry group, and against my well judgment my wrath rise, and
doubtless my countenance lower; for Milicent, observe that I
must be tired of her daub and scratch, beg I would join the
company now, and defer the examination of the remainder to another
opportunity. but while I be assure she that I have no wish to
join they, and be not tired, Mr. Huntingdon himself come up to the
little round table at which we sit.
'be these your?' say he, carelessly take up one of the
drawing.
'no, they be Miss Hargrave's.'
'oh! well, letus have a look at they.'
and, regardless of Miss Hargrave's protestation that they be not
worth look at, he draw a chair to my side, and receive the
drawing, one by one from my hand, successively scan they over,
and throw they on the table, but say not a word about they, though
he be talk all the time. I donot know what Milicent Hargrave
thought of such conduct, but I find his conversation extremely
interesting; though, as I afterwards discover, when I come to
analyse it, it be chiefly confine to quiz the different
member of the company present; and albeit he make some clever
remark, and some excessively droll one, I do not think the whole
would appear anything very particular, if write here, without the
adventitious aid of look, and tone, and gesture, and that
ineffable but indefinite charm, which cast a halo over all he do
and say, and which would have make it a delight to look in his
face, and hear the music of his voice, if he have be talk
positive nonsense - and which, moreover, make I feel so bitter
against my aunt when she put a stop to this enjoyment, by come
composedly forward, under pretence of wish to see the drawing,
that she care and know nothing about, and while make believe to
examine they, address herself to Mr. Huntingdon, with one of she
cold and most repellent aspect, and begin a series of the
most common-place and formidably formal question and observation,
on purpose to wrest his attention from I - on purpose to vex I,
as I think: and have now look through the portfolio, I leave
they to their TETE-e-tete, and seat myself on a sofa, quite apart
from the company - never think how strange such conduct would
appear, but merely to indulge, at first, the vexation of the
moment, and subsequently to enjoy my private thought.
but I be not leave long alone, for Mr. Wilmot, of all man the least
welcome, take advantage of my isolated position to come and plant
himself beside I. I have flatter myself that I have so
effectually repulse his advance on all former occasion, that I
have nothing more to apprehend from his unfortunate predilection;
but it seem I be mistaken: so great be his confidence, either
in his wealth or his remain power of attraction, and so firm
his conviction of feminine weakness, that he think himself
warrant to return to the siege, which he do with renovated
ardour, enkindle by the quantity of wine he have drunk - a
circumstance that render he infinitely the more disgusting; but
greatly as I abhor he at that moment, I do not like to treat
he with rudeness, as I be now his guest, and have just be
enjoy his hospitality; and I be no hand at a polite but
determined rejection, nor would it have greatly avail I if I
have, for he be too coarse-minded to take any repulse that be not
as plain and positive as his own effrontery. the consequence be,
that he wax more fulsomely tender, and more repulsively warm, and
I be drive to the very verge of desperation, and about to say I
know not what, when I feel my hand, that hang over the arm of the
sofa, suddenly take by another and gently but fervently press.
instinctively, I guess who it be, and, on look up, be less
surprised than delight to see Mr. Huntingdon smile upon I. it
be like turn from some purgatorial fiend to an angel of light,
come to announce that the season of torment be past.
'Helen,' say he (he frequently call I Helen, and I never
resent the freedom), 'I want you to look at this picture. Mr.
Wilmot will excuse you a moment, Ibe sure.'
I rise with alacrity. he draw my arm within his, and lead I across
the room to a splendid painting of Vandyke's that I have notice
before, but not sufficiently examine. after a moment of silent
contemplation, I be begin to comment on its beauty and
peculiarity, when, playfully press the hand he still retain
within his arm, he interrupt I with, - 'never mind the picture:
it be not for that I bring you here; it be to get you away from
that scoundrelly old profligate yonder, who be look as if he
would like to challenge I for the affront.'
'I be very much oblige to you,' say I. 'this be twice you have
deliver I from such unpleasant companionship.'
'donot be too thankful,' he answer: 'it be not all kindness to
you; it be partly from a feeling of spite to your tormentor that
make I delighted to do the old fellow a bad turn, though I donot
think I have any great reason to dread they as rival. have I,
Helen?'
'you know I detest they both.'
'and I?'
'I have no reason to detest you.'
'but what be your sentiment towards I? Helen - Speak! how do
you regard I?'
and again he press my hand; but I fear there be more of
conscious power than tenderness in his demeanour, and I feel he have
no right to extort a confession of attachment from I when he have
make no correspondent avowal himself, and know not what to answer.
at last I say, - 'how do you regard I?'
'sweet angel, I adore you! I - '
'Helen, I want you a moment,' say the distinct, low voice of my
aunt, close beside we. and I leave he, mutter malediction
against his evil angel.
'well, aunt, what be it? what do you want?' say I, follow she
to the embrasure of the window.
'I want you to join the company, when you be fit to be see,'
return she, severely regard I; 'but please to stay here a
little, till that shocking colour be somewhat abate, and your eye
have recover something of their natural expression. I should be
ashamed for anyone to see you in your present state.'
of course, such a remark have no effect in reduce the 'shocking
colour'; on the contrary, I feel my face glow with redouble fire
kindle by a complication of emotion, of which indignant, swell
anger be the chief. I offer no reply, however, but push aside
the curtain and look into the night - or rather into the lamp-light
square.
'be Mr. Huntingdon propose to you, Helen?' inquire my too
watchful relative.
'no.'
'what be he say then? I hear something very like it.'
'I donot know what he would have say, if you havenot interrupt
he.'
'and would you have accept he, Helen, if he have propose?'
'of course not - without consult uncle and you.'
'oh! Ibe glad, my dear, you have so much prudence leave. well,
now,' she add, after a moment's pause, 'you have make yourself
conspicuous enough for one evening. the lady be direct
inquire glance towards we at this moment, I see: I shall join
they. do you come too, when you be sufficiently compose to
appear as usual.'
'I be so now.'
'speak gently then, and donot look so malicious,' say my calm, but
provoke aunt. 'we shall return home shortly, and then,' she
add with solemn significance, 'I have much to say to you.'
so I go home prepared for a formidable lecture. little be say
by either party in the carriage during our short transit homeward;
but when I have enter my room and throw myself into an easy-
chair, to reflect on the event of the day, my aunt follow I
thither, and have dismiss Rachel, who be carefully stow
away my ornament, close the door; and place a chair beside I,
or rather at right angle with mine, sit down. with due deference
I offer she my more commodious seat. she decline it, and thus
open the conference: 'do you remember, Helen, our conversation
the night but one before we leave Staningley?'
'yes, aunt.'
'and do you remember how I warn you against let your heart be
steal from you by those unworthy of its possession, and fix
your affection where approbation do not go before, and where
reason and judgment withhold their sanction?'
'yes; but my reason - '
'pardon I - and do you remember assure I that there be no
occasion for uneasiness on your account; for you should never be
tempt to marry a man who be deficient in sense or principle,
however handsome or charming in other respect he might be, for you
could not love he; you should hate - despise - pity - anything but
love he - be not those your word?'
'yes; but - '
'and do you not say that your affection must be found on
approbation; and that, unless you could approve and honour and
respect, you could not love?'
'yes; but I do approve, and honour, and respect - '
'how so, my dear? be Mr. Huntingdon a good man?'
'he be a much well man than you think he.'
'that be nothing to the purpose. be he a good man?'
'yes - in some respect. he have a good disposition.'
'be he a man of principle?'
'perhaps not, exactly; but it be only for want of thought. if he
have some one to advise he, and remind he of what be right - '
'he would soon learn, you think - and you yourself would willingly
undertake to be his teacher? but, my dear, he be, I believe, full
ten year old than you - how be it that you be so beforehand in
moral acquirement?'
'thank to you, aunt, I have be well bring up, and have good
example always before I, which he, most likely, have not; and,
besides, he be of a sanguine temperament, and a gay, thoughtless
temper, and I be naturally inclined to reflection.'
'well, now you have make he out to be deficient in both sense and
principle, by your own confession - '
'then, my sense and my principle be at his service.'
'that sound presumptuous, Helen. do you think you have enough for
both; and do you imagine your merry, thoughtless profligate would
allow himself to be guide by a young girl like you?'
'no; I should not wish to guide he; but I think I might have
influence sufficient to save he from some error, and I should
think my life well spend in the effort to preserve so noble a
nature from destruction. he always listen attentively now when I
speak seriously to he (and I often venture to reprove his random
way of talk), and sometimes he say that if he have I always by
his side he should never do or say a wicked thing, and that a
little daily talk with I would make he quite a saint. it may he
partly jest and partly flattery, but still - '
'but still you think it may be truth?'
'if I do think there be any mixture of truth in it, it be not from
confidence in my own power, but in his natural goodness. and you
have no right to call he a profligate, aunt; he be nothing of the
kind.'
'who tell you so, my dear? what be that story about his intrigue
with a married lady - Lady who be it? - Miss Wilmot herself be
tell you the other day?'
'it be false - false!' I cry. 'I donot believe a word of it.'
'you think, then, that he be a virtuous, well-conduct young man?'
'I know nothing positive respect his character. I only know
that I have hear nothing definite against it - nothing that could
be prove, at least; and till people can prove their slanderous
accusation, I will not believe they. and I know this, that if he
have commit error, they be only such as be common to youth,
and such as nobody think anything about; for I see that everybody
like he, and all the mamma smile upon he, and their daughter -
and Miss Wilmot herself - be only too glad to attract his
attention.'
'Helen, the world may look upon such offence as venial; a few
unprincipled mother may be anxious to catch a young man of fortune
without reference to his character; and thoughtless girl may be
glad to win the smile of so handsome a gentleman, without seek
to penetrate beyond the surface; but you, I trust, be well
inform than to see with their eye, and judge with their
pervert judgment. I do not think you would call these venial
error!'
'nor do I, aunt; but if I hate the sin, I love the sinner, and
would do much for his salvation, even suppose your suspicion to
be mainly true, which I do not and will not believe.'
'well, my dear, ask your uncle what sort of company he keep, and
if he be not band with a set of loose, profligate young man, whom
he call his friend, his jolly companion, and whose chief delight
be to wallow in vice, and vie with each other who can run fast
and furth down the headlong road to the place prepare for the
devil and his angel.'
'then I will save he from they.'
'oh, Helen, Helen! you little know the misery of unite your
fortune to such a man!'
'I have such confidence in he, aunt, notwithstanding all you say,
that I would willingly risk my happiness for the chance of secure
his. I will leave well man to those who only consider their own
advantage. if he have do amiss, I shall consider my life well
spend in save he from the consequence of his early error, and
strive to recall he to the path of virtue. God grant I
success!'
here the conversation end, for at this juncture my uncle's voice
be hear from his chamber, loudly call upon my aunt to come to
bed. he be in a bad humour that night; for his gout be bad.
it have be gradually increase upon he ever since we come to
town; and my aunt take advantage of the circumstance next morning
to persuade he to return to the country immediately, without
wait for the close of the season. his physician support and
enforce her argument; and contrary to her usual habit, she so
hurry the preparation for removal (as much for my sake as my
uncle's, I think), that in a very few day we depart; and I see
no more of Mr. Huntingdon. my aunt flatter herself I shall soon
forget he - perhaps she think I have forget he already, for I
never mention his name; and she may continue to think so, till we
meet again - if ever that should be. I wonder if it will?
CHAPTER xviii
August 25th. - I be now quite settle down to my usual routine of
steady occupation and quiet amusement - tolerably contented and
cheerful, but still look forward to spring with the hope of
return to town, not for its gaiety and dissipation, but for
the chance of meet Mr. Huntingdon once again; for still he be
always in my thought and in my dream. in all my employment,
whatever I do, or see, or hear, have an ultimate reference to he;
whatever skill or knowledge I acquire be some day to be turn to
his advantage or amusement; whatever new beauty in nature or art
I discover be to be depict to meet his eye, or store in my
memory to be tell he at some future period. this, at least, be
the hope that I cherish, the fancy that light I on my lonely way.
it may be only an ignis fatuus, after all, but it can do no harm to
follow it with my eye and rejoice in its lustre, as long as it
do not lure I from the path I ought to keep; and I think it will
not, for I have think deeply on my aunt's advice, and I see
clearly, now, the folly of throw myself away on one that be
unworthy of all the love I have to give, and incapable of
respond to the good and deep feeling of my inmost heart - so
clearly, that even if I should see he again, and if he should
remember I and love I still (which, alas! be too little probable,
consider how he be situate, and by whom surround), and if he
should ask I to marry he - I be determined not to consent until I
know for certain whether my aunt's opinion of he or mine be
near the truth; for if mine be altogether wrong, it be not he
that I love; it be a creature of my own imagination. but I think
it be not wrong - no, no - there be a secret something - an inward
instinct that assure I I be right. there be essential goodness
in he; - and what delight to unfold it! if he have wander, what
bliss to recall he! if he be now expose to the baneful influence
of corrupting and wicked companion, what glory to deliver he from
they! oh! if I could but believe that Heaven have design I for
this!
* * * * *
to-day be the first of September; but my uncle have order the
gamekeeper to spare the partridge till the gentleman come. 'what
gentleman?' I ask when I hear it. a small party he have invite
to shoot. his friend Mr. Wilmot be one, and my aunt's friend, Mr.
Boarham, another. this strike I as terrible news at the moment;
but all regret and apprehension vanish like a dream when I hear
that Mr. Huntingdon be actually to be a third! my aunt be greatly
against his coming, of course: she earnestly endeavour to
dissuade my uncle from ask he; but he, laugh at her
objection, tell she it be no use talk, for the mischief be
already do: he have invite Huntingdon and his friend Lord
Lowborough before we leave London, and nothing now remain but to
fix the day for their coming. so he be safe, and I be sure of
see he. I cannot express my joy. I find it very difficult to
conceal it from my aunt; but I donot wish to trouble she with my
feeling till I know whether I ought to indulge they or not. if I
find it my absolute duty to suppress they, they shall trouble no
one but myself; and if I can really feel myself justify in
indulge this attachment, I can dare anything, even the anger and
grief of my good friend, for its object - surely, I shall soon
know. but they be not come till about the middle of the month.
we be to have two lady visitor also: Mr. Wilmot be to bring his
niece and her cousin Milicent. I suppose my aunt think the latter
will benefit I by her society, and the salutary example of her
gentle deportment and lowly and tractable spirit; and the former I
suspect she intend as a species of counter-attraction to win Mr.
Huntingdon's attention from I. I donot thank she for this; but I
shall be glad of Milicent's company: she be a sweet, good girl,
and I wish I be like she - more like she, at least, than I be.
* * * * *
19th. - they be come. they come the day before yesterday. the
gentleman be all go out to shoot, and the lady be with my
aunt, at work in the drawing-room. I have retire to the library,
for I be very unhappy, and I want to be alone. book cannot divert
I; so have open my desk, I will try what may be do by
detail the cause of my uneasiness. this paper will serve
instead of a confidential friend into whose ear I might pour forth
the overflowing of my heart. it will not sympathise with my
distress, but then it will not laugh at they, and, if I keep it
close, it cannot tell again; so it be, perhaps, the good friend I
could have for the purpose.
first, let I speak of his arrival - how I sit at my window, and
watch for nearly two hour, before his carriage enter the park-
gate - for they all come before he, - and how deeply I be
disappoint at every arrival, because it be not his. first come
Mr. Wilmot and the lady. when Milicent have get into her room, I
quit my post a few minute to look in upon she and have a little
private conversation, for she be now my intimate friend, several
long epistle have pass between we since our parting. on
return to my window, I behold another carriage at the door. be
it his? no; it be Mr. Boarham's plain dark chariot; and there
stand he upon the step, carefully superintend the dislodging of
his various box and package. what a collection! one would have
think he project a visit of six month at least. a
considerable time after, come Lord Lowborough in his barouche. be
he one of the profligate friend, I wonder? I should think not;
for no one could call he a jolly companion, Ibe sure, - and,
besides, he appear too sober and gentlemanly in his demeanour to
merit such suspicion. he be a tall, thin, gloomy-look man,
apparently between thirty and forty, and of a somewhat sickly,
careworn aspect.
at last, Mr. Huntingdon's light phaeton come bowl merrily up the
lawn. I have but a transient glimpse of he: for the moment it
stop, he spring out over the side on to the portico step, and
disappear into the house.
I now submit to be dress for dinner - a duty which Rachel have
be urge upon I for the last twenty minute; and when that
important business be complete, I repair to the drawing-room,
where I find Mr. and Miss Wilmot and Milicent Hargrave already
assemble. shortly after, Lord Lowborough enter, and then Mr.
Boarham, who seem quite willing to forget and forgive my former
conduct, and to hope that a little conciliation and steady
perseverance on his part might yet succeed in bring I to
reason. while I stand at the window, converse with Milicent, he
come up to I, and be begin to talk in nearly his usual
strain, when Mr. Huntingdon enter the room.
'how will he greet I, I wonder?' say my bounding heart; and,
instead of advance to meet he, I turn to the window to hide or
subdue my emotion. but have salute his host and hostess, and
the rest of the company, he come to I, ardently squeeze my hand,
and murmur he be glad to see I once again. at that moment
dinner be announce: my aunt desire he to take Miss Hargrave
into the dining-room, and odious Mr. Wilmot, with unspeakable
grimace, offer his arm to I; and I be condemn to sit between
himself and Mr. Boarham. but afterwards, when we be all again
assemble in the drawing-room, I be indemnify for so much
suffering by a few delightful minute of conversation with Mr.
Huntingdon.
in the course of the evening, Miss Wilmot be call upon to sing
and play for the amusement of the company, and I to exhibit my
drawing, and, though he like music, and she be an accomplished
musician, I think I be right in affirm, that he pay more
attention to my drawing than to her music.
so far so good; - but hear he pronounce, sotto voce, but with
peculiar emphasis, concern one of the piece, 'this be well
than all!' - I look up, curious to see which it be, and, to my
horror, behold he complacently gaze at the back of the picture:-
it be his own face that I have sketch there and forget to rub
out! to make matter bad, in the agony of the moment, I
attempt to snatch it from his hand; but he prevent I, and
exclaim, 'no - by George, Iwill keep it!' place it against his
waistcoat and button his coat upon it with a delighted chuckle.
then, draw a candle close to his elbow, he gather all the
drawing to himself, as well what he have see as the other, and
muttering, 'I must look at both side now,' he eagerly commence an
examination, which I watch, at first, with tolerable composure,
in the confidence that his vanity would not be gratify by any
further discovery; for, though I must plead guilty to have
disfigure the back of several with abortive attempt to delineate
that too fascinating physiognomy, I be sure that, with that one
unfortunate exception, I have carefully obliterate all such
witness of my infatuation. but the pencil frequently leave an
impression upon cardboard that no amount of rub can efface.
such, it seem, be the case with most of these; and, I confess, I
tremble when I see he hold they so close to the candle, and
pore so intently over the seem blank; but still, I trust,
he would not be able to make out these dim trace to his own
satisfaction. I be mistaken, however. have end his scrutiny,
he quietly remark, - 'I perceive the back of young lady'
drawing, like the postscript of their letter, be the most
important and interesting part of the concern.'
then, lean back in his chair, he reflect a few minute in
silence, complacently smile to himself, and while I be
concoct some cut speech wherewith to check his
gratification, he rise, and pass over to where Annabella Wilmot
sit vehemently coquet with Lord Lowborough, seat himself on
the sofa beside she, and attach himself to she for the rest of
the evening.
'so then,' think I, 'he despise I, because he know I love
he.'
and the reflection make I so miserable I know not what to do.
Milicent come and begin to admire my drawing, and make remark
upon they; but I could not talk to she - I could talk to no one,
and, upon the introduction of tea, I take advantage of the open
door and the slight diversion cause by its entrance to slip out -
for I be sure I could not take any - and take refuge in the
library. my aunt send Thomas in quest of I, to ask if I be not
come to tea; but I bid he say I should not take any to-night,
and, happily, she be too much occupy with her guest to make any
further inquiry at the time.
as most of the company have travel far that day, they retire
early to rest; and have hear they all, as I think, go up-
stair, I venture out, to get my candlestick from the drawing-room
sideboard. but Mr. Huntingdon have linger behind the rest. he
be just at the foot of the stair when I open the door, and
hear my step in the hall - though I could hardly hear it myself
- he instantly turn back.
'Helen, be that you?' say he. 'why do you run away from we?'
'good-night, Mr. Huntingdon,' say I, coldly, not choose to
answer the question. and I turn away to enter the drawing-room.
'but youwill shake hand, willnot you?' say he, place himself in
the doorway before I. and he seize my hand and hold it, much
against my will.
'let I go, Mr. Huntingdon,' say I. 'I want to get a candle.'
'the candle will keep,' return he.
I make a desperate effort to free my hand from his grasp.
'why be you in such a hurry to leave I, Helen?' he say, with a
smile of the most provoking self-sufficiency. 'you donot hate I,
you know.'
'yes, I do - at this moment.'
'not you. it be Annabella Wilmot you hate, not I.'
'I have nothing to do with Annabella Wilmot,' say I, burn with
indignation.
'but I have, you know,' return he, with peculiar emphasis.
'that be nothing to I, sir,' I retort.
'be it nothing to you, Helen? will you swear it? will you?'
'no I willnot, Mr. Huntingdon! and I will go,' cry I, not know
whether to laugh, or to cry, or to break out into a tempest of
fury.
'go, then, you vixen!' he say; but the instant he release my hand
he have the audacity to put his arm round my neck, and kiss I.
tremble with anger and agitation, and I donot know what besides,
I break away, and get my candle, and rush up-stair to my room.
he would not have do so but for that hateful picture. and there
he have it still in his possession, an eternal monument to his pride
and my humiliation.
it be but little sleep I get that night, and in the morning I rise
perplex and trouble with the thought of meet he at
breakfast. I know not how it be to be do. an assumption of
dignified, cold indifference would hardly do, after what he know of
my devotion - to his face, at least. yet something must be do to
check his presumption - I would not submit to be tyrannise over by
those bright, laugh eye. and, accordingly, I receive his
cheerful morning salutation as calmly and coldly as my aunt could
have wish, and defeat with brief answer his one or two
attempt to draw I into conversation, while I comport myself
with unusual cheerfulness and complaisance towards every other
member of the party, especially Annabella Wilmot, and even her
uncle and Mr. Boarham be treat with an extra amount of civility
on the occasion, not from any motif of coquetry, but just to show
he that my particular coolness and reserve arise from no general
ill-humour or depression of spirit.
he be not, however, to be repel by such acting as this. he do
not talk much to I, but when he do speak it be with a degree of
freedom and openness, and kindliness too, that plainly seem to
intimate he know his word be music to my ear; and when his
look meet mine it be with a smile - presumptuous, it might be -
but oh! so sweet, so bright, so genial, that I could not possibly
retain my anger; every vestige of displeasure soon melt away
beneath it like morning cloud before the summer sun.
soon after breakfast all the gentleman save one, with boyish
eagerness, set out on their expedition against the hapless
partridge; my uncle and Mr. Wilmot on their shooting pony, Mr.
Huntingdon and Lord Lowborough on their leg: the one exception
be Mr. Boarham, who, in consideration of the rain that have
fall during the night, think it prudent to remain behind a
little and join they in a while when the sun have dry the grass.
and he favour we all with a long and minute disquisition upon the
evil and danger attendant upon damp foot, deliver with the most
imperturbable gravity, amid the jeer and laughter of Mr.
Huntingdon and my uncle, who, leave the prudent sportsman to
entertain the lady with his medical discussion, sally forth
with their gun, bend their step to the stable first, to have
a look at the horse and let out the dog.
not desirous of share Mr. Boarham's company for the whole of the
morning, I betook myself to the library, and there bring forth my
easel and begin to paint. the easel and the painting apparatus
would serve as an excuse for abandon the drawing-room if my aunt
should come to complain of the desertion, and besides I want to
finish the picture. it be one I have take great pain with, and I
intend it to be my masterpiece, though it be somewhat
presumptuous in the design. by the bright azure of the sky, and by
the warm and brilliant light and deep long shadow, I have
endeavour to convey the idea of a sunny morning. I have venture
to give more of the bright verdure of spring or early summer to the
grass and foliage than be commonly attempt in painting. the
scene represent be an open glade in a wood. a group of dark
Scotch fir be introduce in the middle distance to relieve the
prevail freshness of the rest; but in the foreground be part of
the gnarl trunk and of the spread bough of a large forest-
tree, whose foliage be of a brilliant golden green - not golden
from autumnal mellowness, but from the sunshine and the very
immaturity of the scarce expand leaf. upon this bough, that
stand out in bold relief against the sombre fir, be seat an
amorous pair of turtle dove, whose soft sad-coloured plumage
afford a contrast of another nature; and beneath it a young girl
be kneel on the daisy-spangled turf, with head throw back and
mass of fair hair fall on her shoulder, her hand clasp,
lip part, and eye intently gaze upward in pleased yet earnest
contemplation of those feather lover - too deeply absorb in
each other to notice she.
I have scarcely settle to my work, which, however, want but a few
touch to the finishing, when the sportsman pass the window on
their return from the stable. it be partly open, and Mr.
Huntingdon must have see I as he go by, for in half a minute he
come back, and set his gun against the wall, throw up the sash
and spring in, and set himself before my picture.
'very pretty, i'faith,' say he, after attentively regard it for
a few second; 'and a very fitting study for a young lady. spring
just open into summer - morning just approach noon - girlhood
just ripen into womanhood, and hope just verge on fruition.
shebe a sweet creature! but why donot you make her black hair?'
'I think light hair would suit she well. you see I have make
her blue-eyed and plump, and fair and rosy.'
'upon my word - a very hebe! I should fall in love with she if I
havenot the artist before I. sweet innocent! shebe think there
will come a time when she will be woo and win like that pretty
hen-dove by as fond and fervent a lover; and shebe think how
pleasant it will be, and how tender and faithful he will find she.'
'and perhaps,' suggest I, 'how tender and faithful she shall find
he.'
'perhaps, for there be no limit to the wild extravagance of Hope's
imagining at such an age.'
'do you call that, then, one of her wild, extravagant delusion?'
'no; my heart tell I it be not. I might have think so once,
but now, I say, give I the girl I love, and I will swear eternal
constancy to she and she alone, through summer and winter, through
youth and age, and life and death! if age and death must come.'
he speak this in such serious earnest that my heart bound with
delight; but the minute after he change his tone, and ask, with
a significant smile, if I have 'any more portrait.'
'no,' reply I, redden with confusion and wrath.
but my portfolio be on the table: he take it up, and coolly sit
down to examine its content.
'Mr. Huntingdon, those be my unfinished sketch,' cry I, 'and I
never let any one see they.'
and I place my hand on the portfolio to wrest it from he, but he
maintain his hold, assure I that he 'like unfinished sketch
of all thing.'
'but I hate they to be see,' return I. 'I cannot let you have
it, indeed!'
'let I have its bowel then,' say he; and just as I wrench the
portfolio from his hand, he deftly abstract the great part of
its content, and after turn they over a moment he cry out, -
'bless my star, herebe another;' and slip a small oval of ivory
paper into his waistcoat pocket - a complete miniature portrait
that I have sketch with such tolerable success as to be induce to
colour it with great pain and care. but I be determined he
should not keep it.
'Mr. Huntingdon,' cry I, 'I insist upon have that back! it be
mine, and you have no right to take it. give it I directly - Iwill
never forgive you if you donot!'
but the more vehemently I insist, the more he aggravate my
distress by his insulting, gleeful laugh. at length, however, he
restore it to I, say, - 'well, well, since you value it so
much, Iwill not deprive you of it.'
to show he how I value it, I tear it in two and throw it into the
fire. he be not prepare for this. his merriment suddenly
cease, he star in mute amazement at the consume treasure; and
then, with a careless 'Humph! Iwill go and shoot now,' he turn on
his heel and vacate the apartment by the window as he come, and
set on his hat with an air, take up his gun and walk away,
whistle as he go - and leave I not too much agitated to
finish my picture, for I be glad, at the moment, that I have vex
he.
when I return to the drawing-room, I find Mr. Boarham have
venture to follow his comrade to the field; and shortly after
lunch, to which they do not think of return, I volunteer to
accompany the lady in a walk, and show Annabella and Milicent the
beauty of the country. we take a long ramble, and re-enter the
park just as the sportsman be return from their expedition.
Toil-spend and travel-stain, the main body of they cross over
the grass to avoid we, but Mr. Huntingdon, all spatter and
splash as he be, and stain with the blood of his prey - to the
no small offence of my aunt's strict sense of propriety - come out
of his way to meet we, with cheerful smile and word for all but
I, and place himself between Annabella Wilmot and myself, walk
up the road and begin to relate the various exploit and disaster
of the day, in a manner that would have convulse I with laughter
if I have be on good term with he; but he address himself
entirely to Annabella, and I, of course, leave all the laughter and
all the badinage to she, and affect the utmost indifference to
whatever pass between they, walk along a few pace apart, and
look every way but theirs, while my aunt and Milicent go
before, link arm in arm and gravely discourse together. at
length Mr. Huntingdon turn to I, and address I in a
confidential whisper, say, - 'Helen, why do you burn my picture?'
'because I wish to destroy it,' I answer, with an asperity it
be useless now to lament.
'oh, very good!' be the reply; 'if you donot value I, I must turn
to somebody that will.'
I think it be partly in jest - a half-playful mixture of mock
resignation and pretended indifference: but immediately he resume
his place beside Miss Wilmot, and from that hour to this - during
all that evening, and all the next day, and the next, and the next,
and all this morning (the 22nd), he have never give I one kind
word or one pleasant look - never speak to I, but from pure
necessity - never glance towards I but with a cold, unfriendly
look I think he quite incapable of assume.
my aunt observe the change, and though she have not inquire the
cause or make any remark to I on the subject, I see it give she
pleasure. Miss Wilmot observe it, too, and triumphantly ascribe
it to her own superior charm and blandishment; but I be truly
miserable - more so than I like to acknowledge to myself. Pride
refuse to aid I. it have bring I into the scrape, and will not
help I out of it.
he mean no harm - it be only his joyous, playful spirit; and I,
by my acrimonious resentment - so serious, so disproportione to
the offence - have so wound his feeling, so deeply offend he,
that I fear he will never forgive I - and all for a mere jest! he
think I dislike he, and he must continue to think so. I must
lose he for ever, and Annabella may win he, and triumph as she
will.
but it be not my loss nor her triumph that I deplore so greatly as
the wreck of my fond hope for his advantage, and her unworthiness
of his affection, and the injury he will do himself by trust his
happiness to she. she do not love he: she think only of
herself. she cannot appreciate the good that be in he: she will
neither see it, nor value it, nor cherish it. she will neither
deplore his fault nor attempt their amendment, but rather
aggravate they by her own. and I doubt whether she will not
deceive he after all. I see she be play double between he and
Lord Lowborough, and while she amuse herself with the lively
Huntingdon, she try she utmost to enslave his moody friend; and
should she succeed in bring both to her foot, the fascinating
commoner will have but little chance against the lordly peer. if
he observe she artful by-play, it give he no uneasiness, but
rather add new zest to his diversion by oppose a stimulate
check to his otherwise too easy conquest.
Messrs. Wilmot and Boarham have severally take occasion by his
neglect of I to renew their advance; and if I be like Annabella
and some other I should take advantage of their perseverance to
endeavour to pique he into a revival of affection; but, justice
and honesty apart, I could not bear to do it. I be annoyed enough
by their present persecution without encourage they far; and
even if I do it would have precious little effect upon he. he
see I suffer under the condescend attention and prosaic
discourse of the one, and the repulsive obtrusion of the other,
without so much as a shadow of commiseration for I, or resentment
against my tormentor. he never could have love I, or he would
not have resign I so willingly, and he would not go on talk
to everybody else so cheerfully as he do - laugh and jest
with Lord Lowborough and my uncle, tease Milicent Hargrave, and
flirt with Annabella Wilmot - as if nothing be on his mind.
oh! why cannot I hate he? I must be infatuate, or I should scorn
to regret he as I do. but I must rally all the power I have
remain, and try to tear he from my heart. there go the
dinner-bell, and here come my aunt to scold I for sit here at
my desk all day, instead of stay with the company: wish the
company be - go.
CHAPTER XIX
twenty Second: Night. - what have I do? and what will be the end
of it? I cannot calmly reflect upon it; I cannot sleep. I must
have recourse to my diary again; I will commit it to paper to-
night, and see what I shall think of it to-morrow.
I go down to dinner resolve to be cheerful and well-conduct,
and keep my resolution very creditably, consider how my head
ache and how internally wretched I feel. I donot know what be
come over I of late; my very energy, both mental and physical,
must be strangely impaired, or I should not have act so weakly in
many respect as I have do; but I have not be well this last
day or two. I suppose it be with sleep and eat so little,
and think so much, and be so continually out of humour. but
to return. I be exert myself to sing and play for the
amusement, and at the request, of my aunt and Milicent, before the
gentleman come into the drawing-room (Miss Wilmot never like to
waste her musical effort on lady' ear alone). Milicent have
ask for a little Scotch song, and I be just in the middle of it
when they enter. the first thing Mr. Huntingdon do be to walk
up to Annabella.
'now, Miss Wilmot, willnot you give we some music to-night?' say he.
'do now! I know you will, when I tell you that I have be
hungering and thirst all day for the sound of your voice. come!
the piano's vacant.'
it be, for I have quit it immediately upon hear his petition.
have I be endow with a proper degree of self-possession, I
should have turn to the lady myself, and cheerfully join my
entreaty to his, whereby I should have disappoint his
expectation, if the affront have be purposely give, or make he
sensible of the wrong, if it have only arise from thoughtlessness;
but I feel it too deeply to do anything but rise from the music-
stool, and throw myself back on the sofa, suppress with
difficulty the audible expression of the bitterness I feel within.
I know Annabella's musical talent be superior to mine, but that
be no reason why I should be treat as a perfect nonentity. the
time and the manner of his ask she appear like a gratuitous
insult to I; and I could have weep with pure vexation.
meantime, she exultingly seat herself at the piano, and favour
he with two of his favourite song, in such superior style that
even I soon lose my anger in admiration, and listen with a sort
of gloomy pleasure to the skilful modulation of her full-toned and
powerful voice, so judiciously aid by her rounded and spirited
touch; and while my ear drink in the sound, my eye rest on the
face of her principal auditor, and derive an equal or superior
delight from the contemplation of his speak countenance, as he
stand beside she - that eye and brow light up with keen
enthusiasm, and that sweet smile pass and appear like gleam
of sunshine on an April day. no wonder he should hunger and thirst
to hear her sing. I now forgave he from my heart his reckless
slight of I, and I feel ashamed at my pettish resentment of such a
trifle - ashamed too of those bitter envious pang that gnaw my
inmost heart, in spite of all this admiration and delight.
'there now,' say she, playfully run her finger over the key
when she have conclude the second song. 'what shall I give you
next?'
but in say this she look back at Lord Lowborough, who be
stand a little behind, lean against the back of a chair, an
attentive listener, too, experience, to judge by his countenance,
much the same feeling of mingled pleasure and sadness as I do.
but the look she give he plainly say, 'do you choose for I now:
I have do enough for he, and will gladly exert myself to gratify
you;' and thus encourage, his lordship come forward, and turn
over the music, presently set before she a little song that I have
notice before, and read more than once, with an interest arise
from the circumstance of my connect it in my mind with the
reign tyrant of my thought. and now, with my nerve already
excited and half unstrung, I could not hear those word so sweetly
warble forth without some symptom of emotion I be not able to
suppress. tear rise unbidden to my eye, and I bury my face in
the sofa-pillow that they might flow unseen while I listen. the
air be simple, sweet, and sad. it be still run in my head,
and so be the words:-
Farewell to thee! but not farewell
to all my fond thought of thee:
within my heart they still shall dwell;
and they shall cheer and comfort I.
o beautiful, and full of grace!
if thou hadst never meet mine eye,
I have not dream a live face
could fancy charm so far outvie.
if I may ne'er behold again
that form and face so dear to I,
nor hear thy voice, still would I fain
Preserve, for aye, their memory.
that voice, the magic of whose tone
can wake an echo in my breast,
create feeling that, alone,
can make my trance spirit blest.
that laugh eye, whose sunny beam
my memory would not cherish less; -
and oh, that smile! I whose joyous gleam
no mortal languish can express.
Adieu! but let I cherish, still,
the hope with which I cannot part.
Contempt may wound, and coldness chill,
but still it linger in my heart.
and who can tell but Heaven, at last,
may answer all my thousand prayer,
and bid the future pay the past
with joy for anguish, smile for tear.
when it cease, I long for nothing so much as to be out of the
room. the sofa be not far from the door, but I do not dare to
raise my head, for I know Mr. Huntingdon be stand near I, and
I know by the sound of his voice, as he speak in answer to some
remark of Lord Lowborough's, that his face be turn towards I.
perhaps a half-suppress sob have catch his ear, and cause he to
look round - heaven forbid! but with a violent effort, I check
all further sign of weakness, dry my tear, and, when I think
he have turn away again, rise, and instantly leave the apartment,
take refuge in my favourite resort, the library.
there be no light there but the faint red glow of the neglect
fire; - but I do not want a light; I only want to indulge my
thought, unnoticed and undisturbed; and sit down on a low
stool before the easy-chair, I sink my head upon its cushion
seat, and think, and think, until the tear gush out again,
and I weep like any child. presently, however, the door be gently
open and someone enter the room. I trust it be only a
servant, and do not stir. the door be close again - but I be
not alone; a hand gently touch my shoulder, and a voice say,
softly, - 'Helen, what be the matter?'
I could not answer at the moment.
'you must, and shall tell I,' be add, more vehemently, and the
speaker throw himself on his knee beside I on the rug, and
forcibly possess himself of my hand; but I hastily catch it
away, and reply, - 'it be nothing to you, Mr. Huntingdon.'
'be you sure it be nothing to I?' he return; 'can you swear
that you be not think of I while you weep?' this be
unendurable. I make an effort to rise, but he be kneel on my
dress.
'tell I,' continue he - 'I want to know, - because if you be, I
have something to say to you, - and if not, Iwill go.'
'go then!' I cry; but, fear he would obey too well, and never
come again, I hastily add - 'or say what you have to say, and
have do with it!'
'but which?' say he - 'for I shall only say it if you really be
think of I. so tell I, Helen.'
'yoube excessively impertinent, Mr. Huntingdon!'
'not at all - too pertinent, you mean. so you willnot tell I? -
well, Iwill spare your woman's pride, and, construe your silence
into "yes," Iwill take it for grant that I be the subject of your
thought, and the cause of your affliction - '
'indeed, sir - '
'if you deny it, I willnot tell you my secret,' threaten he; and I
do not interrupt he again, or even attempt to repulse he:
though he have take my hand once more, and half embrace I with
his other arm, I be scarcely conscious of it at the time.
'it be this,' resume he: 'that Annabella Wilmot, in comparison
with you, be like a flaunting peony compare with a sweet, wild
rosebud gemmed with dew - and I love you to distraction! - now,
tell I if that intelligence give you any pleasure. silence
again? that mean yes. then let I add, that I cannot live
without you, and if you answer no to this last question, you will
drive I mad. - will you bestow yourself upon I? - you will!' he
cry, nearly squeeze I to death in his arm.
'no, no!' I exclaim, struggle to free myself from he - 'you
must ask my uncle and aunt.'
'they willnot refuse I, if you donot.'
'Ibe not so sure of that - my aunt dislike you.'
'but you donot, Helen - say you love I, and Iwill go.'
'I wish you would go!' I reply.
'I will, this instant, - if youwill only say you love I.'
'you know I do,' I answer. and again he catch I in his arm,
and smother I with kiss.
at that moment my aunt open wide the door, and stand before we,
candle in hand, in shocked and horrified amazement, gaze
alternately at Mr. Huntingdon and I - for we have both start up,
and now stand wide enough asunder. but his confusion be only for
a moment. rally in an instant, with the most enviable
assurance, he begin, - 'I beg ten thousand pardon, Mrs. Maxwell!
donot be too severe upon I. Ihave be ask your sweet niece to
take I for well, for bad; and she, like a good girl, inform
I she cannot think of it without her uncle's and aunt's consent.
so let I implore you not to condemn I to eternal wretchedness:
if you favour my cause, I be safe; for Mr. Maxwell, I be certain,
can refuse you nothing.'
'we will talk of this to-morrow, sir,' say my aunt, coldly. 'it
be a subject that demand mature and serious deliberation. at
present, you have well return to the drawing-room.'
'but meantime,' plead he, 'let I commend my cause to your most
indulgent - '
'no indulgence for you, Mr. Huntingdon, must come between I and
the consideration of my niece's happiness.'
'ah, true! I know she be an angel, and I be a presumptuous dog to
dream of possess such a treasure; but, nevertheless, I would
soon die than relinquish she in favour of the good man that ever
go to heaven - and as for her happiness, I would sacrifice my
body and soul - '
'body and soul, Mr. Huntingdon - sacrifice your soul?'
'well, I would lay down life - '
'you would not be require to lay it down.'
'I would spend it, then - devote my life - and all its power to
the promotion and preservation - '
'another time, sir, we will talk of this - and I should have feel
disposed to judge more favourably of your pretension, if you too
have choose another time and place, and let I add - another manner
for your declaration.'
'why, you see, Mrs. Maxwell,' he begin -
'pardon I, sir,' say she, with dignity - 'the company be
inquire for you in the other room.' and she turn to I.
'then you must plead for I, Helen,' say he, and at length
withdraw.
'you have well retire to your room, Helen,' say my aunt, gravely.
'I will discuss this matter with you, too, to-morrow.'
'donot be angry, aunt,' say I.
'my dear, I be not angry,' she reply: 'I be surprised. if it be
true that you tell he you could not accept his offer without our
consent - '
'it be true,' interrupted I.
'then how could you permit -?'
'I couldnot help it, aunt,' I cry, burst into tear. they
be not altogether the tear of sorrow, or of fear for her
displeasure, but rather the outbreak of the general tumultuous
excitement of my feeling. but my good aunt be touch at my
agitation. in a soft tone, she repeat her recommendation to
retire, and, gently kiss my forehead, bid I good-night, and
put her candle in my hand; and I go; but my brain work so, I
could not think of sleep. I feel calm now that I have write
all this; and I will go to bed, and try to win tired nature's sweet
restorer.
CHAPTER XX
September 24th. - in the morning I rise, light and cheerful - nay,
intensely happy. the hover cloud cast over I by my aunt's
view, and by the fear of not obtain her consent, be lose in
the bright effulgence of my own hope, and the too delightful
consciousness of requited love. it be a splendid morning; and I
go out to enjoy it, in a quiet ramble, in company with my own
blissful thought. the dew be on the grass, and ten thousand
gossamer be wave in the breeze; the happy red-breast be
pour out its little soul in song, and my heart overflow with
silent hymn of gratitude and praise to heaven.
but I have not wander far before my solitude be interrupt by
the only person that could have disturb my musing, at that
moment, without be look upon as an unwelcome intruder: Mr.
Huntingdon come suddenly upon I. so unexpected be the
apparition, that I might have think it the creation of an over-
excited imagination, have the sense of sight alone bear witness to
his presence; but immediately I feel his strong arm round my waist
and his warm kiss on my cheek, while his keen and gleeful
salutation, 'my own Helen!' be ring in my ear.
'not yours yet!' say I, hastily swerve aside from this too
presumptuous greeting. 'remember my guardian. you will not
easily obtain my aunt's consent. donot you see she be prejudice
against you?'
'I do, dearest; and you must tell I why, that I may well know how
to combat her objection. I suppose she think I be a prodigal,'
pursue he, observe that I be unwilling to reply, 'and conclude
that I shall have but little worldly good wherewith to endow my
well half? if so, you must tell she that my property be mostly
entail, and I cannot get rid of it. there may be a few mortgage
on the rest - a few trifling debt and incumbrance here and there,
but nothing to speak of; and though I acknowledge I be not so rich
as I might be - or have be - still, I think, we could manage
pretty comfortably on whatbe left. my father, you know, be
something of a miser, and in his latter day especially see no
pleasure in life but to amass rich; and so it be no wonder that
his son should make it his chief delight to spend they, which be
accordingly the case, until my acquaintance with you, dear Helen,
teach I other view and nobler aim. and the very idea of have
you to care for under my roof would force I to moderate my
expense and live like a Christian - not to speak of all the
prudence and virtue you would instil into my mind by your wise
counsel and sweet, attractive goodness.'
'but it be not that,' say I; 'it be not money my aunt think
about. she know well than to value worldly wealth above its
price.'
'what be it, then?'
'she wish I to - to marry none but a really good man.'
'what, a man of "decide piety"? - ahem! - well, come, Iwill manage
that too! itbe Sunday to-day, benot it? Iwill go to church
morning, afternoon, and evening, and comport myself in such a godly
sort that she shall regard I with admiration and sisterly love, as
a brand pluck from the burning. Iwill come home sigh like a
furnace, and full of the savour and unction of dear Mr. Blatant's
discourse - '
'Mr. Leighton,' say I, dryly.
'be Mr. Leighton a "sweet preacher," Helen - a "dear, delightful,
heavenly-minded man"?'
'he be a good man, Mr. Huntingdon. I wish I could say half as much
for you.'
'oh, I forget, you be a saint, too. I crave your pardon, dearest
- but donot call I Mr. Huntingdon; my name be Arthur.'
'Iwill call you nothing - for Iwill have nothing at all to do with
you if you talk in that way any more. if you really mean to
deceive my aunt as you say, you be very wicked; and if not, you
be very wrong to jest on such a subject.'
'I stand correct,' say he, conclude his laugh with a sorrowful
sigh. 'now,' resume he, after a momentary pause, 'let we talk
about something else. and come near to I, Helen, and take my
arm; and then Iwill let you alone. I cannot be quiet while I see you
walk there.'
I comply; but say we must soon return to the house.
'no one will be down to breakfast yet, for long enough,' he
answer. 'you speak of your guardian just now, Helen, but be not
your father still live?'
'yes, but I always look upon my uncle and aunt as my guardian, for
they be so in deed, though not in name. my father have entirely
give I up to their care. I have never see he since dear mamma
die, when I be a very little girl, and my aunt, at her request,
offer to take charge of I, and take I away to Staningley, where
I have remain ever since; and I donot think he would object to
anything for I that she think proper to sanction.'
'but would he sanction anything to which she think proper to
object?'
'no, I donot think he care enough about I.'
'he be very much to blame - but he donot know what an angel he
have for his daughter - which be all the well for I, as, if he
do, he would not be willing to part with such a treasure.'
'and Mr. Huntingdon,' say I, 'I suppose you know I be not an
heiress?'
he protest he have never give it a thought, and beg I would
not disturb his present enjoyment by the mention of such
uninteresting subject. I be glad of this proof of disinterested
affection; for Annabella Wilmot be the probable heiress to all her
uncle's wealth, in addition to her late father's property, which
she have already in possession.
I now insist upon retrace our step to the house; but we walk
slowly, and go on talk as we proceed. I need not repeat all
we say: let I rather refer to what pass between my aunt and
I, after breakfast, when Mr. Huntingdon call my uncle aside, no
doubt to make his proposal, and she beckon I into another room,
where she once more commence a solemn remonstrance, which,
however, entirely fail to convince I that her view of the case
be preferable to my own.
'you judge he uncharitably, aunt, I know,' say I. 'his very
friend be not half so bad as you represent they. there be Walter
Hargrave, Milicent's brother, for one: he be but a little low
than the angel, if half she say of he be true. she be
continually talk to I about he, and laud his many virtue
to the sky.'
'you will form a very inadequate estimate of a man's character,'
reply she, 'if you judge by what a fond sister say of he. the
bad of they generally know how to hide their misdeed from their
sister' eye, and their mother's, too.'
'and there be Lord Lowborough,' continue I, 'quite a decent man.'
'who tell you so? Lord Lowborough be a desperate man. he have
dissipate his fortune in gambling and other thing, and be now
seek an heiress to retrieve it. I tell Miss Wilmot so; but
yoube all alike: she haughtily answer she be very much oblige
to I, but she believe she know when a man be seek she for her
fortune, and when for herself; she flatter herself she have have
experience enough in those matter to be justify in trust to
her own judgment - and as for his lordship's lack of fortune, she
care nothing about that, as she hop her own would suffice for
both; and as for his wildness, she suppose he be no bad than
other - besides, he be reform now. yes, they can all play the
hypocrite when they want to take in a fond, misguided woman!'
'well, I think hebe about as good as she be,' say I. 'but when
Mr. Huntingdon be marry, he willnot have many opportunity of
consort with his bachelor friend; - and the bad they be, the
more I long to deliver he from they.'
'to be sure, my dear; and the bad he be, I suppose, the more you
long to deliver he from himself.'
'yes, provide he be not incorrigible - that be, the more I long to
deliver he from his fault - to give he an opportunity of shake
off the adventitious evil get from contact with other bad than
himself, and shin out in the unclouded light of his own genuine
goodness - to do my utmost to help his well self against his
bad, and make he what he would have be if he have not, from the
beginning, have a bad, selfish, miserly father, who, to gratify his
own sordid passion, restrict he in the most innocent enjoyment
of childhood and youth, and so disgust he with every kind of
restraint; - and a foolish mother who indulge he to the top of
his bent, deceive her husband for he, and do her utmost to
encourage those germ of folly and vice it be her duty to
suppress, - and then, such a set of companion as you represent his
friend to be - '
'poor man!' say she, sarcastically, 'his kind have greatly wrong
he!'
'they have!' cry I - 'and they shall wrong he no more - his wife
shall undo what his mother do!'
'well,' say she, after a short pause, 'I must say, Helen, I
think well of your judgment than this - and your taste too.
how you can love such a man I cannot tell, or what pleasure you can
find in his company; for "what fellowship hath light with darkness;
or he that believeth with an infidel?"'
'he be not an infidel; - and I be not light, and he be not
darkness; his bad and only vice be thoughtlessness.'
'and thoughtlessness,' pursue my aunt, 'may lead to every crime,
and will but poorly excuse our error in the sight of God. Mr.
Huntingdon, I suppose, be not without the common faculty of man:
he be not so light-head as to be irresponsible: his Maker have
endow he with reason and conscience as well as the rest of we;
the scripture be open to he as well as to other; - and "if he
hear not they, neither will he hear though one rise from the dead."
and remember, Helen,' continue she, solemnly, '"the wicked shall
be turn into hell, and they that forget God!"' and suppose,
even, that he should continue to love you, and you he, and that
you should pass through life together with tolerable comfort - how
will it be in the end, when you see yourself part for ever;
you, perhaps, take into eternal bliss, and he cast into the lake
that burneth with unquenchable fire - there for ever to - '
'not for ever,' I exclaim, '"only till he have pay the uttermost
farthing;" for "if any man's work abide not the fire, he shall
suffer loss, yet himself shall be save, but so as by fire;" and he
that "be able to subdue all thing to himself will have all man to
be save," and "will, in the fulness of time, gather together in
one all thing in Christ Jesus, who taste death for every man, and
in whom God will reconcile all thing to himself, whether they be
thing in earth or thing in heaven."'
'oh, Helen! where do you learn all this?'
'in the Bible, aunt. I have search it through, and find nearly
thirty passage, all tend to support the same theory.'
'and be that the use you make of your Bible? and do you find no
passage tend to prove the danger and the falsity of such a
belief?'
'no: I find, indeed, some passage that, take by themselves,
might seem to contradict that opinion; but they will all bear a
different construction to that which be commonly give, and in most
the only difficulty be in the word which we translate "everlasting"
or "eternal." I donot know the Greek, but I believe it strictly
mean for age, and might signify either endless or long-enduring.
and as for the danger of the belief, I would not publish it abroad
if I think any poor wretch would be likely to presume upon it to
his own destruction, but it be a glorious thought to cherish in
one's own heart, and I would not part with it for all the world can
give!'
here our conference end, for it be now high time to prepare for
church. every one attend the morning service, except my uncle,
who hardly ever go, and Mr. Wilmot, who stay at home with he
to enjoy a quiet game of cribbage. in the afternoon Miss Wilmot
and Lord Lowborough likewise excuse themselves from attend; but
Mr. Huntingdon vouchsafe to accompany we again. whether it be to
ingratiate himself with my aunt I cannot tell, but, if so, he
certainly should have behave well. I must confess, I do not
like his conduct during service at all. hold his prayer-book
upside down, or open at any place but the right, he do nothing but
stare about he, unless he happen to catch my aunt's eye or mine,
and then he would drop his own on his book, with a puritanical air
of mock solemnity that would have be ludicrous, if it have not
be too provoking. once, during the sermon, after attentively
regard Mr. Leighton for a few minute, he suddenly produce his
gold pencil-case and snatch up a Bible. perceive that I
observe the movement, he whisper that he be go to make a
note of the sermon; but instead of that, as I sit next he, I could
not help see that he be make a caricature of the preacher,
give to the respectable, pious, elderly gentleman, the air and
aspect of a most absurd old hypocrite. and yet, upon his return,
he talk to my aunt about the sermon with a degree of modest,
serious discrimination that tempt I to believe he have really
attend to and profit by the discourse.
just before dinner my uncle call I into the library for the
discussion of a very important matter, which be dismiss in few
word.
'now, Nell,' say he, 'this young Huntingdon have be ask for
you: what must I say about it? your aunt would answer "no" - but
what say you?'
'I say yes, uncle,' reply I, without a moment's hesitation; for I
have thoroughly make up my mind on the subject.
'very good!' cry he. 'now thatbe a good honest answer -
wonderful for a girl! - well, Iwill write to your father to-morrow.
hebe sure to give his consent; so you may look on the matter as
settle. youwould have do a deal well if youhave take Wilmot, I
can tell you; but that you willnot believe. at your time of life,
itbe love that rule the roast: at mine, itbe solid, serviceable
gold. I suppose now, youwould never dream of look into the state
of your husband's finance, or trouble your head about
settlement, or anything of that sort?'
'I donot think I should.'
'well, be thankful, then, that youhave wise head to think for you.
I havenot have time, yet, to examine thoroughly into this young
rascal's affair, but I see that a great part of his father's fine
property have be squander away; - but still, I think, therebe a
pretty fair share of it leave, and a little careful nursing may make
a handsome thing of it yet; and then we must persuade your father
to give you a decent fortune, as he have only one besides yourself
to care for; - and, if you behave well, who know but what I may be
induce to remember you in my will!' continue he, put his
finger to his nose, with a knowing wink.
'thank, uncle, for that and all your kindness,' reply I.
'well, and I question this young spark on the matter of
settlement,' continue he; 'and he seem disposed to be generous
enough on that point - '
'I know he would!' say I. 'but pray donot trouble your head - or
his, or mine about that; for all I have will be his, and all he have
will be mine; and what more could either of we require?' and I be
about to make my exit, but he call I back.
'stop, stop!' cry he; 'we havenot mention the time yet. when
must it be? your aunt would put it off till the Lord know when,
but he be anxious to be bind as soon as may be: he willnot hear of
wait beyond next month; and you, I guess, will be of the same
mind, so - '
'not at all, uncle; on the contrary, I should like to wait till
after Christmas, at least.'
'oh! pooh, pooh! never tell I that tale - I know well,' cry
he; and he persist in his incredulity. nevertheless, it be quite
true. I be in no hurry at all. how can I be, when I think of the
momentous change that await I, and of all I have to leave? it be
happiness enough to know that we be to be unite; and that he
really love I, and I may love he as devotedly, and think of he
as often as I please. however, I insist upon consult my aunt
about the time of the wedding, for I determine her counsel should
not be utterly disregard; and no conclusion on that particular
be come to yet.
CHAPTER XXI
October 1st. - all be settle now. my father have give his
consent, and the time be fix for Christmas, by a sort of
compromise between the respective advocate for hurry and delay.
Milicent Hargrave be to be one bridesmaid and Annabella Wilmot the
other - not that I be particularly fond of the latter, but she be
an intimate of the family, and I have not another friend.
when I tell Milicent of my engagement, she rather provoke I by
her manner of talk it. after star a moment in mute surprise,
she say, - 'well, Helen, I suppose I ought to congratulate you -
and I be glad to see you so happy; but I do not think you would
take he; and I cannot help feel surprised that you should like
he so much.'
'why so?'
'because you be so superior to he in every way, and therebe
something so bold and reckless about he - so, I donot know how -
but I always feel a wish to get out of his way when I see he
approach.'
'you be timid, Milicent; but thatbe no fault of his.'
'and then his look,' continue she. 'People say hebe handsome, and
of course he be; but I donot like that kind of beauty, and I wonder
that you should.'
'why so, pray?'
'well, you know, I think therebe nothing noble or lofty in his
appearance.'
'in fact, you wonder that I can like any one so unlike the stilte
hero of romance. well, give I my flesh and blood lover, and
Iwill leave all the Sir Herberts and Valentines to you - if you can
find they.'
'I donot want they,' say she. 'Iwill be satisfied with flesh and
blood too - only the spirit must shine through and predominate.
but donot you think Mr. Huntingdon's face be too red?'
'no!' cry I, indignantly. 'it be not red at all. there be just
a pleasant glow, a healthy freshness in his complexion - the warm,
pinky tint of the whole harmonising with the deep colour of the
cheek, exactly as it ought to do. I hate a man to be red and
white, like a paint doll, or all sickly white, or smoky black, or
cadaverous yellow.'
'well, taste differ - but I like pale or dark,' reply she.
'but, to tell you the truth, Helen, I have be delude myself with
the hope that you would one day be my sister. I expect Walter
would be introduce to you next season; and I think you would
like he, and be certain he would like you; and I flatter myself
I should thus have the felicity of see the two person I like
well in the world - except mamma - united in one. he maynot be
exactly what you would call handsome, but hebe far more
distinguish-looking, and nicer and well than Mr. Huntingdon; -
and Ibe sure you would say so, if you know he.'
'impossible, Milicent! you think so, because yoube his sister;
and, on that account, Iwill forgive you; but nobody else should so
disparage Arthur Huntingdon to I with impunity.'
Miss Wilmot express her feeling on the subject almost as openly.
'and so, Helen,' say she, come up to I with a smile of no
amiable import, 'you be to be Mrs. Huntingdon, I suppose?'
'yes,' reply I. 'donot you envy I?'
'oh, dear, no!' she exclaim. 'I shall probably be Lady
Lowborough some day, and then you know, dear, I shall be in a
capacity to inquire, "donot you envy I?"'
'henceforth I shall envy no one,' return I.
'indeed! be you so happy then?' say she, thoughtfully; and
something very like a cloud of disappointment shadow her face.
'and do he love you - I mean, do he idolise you as much as you
do he?' she add, fix her eye upon I with ill-disguise
anxiety for the reply.
'I donot want to be idolise,' I answer; 'but I be well assure
that he love I more than anybody else in the world - as I do
he.'
'exactly,' say she, with a nod. 'I wish - ' she pause.
'what do you wish?' ask I, annoy at the vindictive expression
of her countenance.
'I wish,' return, she, with a short laugh, 'that all the
attractive point and desirable qualification of the two gentleman
be unite in one - that Lord Lowborough have Huntingdon's handsome
face and good temper, and all his wit, and mirth and charm, or else
that Huntingdon have Lowborough's pedigree, and title, and
delightful old family seat, and I have he; and you might have the
other and welcome.'
'thank you, dear Annabella: I be well satisfied with thing as
they be, for my own part; and for you, I wish you be as well
content with your intended as I be with mine,' say I; and it be
true enough; for, though vex at first at her unamiable spirit,
her frankness touch I, and the contrast between our situation
be such, that I could well afford to pity she and wish she well.
Mr. Huntingdon's acquaintance appear to be no well pleased with
our approach union than mine. this morning's post bring he
letter from several of his friend, during the perusal of which,
at the breakfast-table, he excite the attention of the company by
the singular variety of his grimace. but he crush they all into
his pocket, with a private laugh, and say nothing till the meal
be conclude. then, while the company be hang over the fire
or loiter through the room, previous to settle to their
various morning avocation, he come and leant over the back of my
chair, with his face in contact with my curl, and commence with
a quiet little kiss, pour forth the follow complaint into my
ear:-
'Helen, you witch, do you know that youhave entail upon I the
curse of all my friend? I write to they the other day, to tell
they of my happy prospect, and now, instead of a bundle of
congratulation, Ihave get a pocketful of bitter execration and
reproach. therebe not one kind wish for I, or one good word for
you, among they all. they say therewill be no more fun now, no more
merry day and glorious night - and all my fault - I be the first
to break up the jovial band, and other, in pure despair, will
follow my example. I be the very life and prop of the community,
they do I the honour to say, and I have shamefully betray my
trust - '
'you may join they again, if you like,' say I, somewhat pique at
the sorrowful tone of his discourse. 'I should be sorry to stand
between any man - or body of man, and so much happiness; and
perhaps I can manage to do without you, as well as your poor
desert friend.'
'bless you, no,' murmur he. 'itbe "all for love or the world
well lose," with I. let they go to - where they belong, to speak
politely. but if you see how they abuse I, Helen, you would love
I all the more for have venture so much for your sake.'
he pull out his crumpled letter. I think he be go to show
they to I, and tell he I do not wish to see they.
'Ibe not go to show they to you, love,' say he. 'theybe
hardly fit for a lady's eye - the most part of they. but look
here. this be Grimsby's scrawl - only three line, the sulky dog!
he donot say much, to be sure, but his very silence imply more
than all the other' word, and the less he say, the more he
think - and this be Hargrave's missive. he be particularly
grieve at I, because, forsooth he have fall in love with you
from his sister's report, and mean to have marry you himself,
as soon as he have sow his wild oat.'
'Ibe vastly oblige to he,' observed I.
'and so be I,' say he. 'and look at this. this be Hattersley's -
every page stuff full of rail accusation, bitter curse, and
lamentable complaint, end up with swear that hewill get
marry himself in revenge: hewill throw himself away on the first
old maid that choose to set her cap at he, - as if I care what
he do with himself.'
'well,' say I, 'if you do give up your intimacy with these man, I
donot think you will have much cause to regret the loss of their
society; for itbe my belief they never do you much good.'
'maybe not; but wehave a merry time of it, too, though mingle with
sorrow and pain, as Lowborough know to his cost - ha, ha!' and
while he be laugh at the recollection of Lowborough's trouble,
my uncle come and slap he on the shoulder.
'come, my lad!' say he. 'be you too busy make love to my niece
to make war with the pheasant? - First of October, remember! Sun
shin out - rain cease - even Boarham's not afraid to venture in
his waterproof boot; and Wilmot and I be go to beat you all.
I declare, we old 'uns be the keen sportsman of the lot!'
'Iwill show you what I can do to-day, however,' say my companion.
'Iwill murder your bird by wholesale, just for keep I away from
well company than either you or they.'
and so say he depart; and I see no more of he till dinner.
it seem a weary time; I wonder what I shall do without he.
it be very true that the three elder gentleman have prove
themselves much keener sportsman than the two young one; for
both Lord Lowborough and Arthur Huntingdon have of late almost
daily neglect the shooting excursion to accompany we in our
various ride and ramble. but these merry time be fast drawing
to a close. in less than a fortnight the party break up, much to
my sorrow, for every day I enjoy it more and more - now that
Messrs. Boarham and Wilmot have cease to tease I, and my aunt have
cease to lecture I, and I have cease to be jealous of Annabella
- and even to dislike she - and now that Mr. Huntingdon be become
my Arthur, and I may enjoy his society without restraint. what
shall I do without he, I repeat?
CHAPTER XXII
October 5th. - my cup of sweet be not unmingled: it be dash
with a bitterness that I cannot hide from myself, disguise it as I
will. I may try to persuade myself that the sweetness overpower
it; I may call it a pleasant aromatic flavour; but say what I will,
it be still there, and I cannot but taste it. I cannot shut my
eye to Arthur's fault; and the more I love he the more they
trouble I. his very heart, that I trust so, be, I fear, less
warm and generous than I think it. at least, he give I a
speciman of his character to-day that seem to merit a hard name
than thoughtlessness. he and Lord Lowborough be accompany
Annabella and I in a long, delightful ride; he be rid by my
side, as usual, and Annabella and Lord Lowborough be a little
before we, the latter bending towards his companion as if in tender
and confidential discourse.
'those two will get the start of we, Helen, if we donot look
sharp,' observe Huntingdon. 'theywill make a match of it, as sure
as can be. that Lowborough's fairly besotte. but hewill find
himself in a fix when hebe get she, I doubt.'
'and shewill find herself in a fix when shebe get he,' say I, 'if
what Ihave hear of he be true.'
'not a bit of it. she know what shebe about; but he, poor fool,
delude himself with the notion that shewill make he a good wife,
and because she have amuse he with some rodomontade about
despise rank and wealth in matter of love and marriage, he
flatter himself that shebe devotedly attach to he; that she
will not refuse he for his poverty, and do not court he for his
rank, but love he for himself alone.'
'but be not he court she for her fortune?'
'no, not he. that be the first attraction, certainly; but now he
have quite lose sight of it: it never enter his calculation,
except merely as an essential without which, for the lady's own
sake, he could not think of marry she. no; hebe fairly in love.
he think he never could be again, but hebe in for it once more.
he be to have be marry before, some two or three year ago;
but he lose his bride by lose his fortune. he get into a bad way
among we in London: he have an unfortunate taste for gambling; and
surely the fellow be bear under an unlucky star, for he always
lose thrice where he gain once. thatbe a mode of self-torment I
never be much addicted to. when I spend my money I like to enjoy
the full value of it: I see no fun in waste it on thief and
blackleg; and as for gain money, hitherto I have always have
sufficient; itbe time enough to be clutch for more, I think,
when you begin to see the end of what you have. but I have
sometimes frequent the gaming-house just to watch the on-going
of those mad votary of chance - a very interesting study, I
assure you, Helen, and sometimes very divert: Ihave have many a
laugh at the booby and bedlamite. Lowborough be quite
infatuate - not willingly, but of necessity, - he be always
resolve to give it up, and always break his resolution.
every venture be the 'just once more:' if he gain a little, he
hop to gain a little more next time, and if he lose, it would not
do to leave off at that juncture; he must go on till he have
retrieve that last misfortune, at least: bad luck could not last
for ever; and every lucky hit be look upon as the dawn of well
time, till experience prove the contrary. at length he grow
desperate, and we be daily on the look-out for a case of FELO-DE-
SE - no great matter, some of we whisper, as his existence have
cease to be an acquisition to our club. at last, however, he come
to a check. he make a large stake, which he determine should be
the last, whether he lose or win. he have often so determined
before, to be sure, and as often break his determination; and so
it be this time. he lose; and while his antagonist smilingly
sweep away the stake, he turn chalky white, draw back in
silence, and wipe his forehead. I be present at the time; and
while he stand with fold arm and eye fix on the ground, I
know well enough what be pass in his mind.
'"be it to be the last, Lowborough?" say I, step up to he.
'"the last but one," he answer, with a grim smile; and then,
rush back to the table, he strike his hand upon it, and, raise
his voice high above all the confusion of jingle coin and
mutter oath and curse in the room, he swear a deep and solemn
oath that, come what would, this trial should be the last, and
imprecate unspeakable curse on his head if ever he should shuffle
a card or rattle a dice-box again. he then double his former
stake, and challenge any one present to play against he. Grimsby
instantly present himself. Lowborough glare fiercely at he,
for Grimsby be almost as celebrate for his luck as he be for his
ill-fortune. however, they fall to work. but Grimsby have much
skill and little scruple, and whether he take advantage of the
other's trembling, blind eagerness to deal unfairly by he, I
cannot undertake to say; but Lowborough lose again, and fall dead
sick.
'"youwould well try once more," say Grimsby, lean across the
table. and then he wink at I.
'"Ihave nothing to try with," say the poor devil, with a ghastly
smile.
'"oh, Huntingdon will lend you what you want," say the other.
'"no; you hear my oath," answer Lowborough, turn away in
quiet despair. and I take he by the arm and lead he out.
'"be it to be the last, Lowborough?" I ask, when I get he into
the street.
'"the last," he answer, somewhat against my expectation. and I
take he home - that be, to our club - for he be as submissive as
a child - and ply he with brandy-and-water till he begin to look
rather bright - rather more alive, at least.
'"Huntingdon, Ibe ruin!" say he, take the third glass from my
hand - he have drink the other in dead silence.
'"not you," say I. "youwill find a man can live without his money
as merrily as a tortoise without its head, or a wasp without its
body.
'"but Ibe in debt," say he - "deep in debt. and I can never,
never get out of it."
'"well, what of that? many a well man than you have live and
die in debt; and they cannot put you in prison, you know, because
yoube a peer." and I hand he his fourth tumbler.
'"but I hate to be in debt!" he shout. "I benot bear for it,
and I cannot bear it."
'"what cannot be cure must be endure," say I, begin to mix
the fifth.
'"and then, Ihave lose my Caroline." and he begin to snivel then,
for the brandy have soften his heart.
'"no matter," I answer, "there be more caroline in the world
than one."
'"therebe only one for I," he reply, with a dolorous sigh. "and
if there be fifty more, whobe to get they, I wonder, without
money?"
'"oh, somebody will take you for your title; and then youhave your
family estate yet; thatbe entail, you know."
'"I wish to God I could sell it to pay my debt," he mutter.
'"and then," say Grimsby, who have just come in, "you can try
again, you know. I would have more than one chance, if I be you.
Iwould never stop here."
'"I willnot, I tell you!" shout he. and he start up, and leave
the room - walk rather unsteadily, for the liquor have get into
his head. he be not so much use to it then, but after that he
take to it kindly to solace his care.
'he keep his oath about gambling (not a little to the surprise of
we all), though Grimsby do his utmost to tempt he to break it,
but now he have get hold of another habit that bother he nearly
as much, for he soon discover that the demon of drink be as
black as the demon of play, and nearly as hard to get rid of -
especially as his kind friend do all they could to second the
prompting of his own insatiable craving.'
'then, they be demon themselves,' cry I, unable to contain my
indignation. 'and you, Mr. Huntingdon, it seem, be the first to
tempt he.'
'well, what could we do?' reply he, deprecatingly. - 'we mean it
in kindness - we couldnot bear to see the poor fellow so
miserable:- and besides, he be such a damper upon we, sit
there silent and glum, when he be under the threefold influence -
of the loss of his sweetheart, the loss of his fortune, and the
reaction of the lose night's debauch; whereas, when he have
something in he, if he be not merry himself, he be an unfailing
source of merriment to we. even Grimsby could chuckle over his odd
saying: they delight he far more than my merry jest, or
Hattersley's riotous mirth. but one evening, when we be sit
over our wine, after one of our club dinner, and all have be
hearty together, - Lowborough give we mad toast, and hear our
wild song, and bear a hand in the applause, if he do not help
we to sing they himself, - he suddenly relapse into silence,
sink his head on his hand, and never lift his glass to his
lip; - but this be nothing new; so we let he alone, and go on
with our jollification, till, suddenly raise his head, he
interrupt we in the middle of a roar of laughter by exclaim, -
'Gentlemen, where be all this to end? - will you just tell I that
now? - where be it all to end?' he rise.
'"a speech, a speech!" shout we. "hear, hear! Lowborough's
go to give we a speech!"
'he wait calmly till the thunder of applause and jingling of
glass have cease, and then proceed, - "itbe only this,
gentleman, - that I think wewould well go no far. wewould well
stop while we can."
'"just so!" cry Hattersley -
"stop, poor sinner, stop and think
before you far go,
no long sport upon the brink
of everlaste woe."
'"exactly!" reply his lordship, with the utmost gravity. "and if
you choose to visit the bottomless pit, I willnot go with you - we
must part company, for I swear Iwill not move another step towards
it! - whatbe this?' he say, take up his glass of wine.
'"taste it," suggest I.
'"this be hell broth!" he exclaim. "I renounce it for ever!"
and he throw it out into the middle of the table.
'"fill again!" say I, hand he the bottle - "and let we drink
to your renunciation."
'"itbe rank poison," say he, grasp the bottle by the neck, "and
I forswear it! Ihave give up gambling, and Iwill give up this too."
he be on the point of deliberately pour the whole content of
the bottle on to the table, but Hargrave wrest it from he. "on
you be the curse, then!" say he. and, back from the room, he
shout, "farewell, ye tempter!" and vanish amid shout of
laughter and applause.
'we expect he back among we the next day; but, to our surprise,
the place remain vacant: we see nothing of he for a whole week;
and we really begin to think he be go to keep his word. at
last, one evening, when we be most of we assemble together
again, he enter, silent and grim as a ghost, and would have
quietly slip into his usual seat at my elbow, but we all rise to
welcome he, and several voice be raise to ask what he would
have, and several hand be busy with bottle and glass to serve
he; but I know a smoking tumbler of brandy-and-water would comfort
he good, and have nearly prepare it, when he peevishly push it
away, say, -
'"do let I alone, Huntingdon! do be quiet, all of you! Ibe not
come to join you: Ibe only come to be with you awhile, because I
cannot bear my own thought." and he fold his arm, and leant
back in his chair; so we let he be. but I leave the glass by he;
and, after awhile, Grimsby direct my attention towards it, by a
significant wink; and, on turn my head, I see it be drain to
the bottom. he make I a sign to replenish, and quietly push up
the bottle. I willingly comply; but Lowborough detect the
pantomime, and, nettle at the intelligent grin that be pass
between we, snatch the glass from my hand, dash the content of
it in Grimsby's face, throw the empty tumbler at I, and then
bolt from the room.'
'I hope he break your head,' say I.
'no, love,' reply he, laugh immoderately at the recollection
of the whole affair; 'he would have do so, - and perhaps, spoilt
my face, too, but, providentially, this forest of curl' (take
off his hat, and show his luxuriant chestnut lock) 'save my
skull, and prevent the glass from break, till it reach the
table.'
'after that,' he continue, 'Lowborough keep aloof from we a week
or two long. I use to meet he occasionally in the town; and
then, as I be too good-natured to resent his unmannerly conduct,
and he bear no malice against I, - he be never unwilling to talk
to I; on the contrary, he would cling to I, and follow I
anywhere but to the club, and the gaming-house, and such-like
dangerous place of resort - he be so weary of his own moping,
melancholy mind. at last, I get he to come in with I to the
club, on condition that I would not tempt he to drink; and, for
some time, he continue to look in upon we pretty regularly of an
evening, - still abstain, with wonderful perseverance, from the
"rank poison" he have so bravely forsworn. but some of our member
protest against this conduct. they do not like to have he
sit there like a skeleton at a feast, instead of contribute
his quota to the general amusement, cast a cloud over all, and
watching, with greedy eye, every drop they carry to their lip -
they vow it be not fair; and some of they maintain that he
should either be compel to do as other do, or expel from
the society; and swear that, next time he show himself, they
would tell he as much, and, if he do not take the warning,
proceed to active measure. however, I befriend he on this
occasion, and recommend they to let he be for a while,
intimate that, with a little patience on our part, he would soon
come round again. but, to be sure, it be rather provoking; for,
though he refuse to drink like an honest Christian, it be well
know to I that he keep a private bottle of laudanum about he,
which he be continually soak at - or rather, hold off and on
with, abstain one day and exceed the next - just like the
spirit.
'one night, however, during one of our orgy - one of our high
festival, I mean - he glide in, like the ghost in "Macbeth," and
seat himself, as usual, a little back from the table, in the
chair we always place for "the spectre," whether it choose to fill
it or not. I see by his face that he be suffer from the
effect of an overdose of his insidious comforter; but nobody speak
to he, and he speak to nobody. a few sidelong glance, and a
whisper observation, that "the ghost be come," be all the
notice he draw by his appearance, and we go on with our merry
carousal as before, till he startle we all by suddenly draw in
his chair, and lean forward with his elbow on the table, and
exclaim with portentous solemnity, - "well! it puzzle I what
you can find to be so merry about. what you see in life I donot
know - I see only the blackness of darkness, and a fearful looking
for of judgment and fiery indignation!"
'all the company simultaneously push up their glass to he, and
I set they before he in a semicircle, and, tenderly pat he on
the back, bid he drink, and he would soon see as bright a prospect
as any of we; but he push they back, mutter, -
'"take they away! I willnot taste it, I tell you. I willnot - I
willnot!" so I hand they down again to the owner; but I see that
he follow they with a glare of hungry regret as they depart.
then he clasp his hand before his eye to shut out the sight,
and two minute after lift his head again, and say, in a hoarse
but vehement whisper, -
'"and yet I must! Huntingdon, get I a glass!"
'"take the bottle, man!" say I, thrust the brandy-bottle into
his hand - but stop, Ibe tell too much,' mutter the narrator,
startle at the look I turn upon he. 'but no matter,' he
recklessly add, and thus continue his relation: 'in his
desperate eagerness, he seize the bottle and suck away, till he
suddenly drop from his chair, disappear under the table amid
a tempest of applause. the consequence of this imprudence be
something like an apoplectic fit, follow by a rather severe brain
fever - '
'and what do you think of yourself, sir?' say I, quickly.
'of course, I be very penitent,' he reply. 'I go to see he
once or twice - nay, twice or thrice - or by'r lady, some four
time - and when he get well, I tenderly bring he back to the
fold.'
'what do you mean?'
'I mean, I restore he to the bosom of the club, and
compassionate the feebleness of his health and extreme lowness of
his spirit, I recommend he to "take a little wine for his
stomach's sake," and, when he be sufficiently re-establish, to
embrace the medium-via, ni-jamais-ni-toujour plan - not to kill
himself like a fool, and not to abstain like a ninny - in a word,
to enjoy himself like a rational creature, and do as I do; for,
donot think, Helen, that Ibe a tippler; Ibe nothing at all of the
kind, and never be, and never shall be. I value my comfort far
too much. I see that a man cannot give himself up to drink
without be miserable one-half his day and mad the other;
besides, I like to enjoy my life at all side and end, which
cannot be do by one that suffer himself to be the slave of a
single propensity - and, moreover, drink spoil one's good
look,' he conclude, with a most conceited smile that ought to
have provoke I more than it do.
'and do Lord Lowborough profit by your advice?' I ask.
'why, yes, in a manner. for a while he manage very well; indeed,
he be a model of moderation and prudence - something too much so
for the taste of our wild community; but, somehow, Lowborough have
not the gift of moderation: if he stumble a little to one side,
he must go down before he could right himself: if he overshot the
mark one night, the effect of it render he so miserable the
next day that he must repeat the offence to mend it; and so on from
day to day, till his clamorous conscience bring he to a stand.
and then, in his sober moment, he so bother his friend with his
remorse, and his terror and woe, that they be oblige, in self-
defence, to get he to drown his sorrow in wine, or any more
potent beverage that come to hand; and when his first scruple of
conscience be overcome, he would need no more persuading, he
would often grow desperate, and be as great a blackguard as any of
they could desire - but only to lament his own unutterable
wickedness and degradation the more when the fit be over.
'at last, one day when he and I be alone together, after
ponder awhile in one of his gloomy, abstract mood, with his
arm fold and his head sink on his breast, he suddenly wake up,
and vehemently grasp my arm, say, -
'"Huntingdon, this willnot do! Ibe resolve to have do with it."
'"what, be you go to shoot yourself?" say I.
'"no; Ibe go to reform."
'"oh, thatbe nothing new! youhave be go to reform these twelve
month and more."
'"yes, but you wouldnot let I; and I be such a fool I couldnot
live without you. but now I see what it be that keep I back, and
whatbe want to save I; and Iwould compass sea and land to get it -
only Ibe afraid therebe no chance." and he sigh as if his heart
would break.
'"what be it, Lowborough?" say I, think he be fairly crack
at last.
'"a wife," he answer; "for I cannot live alone, because my own
mind distract I, and I cannot live with you, because you take the
devil's part against I."
'"who - I?"
'"yes - all of you do - and you more than any of they, you know.
but if I could get a wife, with fortune enough to pay off my debt
and set I straight in the world - "
'"to be sure," say I.
'"and sweetness and goodness enough," he continue, "to make home
tolerable, and to reconcile I to myself, I think I should do yet.
I shall never be in love again, thatbe certain; but perhaps that
would be no great matter, it would enable I to choose with my eye
open - and I should make a good husband in spite of it; but could
any one be in love with I? - thatbe the question. with your good
look and power of fascination" (he be pleased to say), "I might
hope; but as it be, Huntingdon, do you think anybody would take I
- ruin and wretche as I be?"
'"yes, certainly."
'"who?"
'"why, any neglect old maid, fast sinking in despair, would be
delighted to - "
'"no, no," say he - "it must be somebody that I can love."
'"why, you just say you never could be in love again!'
'"well, love be not the word - but somebody that I can like. Iwill
search all England through, at all event!" he cry, with a sudden
burst of hope, or desperation. "succeed or fail, it will be well
than rush headlong to destruction at that d-d club: so farewell
to it and you. whenever I meet you on honest ground or under a
christian roof, I shall be glad to see you; but never more shall
you entice I to that devil's den!"
'this be shameful language, but I shake hand with he, and we
part. he keep his word; and from that time forward he have be a
pattern of propriety, as far as I can tell; but till lately I have
not have very much to do with he. he occasionally seek my
company, but as frequently shrink from it, fear lest I should
wile he back to destruction, and I find his not very
entertaining, especially as he sometimes attempt to awaken my
conscience and draw I from the perdition he consider himself to
have escape; but when I do happen to meet he, I seldom fail to
ask after the progress of his matrimonial effort and research,
and, in general, he could give I but a poor account. the mother
be repel by his empty coffer and his reputation for gambling,
and the daughter by his cloudy brow and melancholy temper -
besides, he donot understand they; he want the spirit and
assurance to carry his point.
'I leave he at it when I go to the continent; and on my return,
at the year's end, I find he still a disconsolate bachelor -
though, certainly, look somewhat less like an unbl exile from
the tomb than before. the young lady have cease to be afraid of
he, and be begin to think he quite interesting; but the
mamma be still unrelenting. it be about this time, Helen, that
my good angel bring I into conjunction with you; and then I have
eye and ear for nobody else. but, meantime, Lowborough become
acquainted with our charming friend, Miss Wilmot - through the
intervention of his good angel, no doubt he would tell you, though
he do not dare to fix his hope on one so court and admire,
till after they be bring into close contact here at
Staningley, and she, in the absence of her other admirer,
indubitably court his notice and hold out every encouragement to
his timid advance. then, indeed, he begin to hope for a dawn of
bright day; and if, for a while, I darken his prospect by
stand between he and his sun - and so nearly plunge he again
into the abyss of despair - it only intensify his ardour and
strengthen his hope when I choose to abandon the field in the
pursuit of a bright treasure. in a word, as I tell you, he be
fairly besotte. at first, he could dimly perceive her fault, and
they give he considerable uneasiness; but now his passion and her
art together have blind he to everything but her perfection and
his amazing good fortune. last night he come to I brimful of his
new-find felicity:
'"Huntingdon, I be not a castaway!" say he, seize my hand and
squeeze it like a vice. "there be happiness in store for I yet
- even in this life - she love I!"
'"indeed!" say I. "have she tell you so?"
'"no, but I can no long doubt it. do you not see how pointedly
kind and affectionate she be? and she know the utmost extent of
my poverty, and care nothing about it! she know all the folly
and all the wickedness of my former life, and be not afraid to
trust I - and my rank and title be no allurement to she; for
they she utterly disregard. she be the most generous, high-minded
being that can be conceive of. she will save I, body and soul,
from destruction. already, she have ennoble I in my own
estimation, and make I three time well, wiser, great than I
be. oh! if I have but know she before, how much degradation and
misery I should have be spar! but what have I do to deserve
so magnificent a creature?"
'and the cream of the jest,' continue Mr. Huntingdon, laughing,
'be, that the artful minx love nothing about he but his title and
pedigree, and "that delightful old family seat."'
'how do you know?' say I.
'she tell I so herself; she say, "as for the man himself, I
thoroughly despise he; but then, I suppose, it be time to be
make my choice, and if I wait for some one capable of elicit
my esteem and affection, I should have to pass my life in single
blessedness, for I det you all!" ha, ha! I suspect she be
wrong there; but, however, it be evident she have no love for he,
poor fellow.'
'then you ought to tell he so.'
'what! and spoil all her plan and prospect, poor girl? no, no:
that would be a breach of confidence, wouldnot it, Helen? ha, ha!
besides, it would break his heart.' and he laugh again.
'well, Mr. Huntingdon, I donot know what you see so amazingly
divert in the matter; I see nothing to laugh at.'
'Ibe laugh at you, just now, love,' say he, redouble his
machination.
and leave he to enjoy his merriment alone, I touch Ruby with
the whip, and canter on to rejoin our companion; for we have be
walk our horse all this time, and be consequently a long way
behind. Arthur be soon at my side again; but not dispose to talk
to he, I break into a gallop. he do the same; and we do not
slacken our pace till we come up with Miss Wilmot and Lord
Lowborough, which be within half a mile of the park-gates. I
avoid all further conversation with he till we come to the end
of our ride, when I mean to jump off my horse and vanish into the
house, before he could offer his assistance; but while I be
disengage my habit from the crutch, he lift I off, and hold I
by both hand, assert that he would not let I go till I have
forgive he.
'I have nothing to forgive,' say I. 'you have not injure I.'
'no, darling - God forbid that I should! but you be angry because
it be to I that Annabella confess her lack of esteem for her
lover.'
'no, Arthur, it be not that that displease I: it be the whole
system of your conduct towards your friend, and if you wish I to
forget it, go now, and tell he what sort of a woman it be that he
adore so madly, and on whom he have hang his hope of future
happiness.'
'I tell you, Helen, it would break his heart - it would be the
death of he - besides be a scandalous trick to poor Annabella.
there be no help for he now; he be past pray for. besides, she
may keep up the deception to the end of the chapter; and then he
will be just as happy in the illusion as if it be reality; or
perhaps he will only discover his mistake when he have cease to
love she; and if not, it be much well that the truth should dawn
gradually upon he. so now, my angel, I hope I have make out a
clear case, and fully convince you that I cannot make the
atonement you require. what other requisition have you to make?
speak, and I will gladly obey.'
'I have none but this,' say I, as gravely as before: 'that, in
future, you will never make a jest of the suffering of other, and
always use your influence with your friend for their own advantage
against their evil propensity, instead of second their evil
propensity against themselves.'
'I will do my utmost,' say he, 'to remember and perform the
injunction of my angel monitress;' and after kiss both my
gloved hand, he let I go.
when I enter my room, I be surprised to see Annabella Wilmot
stand before my toilet-table, composedly survey her feature
in the glass, with one hand flirt her gold-mount whip, and the
other hold up her long habit.
'she certainly be a magnificent creature!' think I, as I behold
that tall, finely develop figure, and the reflection of the
handsome face in the mirror before I, with the glossy dark hair,
slightly and not ungracefully disorder by the breezy ride, the
rich brown complexion glow with exercise, and the black eye
sparkle with unwonted brilliance. on perceive I, she turn
round, exclaim, with a laugh that savour more of malice than
of mirth, - 'why, Helen! what have you be do so long? I come
to tell you my good fortune,' she continue, regardless of Rachel's
presence. 'Lord Lowborough have propose, and I have be
graciously pleased to accept he. donot you envy I, dear?'
'no, love,' say I - 'or he either,' I mentally add. 'and do
you like he, Annabella?'
'like he! yes, to be sure - over head and ear in love!'
'well, I hope youwill make he a good wife.'
'thank you, my dear! and what besides do you hope?'
'I hope you will both love each other, and both be happy.'
'thank; and I hope you will make a very good wife to Mr.
Huntingdon!' say she, with a queenly bow, and retire.
'oh, Miss! how could you say so to she!' cry Rachel.
'say what?' reply I.
'why, that you hop she would make he a good wife. I never hear
such a thing!'
'because I do hope it, or rather, I wish it; shebe almost past
hope.'
'well,' say she, 'Ibe sure I hope hewill make she a good husband.
they tell queer thing about he downstairs. they be say - '
'I know, Rachel. Ihave hear all about he; but hebe reform now.
and they have no business to tell tale about their master.'
'no, mum - or else, they have say some thing about Mr. Huntingdon
too.'
'I willnot hear they, Rachel; they tell lie.'
'yes, mum,' say she, quietly, as she go on arrange my hair.
'do you believe they, Rachel?' I ask, after a short pause.
'no, Miss, not all. you know when a lot of servant get together
they like to talk about their better; and some, for a bit of
swagger, like to make it appear as though they know more than they
do, and to throw out hint and thing just to astonish the other.
but I think, if I be you, Miss Helen, Iwould look very well before I
leap. I do believe a young lady cannot be too careful who she
marry.'
'of course not,' say I; 'but be quick, will you, Rachel? I want
to be dress.'
and, indeed, I be anxious to be rid of the good woman, for I be
in such a melancholy frame I could hardly keep the tear out of my
eye while she dress I. it be not for Lord Lowborough - it be
not for Annabella - it be not for myself - it be for Arthur
Huntingdon that they rise.
* * * * *
13th. - they be go, and he be go. we be to be part for
more than two month, above ten week! a long, long time to live
and not to see he. but he have promise to write often, and make
I promise to write still oftener, because he will be busy settle
his affair, and I shall have nothing well to do. well, I think
I shall always have plenty to say. but oh! for the time when we
shall be always together, and can exchange our thought without the
intervention of these cold go-between, pen, ink, and paper!
22nd. - I have have several letter from Arthur already. they be
not long, but pass sweet, and just like himself, full of ardent
affection, and playful lively humour; but there be always a 'but'
in this imperfect world, and I do wish he would sometimes be
serious. I cannot get he to write or speak in real, solid
earnest. I donot much mind it now, but if it be always so, what
shall I do with the serious part of myself?
CHAPTER XXIII
Feb. 18, 1822. - early this morning Arthur mount his hunter and
set off in high glee to meet the - hound. he will be away all
day, and so I will amuse myself with my neglect diary, if I can
give that name to such an irregular composition. it be exactly
four month since I open it last.
I be marry now, and settle down as Mrs. Huntingdon of Grassdale
Manor. I have have eight week' experience of matrimony. and do I
regret the step I have take? no, though I must confess, in my
secret heart, that Arthur be not what I think he at first, and
if I have know he in the beginning as thoroughly as I do now, I
probably never should have love he, and if I love he first, and
then make the discovery, I fear I should have think it my duty
not to have marry he. to be sure I might have know he, for
every one be willing enough to tell I about he, and he himself
be no accomplished hypocrite, but I be wilfully blind; and now,
instead of regret that I do not discern his full character
before I be indissolubly bind to he, I be glad, for it have save
I a great deal of battle with my conscience, and a great deal of
consequent trouble and pain; and, whatever I ought to have do, my
duty now be plainly to love he and to cleave to he, and this just
tally with my inclination.
he be very fond of I, almost too fond. I could do with less
caressing and more rationality. I should like to be less of a pet
and more of a friend, if I might choose; but I willnot complain of
that: I be only afraid his affection lose in depth where it gain
in ardour. I sometimes liken it to a fire of dry twig and
branch compare with one of solid coal, very bright and hot; but
if it should burn itself out and leave nothing but ash behind,
what shall I do? but it willnot, it sha'n't, I be determine; and
surely I have power to keep it alive. so let I dismiss that
think at once. but Arthur be selfish; I be constrain to
acknowledge that; and, indeed, the admission give I less pain
than might be expect, for, since I love he so much, I can easily
forgive he for love himself: he like to be please, and it be
my delight to please he; and when I regret this tendency of his,
it be for his own sake, not for mine.
the first instance he give be on the occasion of our bridal tour.
he want to hurry it over, for all the continental scene be
already familiar to he: many have lose their interest in his eye,
and other have never have anything to lose. the consequence be,
that after a fly transit through part of France and part of
Italy, I come back nearly as ignorant as I go, have make no
acquaintance with person and manner, and very little with thing,
my head swarm with a motley confusion of object and scene;
some, it be true, leave a deep and more pleasing impression
than other, but these embitter by the recollection that my
emotion have not be share by my companion, but that, on the
contrary, when I have express a particular interest in anything
that I see or desire to see, it have be displease to he,
inasmuch as it prove that I could take delight in anything
disconnected with himself.
as for Paris, we only just touch at that, and he would not give
I time to see one-tenth of the beauty and interesting object of
Rome. he want to get I home, he say, to have I all to
himself, and to see I safely instal as the mistress of
Grassdale Manor, just as single-minded, as naive, and piquante as I
be; and as if I have be some frail butterfly, he express
himself fearful of rub the silver off my wing by bring I
into contact with society, especially that of Paris and Rome; and,
more-over, he do not scruple to tell I that there be lady in
both place that would tear his eye out if they happen to meet
he with I.
of course I be vex at all this; but still it be less the
disappointment to myself that annoy I, than the disappointment
in he, and the trouble I be at to frame excuse to my friend for
have see and observe so little, without impute one particle
of blame to my companion. but when we get home - to my new,
delightful home - I be so happy and he be so kind that I freely
forgave he all; and I be begin to think my lot too happy, and
my husband actually too good for I, if not too good for this
world, when, on the second Sunday after our arrival, he shock and
horrify I by another instance of his unreasonable exaction. we
be walk home from the morning service, for it be a fine
frosty day, and as we be so near the church, I have request the
carriage should not be use.
'Helen,' say he, with unusual gravity, 'I be not quite satisfied
with you.'
I desire to know what be wrong.
'but will you promise to reform if I tell you?'
'yes, if I can, and without offend a high authority.'
'ah! there it be, you see: you donot love I with all your heart.'
'I donot understand you, Arthur (at least I hope I donot): pray
tell I what I have do or say amiss.'
'it be nothing you have do or say; it be something that you be
- you be too religious. now I like a woman to be religious, and I
think your piety one of your great charm; but then, like all
other good thing, it may be carry too far. to my thinking, a
woman's religion ought not to lessen her devotion to her earthly
lord. she should have enough to purify and etherealise her soul,
but not enough to refine away her heart, and raise she above all
human sympathy.'
'and be I above all human sympathy?' say I.
'no, darling; but you be make more progress towards that saintly
condition than I like; for all these two hour I have be think
of you and want to catch your eye, and you be so absorb in
your devotion that you have not even a glance to spare for I - I
declare it be enough to make one jealous of one's Maker - which be
very wrong, you know; so donot excite such wicked passion again,
for my soul's sake.'
'I will give my whole heart and soul to my maker if I can,' I
answer, 'and not one atom more of it to you than he allow. what
be you, sir, that you should set yourself up as a god, and presume
to dispute possession of my heart with he to whom I owe all I have
and all I be, every blessing I ever do or ever can enjoy - and
yourself among the rest - if you be a blessing, which I be half
incline to doubt.'
'donot be so hard upon I, Helen; and donot pinch my arm so: you
be squeeze your finger into the bone.'
'Arthur,' continue I, relax my hold of his arm, 'you donot love
I half as much as I do you; and yet, if you love I far less than
you do, I would not complain, provide you love your maker more.
I should rejoice to see you at any time so deeply absorb in your
devotion that you have not a single thought to spare for I. but,
indeed, I should lose nothing by the change, for the more you love
your God the more deep and pure and true would be your love to I.'
at this he only laugh and kiss my hand, call I a sweet
enthusiast. then take off his hat, he add: 'but look here,
Helen - what can a man do with such a head as this?'
the head look right enough, but when he place my hand on the top
of it, it sink in a bed of curl, rather alarmingly low, especially
in the middle.
'you see I be not make to be a saint,' say he, laugh, 'if God
mean I to be religious, why donot he give I a proper organ of
veneration?'
'you be like the servant,' I reply, 'who, instead of employ
his one talent in his master's service, restore it to he
unimproved, allege, as an excuse, that he know he "to be a hard
man, reap where he have not sow, and gather where he have not
straw." of he to whom less be give, less will be require, but
our utmost exertion be require of we all. you be not without
the capacity of veneration, and faith and hope, and conscience and
reason, and every other requisite to a Christian's character, if
you choose to employ they; but all our talent increase in the
using, and every faculty, both good and bad, strengthen by
exercise: therefore, if you choose to use the bad, or those which
tend to evil, till they become your master, and neglect the good
till they dwindle away, you have only yourself to blame. but you
have talent, Arthur - natural endowment both of heart and mind
and temper, such as many a well Christian would be glad to
possess, if you would only employ they in God's service. I should
never expect to see you a devotee, but it be quite possible to be a
good Christian without cease to be a happy, merry-hearted man.'
'you speak like an oracle, Helen, and all you say be indisputably
true; but listen here: I be hungry, and I see before I a good
substantial dinner; I be tell that if I abstain from this to-day I
shall have a sumptuous feast to-morrow, consist of all manner of
dainty and delicacy. now, in the first place, I should be loth
to wait till to-morrow when I have the mean of appease my hunger
already before I: in the second place, the solid viand of to-day
be more to my taste than the dainty that be promise I; in the
third place, I donot see to-morrow's banquet, and how can I tell
that it be not all a fable, get up by the greasy-face fellow that
be advise I to abstain in order that he may have all the good
victual to himself? in the fourth place, this table must be spread
for somebody, and, as Solomon say, "who can eat, or who else can
hasten hereunto more than I?" and finally, with your leave, Iwill
sit down and satisfy my craving of to-day, and leave to-morrow to
shift for itself - who know but what I may secure both this and
that?'
'but you be not require to abstain from the substantial dinner of
to-day: you be only advise to partake of these coarser viand in
such moderation as not to incapacitate you from enjoy the
choicer banquet of to-morrow. if, regardless of that counsel, you
choose to make a beast of yourself now, and over-eat and over-drink
yourself till you turn the good victual into poison, who be to
blame if, hereafter, while you be suffer the torment of
yesterday's gluttony and drunkenness, you see more temperate man
sit down to enjoy themselves at that splendid entertainment
which you be unable to taste?'
'most true, my patron saint; but again, our friend Solomon say,
"there be nothing well for a man than to eat and to drink, and to
be merry."'
'and again,' return I, 'he say, "rejoice, o young man, in thy
youth; and walk in the way of thine heart, and in the sight of
thine eye: but know thou, that for all these thing God will
bring thee into judgment."'
'well, but, Helen, Ibe sure Ihave be very good these last few
week. what have you see amiss in I, and what would you have I
to do?'
'nothing more than you do, Arthur: your action be all right so
far; but I would have your thought change; I would have you to
fortify yourself against temptation, and not to call evil good, and
good evil; I should wish you to think more deeply, to look far,
and aim high than you do.'
CHAPTER XXIV
March 25th. - Arthur be get tired - not of I, I trust, but of
the idle, quiet life he lead - and no wonder, for he have so few
source of amusement: he never read anything but newspaper and
sporting magazine; and when he see I occupy with a book, he
willnot let I rest till I close it. in fine weather he generally
manage to get through the time pretty well, but on rainy day, of
which we have have a good many of late, it be quite painful to
witness his ennui. I do all I can to amuse he, but it be
impossible to get he to feel interested in what I most like to
talk about, while, on the other hand, he like to talk about thing
that cannot interest I - or even that annoy I - and these please
he - the most of all: for his favourite amusement be to sit or
loll beside I on the sofa, and tell I story of his former
amour, always turn upon the ruin of some confide girl or the
cozening of some unsuspecting husband; and when I express my horror
and indignation, he lay it all to the charge of jealousy, and
laugh till the tear run down his cheek. I use to fly into
passion or melt into tear at first, but see that his delight
increase in proportion to my anger and agitation, I have since
endeavour to suppress my feeling and receive his revelation in
the silence of calm contempt; but still he read the inward
struggle in my face, and misconstrue my bitterness of soul for his
unworthiness into the pang of wounded jealousy; and when he have
sufficiently divert himself with that, or fear my displeasure
will become too serious for his comfort, he try to kiss and
soothe I into smile again - never be his caress so little
welcome as then! this be double selfishness display to I and to
the victim of his former love. there be time when, with a
momentary pang - a flash of wild dismay, I ask myself, 'Helen, what
have you do?' but I rebuke the inward questioner, and repel the
obtrusive thought that crowd upon I; for be he ten time as
sensual and impenetrable to good and lofty thought, I well know I
have no right to complain. and I donot and willnot complain. I do
and will love he still; and I do not and will not regret that I
have link my fate with his.
April 4th. - we have have a downright quarrel. the particular be
as follow: Arthur have tell I, at different interval, the whole
story of his intrigue with Lady F-, which I would not believe
before. it be some consolation, however, to find that in this
instance the lady have be more to blame than he, for he be very
young at the time, and she have decidedly make the first advance,
if what he say be true. I hat she for it, for it seem as if
she have chiefly contribute to his corruption; and when he be
begin to talk about she the other day, I beg he would not
mention she, for I detest the very sound of her name.
'not because you love she, Arthur, mind, but because she injure
you and deceive her husband, and be altogether a very abominable
woman, whom you ought to be ashamed to mention.'
but he defend she by say that she have a doting old husband,
whom it be impossible to love.
'then why do she marry he?' say I.
'for his money,' be the reply.
'then that be another crime, and her solemn promise to love and
honour he be another, that only increase the enormity of the
last.'
'you be too severe upon the poor lady,' laugh he. 'but never
mind, Helen, I donot care for she now; and I never love any of
they half as much as I do you, so you neednot fear to be forsake
like they.'
'if you have tell I these thing before, Arthur, I never should
have give you the chance.'
'wouldnot you, my darling?'
'most certainly not!'
he laugh incredulously.
'I wish I could convince you of it now!' cry I, start up from
beside he: and for the first time in my life, and I hope the
last, I wish I have not marry he.
'Helen,' say he, more gravely, 'do you know that if I believe you
now I should be very angry? but thank heaven I donot. though you
stand there with your white face and flash eye, look at I
like a very tigress, I know the heart within you perhaps a trifle
well than you know it yourself.'
without another word I leave the room and lock myself up in my own
chamber. in about half an hour he come to the door, and first he
try the handle, then he knock.
'willnot you let I in, Helen?' say he.
'no; you have displease I,' I reply, 'and I donot want to see
your face or hear your voice again till the morning.'
he pause a moment as if dumfounde or uncertain how to answer such
a speech, and then turn and walk away. this be only an hour
after dinner: I know he would find it very dull to sit alone all
the evening; and this considerably soften my resentment, though
it do not make I relent. I be determined to show he that my
heart be not his slave, and I could live without he if I choose;
and I sit down and write a long letter to my aunt, of course
tell she nothing of all this. soon after ten o'clock I hear
he come up again, but he pass my door and go straight to his
own dressing-room, where he shut himself in for the night.
I be rather anxious to see how he would meet I in the morning,
and not a little disappointed to behold he enter the breakfast-
room with a careless smile.
'be you cross still, Helen?' say he, approach as if to salute
I. I coldly turn to the table, and begin to pour out the
coffee, observe that he be rather late.
he utter a low whistle and saunter away to the window, where he
stand for some minute look out upon the pleasing prospect of
sullen grey clouds, streaming rain, soak lawn, and dripping
leafless tree, and mutter execration on the weather, and then
sit down to breakfast. while take his coffee he mutter it be
'd-d cold.'
'you should not have leave it so long,' say I.
he make no answer, and the meal be conclude in silence. it be a
relief to both when the letter-bag be bring in. it contain
upon examination a newspaper and one or two letter for he, and a
couple of letter for I, which he toss across the table without
a remark. one be from my brother, the other from Milicent
Hargrave, who be now in London with her mother. his, I think, be
business letter, and apparently not much to his mind, for he
crush they into his pocket with some muttered expletive that I
should have reprove he for at any other time. the paper he set
before he, and pretend to be deeply absorb in its content
during the remainder of breakfast, and a considerable time after.
the reading and answering of my letter, and the direction of
household concern, afford I ample employment for the morning:
after lunch I get my drawing, and from dinner till bed-time I read.
meanwhile, poor Arthur be sadly at a loss for something to amuse
he or to occupy his time. he want to appear as busy and as
unconcerned as I do. have the weather at all permit, he would
doubtless have order his horse and set off to some distant
region, no matter where, immediately after breakfast, and not
return till night: have there be a lady anywhere within reach,
of any age between fifteen and forty-five, he would have seek
revenge and find employment in get up, or try to get up, a
desperate flirtation with she; but be, to my private
satisfaction, entirely cut off from both these source of
diversion, his suffering be truly deplorable. when he have do
yawn over his paper and scribble short answer to his short
letter, he spend the remainder of the morning and the whole of the
afternoon in fidget about from room to room, watch the
cloud, curse the rain, alternately pet and teasing and
abuse his dog, sometimes lounge on the sofa with a book that
he could not force himself to read, and very often fixedly gaze
at I when he think I do not perceive it, with the vain hope of
detect some trace of tear, or some token of remorseful
anguish in my face. but I manage to preserve an undisturbed
though grave serenity throughout the day. I be not really angry:
I feel for he all the time, and long to be reconcile; but I
determine he should make the first advance, or at least show some
sign of an humble and contrite spirit first; for, if I begin, it
would only minister to his self-conceit, increase his arrogance,
and quite destroy the lesson I want to give he.
he make a long stay in the dining-room after dinner, and, I fear,
take an unusual quantity of wine, but not enough to loosen his
tongue: for when he come in and find I quietly occupy with my
book, too busy to lift my head on his entrance, he merely murmur
an expression of suppress disapprobation, and, shut the door
with a bang, go and stretch himself at full length on the sofa,
and compose himself to sleep. but his favourite cocker, Dash,
that have be lie at my foot, take the liberty of jump upon
he and begin to lick his face. he strike it off with a smart
blow, and the poor dog squeak and run cower back to I. when
he wake up, about half an hour after, he call it to he again,
but Dash only look sheepish and wag the tip of his tail. he
call again more sharply, but Dash only cling the close to I,
and lick my hand, as if implore protection. enrage at this,
his master snatch up a heavy book and hurl it at his head. the
poor dog set up a piteous outcry, and run to the door. I let he
out, and then quietly take up the book.
'give that book to I,' say Arthur, in no very courteous tone. I
give it to he.
'why do you let the dog out?' he ask; 'you know I want he.'
'by what token?' I reply; 'by your throw the book at he? but
perhaps it be intend for I?'
'no; but I see youhave get a taste of it,' say he, look at my
hand, that have also be strike, and be rather severely graze.
I return to my reading, and he endeavour to occupy himself in
the same manner; but in a little while, after several portentous
yawn, he pronounce his book to be 'curse trash,' and throw it on
the table. then follow eight or ten minute of silence, during
the great part of which, I believe, he be star at I. at
last his patience be tired out.
'what be that book, Helen?' he exclaim.
I tell he.
'be it interesting?'
'yes, very.'
I go on reading, or pretend to read, at least - I cannot say
there be much communication between my eye and my brain; for,
while the former run over the page, the latter be earnestly
wonder when Arthur would speak next, and what he would say, and
what I should answer. but he do not speak again till I rise to
make the tea, and then it be only to say he should not take any.
he continue lounge on the sofa, and alternately close his eye
and look at his watch and at I, till bed-time, when I rise, and
take my candle and retire.
'Helen!' cry he, the moment I have leave the room. I turn back,
and stand await his command.
'what do you want, Arthur?' I say at length.
'nothing,' reply he. 'go!'
I go, but hear he mutter something as I be close the door,
I turn again. it sound very like 'confound slut,' but I be
quite willing it should be something else.
'be you speak, Arthur?' I ask.
'no,' be the answer, and I shut the door and depart. I see
nothing more of he till the follow morning at breakfast, when
he come down a full hour after the usual time.
'yoube very late,' be my morning's salutation.
'you neednot have wait for I,' be his; and he walk up to the
window again. it be just such weather as yesterday.
'oh, this confound rain!' he mutter. but, after studiously
regard it for a minute or two, a bright idea, seem to strike
he, for he suddenly exclaim, 'but I know what Iwill do!' and then
return and take his seat at the table. the letter-bag be
already there, wait to be open. he unlock it and examine
the content, but say nothing about they.
'be there anything for I?' I ask.
'no.'
he open the newspaper and begin to read.
'youwould well take your coffee,' suggest I; 'it will be cold
again.'
'you may go,' say he, 'if youhave do; I donot want you.'
I rise and withdraw to the next room, wonder if we be to have
another such miserable day as yesterday, and wish intensely for
an end of these mutually inflict torment. shortly after I hear
he re the bell and give some order about his wardrobe that
sound as if he meditate a long journey. he then send for the
coachman, and I hear something about the carriage and the horse,
and London, and seven o'clock to-morrow morning, that startle and
disturb I not a little.
'I must not let he go to London, whatever come of it,' say I to
myself; 'he will run into all kind of mischief, and I shall be the
cause of it. but the question be, how be I to alter his purpose?
well, I will wait awhile, and see if he mention it.'
I wait most anxiously, from hour to hour; but not a word be
speak, on that or any other subject, to I. he whistle and
talk to his dog, and wander from room to room, much the same
as on the previous day. at last I begin to think I must introduce
the subject myself, and be ponder how to bring it about, when
John unwittingly come to my relief with the following message from
the coachman:
'please, sir, Richard say one of the horse have get a very bad
cold, and he think, sir, if you could make it convenient to go the
day after to-morrow, instead of to-morrow, he could physic it to-
day, so as - '
'confound his impudence!' interject the master.
'please, sir, he say it would be a deal well if you could,'
persist John, 'for he hop therewill be a change in the weather
shortly, and he say itbe not likely, when a horse be so bad with a
cold, and physic and all - '
'devil take the horse!' cry the gentleman. 'well, tell he Iwill
think about it,' he add, after a moment's reflection. he cast a
search glance at I, as the servant withdraw, expect to see
some token of deep astonishment and alarm; but, be previously
prepare, I preserve an aspect of stoical indifference. his
countenance fall as he meet my steady gaze, and he turn away in
very obvious disappointment, and walk up to the fire-place, where
he stand in an attitude of undisguised dejection, lean against
the chimney-piece with his forehead sink upon his arm.
'where do you want to go, Arthur?' say I.
'to London,' reply he, gravely.
'what for?' I ask.
'because I cannot be happy here.'
'why not?'
'because my wife donot love I.'
'she would love you with all her heart, if you deserve it.'
'what must I do to deserve it?'
this seem humble and earnest enough; and I be so much affected,
between sorrow and joy, that I be oblige to pause a few second
before I could steady my voice to reply.
'if she give you her heart,' say I, 'you must take it,
thankfully, and use it well, and not pull it in piece, and laugh
in her face, because she cannot snatch it away.'
he now turn round, and stand face I, with his back to the
fire. 'come, then, Helen, be you go to be a good girl?' say
he.
this sound rather too arrogant, and the smile that accompany it
do not please I. I therefore hesitate to reply. perhaps my
former answer have imply too much: he have hear my voice falter,
and might have see I brush away a tear.
'be you go to forgive I, Helen?' he resume, more humbly.
'be you penitent?' I reply, step up to he and smile in
his face.
'heart-break!' he answer, with a rueful countenance, yet with a
merry smile just lurk within his eye and about the corner of
his mouth; but this could not repulse I, and I fly into his arm.
he fervently embrace I, and though I shed a torrent of tear, I
think I never be happy in my life than at that moment.
'then you willnot go to London, Arthur?' I say, when the first
transport of tear and kiss have subside.
'no, love, - unless you will go with I.'
'I will, gladly,' I answer, 'if you think the change will amuse
you, and if you will put off the journey till next week.'
he readily consent, but say there be no need of much
preparation, as he should not be for stay long, for he do not
wish I to be londonize, and to lose my country freshness and
originality by too much intercourse with the lady of the world.
I think this folly; but I do not wish to contradict he now: I
merely say that I be of very domestic habit, as he well know,
and have no particular wish to mingle with the world.
so we be to go to London on Monday, the day after to-morrow. it
be now four day since the termination of our quarrel, and I be
sure it have do we both good: it have make I like Arthur a great
deal well, and make he behave a great deal well to I. he have
never once attempt to annoy I since, by the most distant
allusion to Lady F-, or any of those disagreeable reminiscence of
his former life. I wish I could blot they from my memory, or else
get he to regard such matter in the same light as I do. well! it
be something, however, to have make he see that they be not fit
subject for a conjugal jest. he may see far some time. I
will put no limit to my hope; and, in spite of my aunt's
foreboding and my own unspoken fear, I trust we shall be happy
yet.
CHAPTER XXV
on the eighth of April we go to London, on the eighth of May I
return, in obedience to Arthur's wish; very much against my own,
because I leave he behind. if he have come with I, I should have
be very glad to get home again, for he lead I such a round of
restless dissipation while there, that, in that short space of
time, I be quite tired out. he seem bent upon display I to
his friend and acquaintance in particular, and the public in
general, on every possible occasion, and to the great possible
advantage. it be something to feel that he consider I a worthy
object of pride; but I pay dear for the gratification: for, in
the first place, to please he I have to violate my cherished
predilection, my almost root principle in favour of a plain,
dark, sober style of dress - I must sparkle in costly jewel and
deck myself out like a paint butterfly, just as I have, long
since, determine I would never do - and this be no trifling
sacrifice; in the second place, I be continually strain to
satisfy his sanguine expectation and do honour to his choice by my
general conduct and deportment, and fear to disappoint he by
some awkward misdemeanour, or some trait of inexperienced ignorance
about the custom of society, especially when I act the part of
hostess, which I be not unfrequently call upon to do; and, in
the third place, as I intimate before, I be weary of the throng
and bustle, the restless hurry and ceaseless change of a life so
alien to all my previous habit. at last, he suddenly discover
that the London air do not agree with I, and I be languish
for my country home, and must immediately return to Grassdale.
I laughingly assure he that the case be not so urgent as he
appear to think it, but I be quite willing to go home if he be.
he reply that he should be oblige to remain a week or two
long, as he have business that require his presence.
'then I will stay with you,' say I.
'but I cannot do with you, Helen,' be his answer: 'as long as you
stay I shall attend to you and neglect my business.'
'but I willnot let you,' I return; 'now that I know you have
business to attend to, I shall insist upon your attend to it,
and let I alone; and, to tell the truth, I shall be glad of a
little rest. I can take my ride and walk in the Park as usual;
and your business cannot occupy all your time: I shall see you at
meal-time, and in the evening at least, and that will be well
than be league away and never see you at all.'
'but, my love, I cannot let you stay. how can I settle my affair
when I know that you be here, neglect -?'
'I shall not feel myself neglect: while you be do your duty,
Arthur, I shall never complain of neglect. if you have tell I
before, that you have anything to do, it would have be half do
before this; and now you must make up for lost time by redouble
exertion. tell I what it be; and I will be your taskmaster,
instead of be a hindrance.'
'no, no,' persist the impracticable creature; 'you must go home,
Helen; I must have the satisfaction of know that you be safe
and well, though far away. your bright eye be fade, and that
tender, delicate bloom have quite desert your cheek.'
'that be only with too much gaiety and fatigue.'
'it be not, I tell you; it be the London air: you be pin for
the fresh breeze of your country home, and you shall feel they
before you be two day old. and remember your situation,
dear Helen; on your health, you know, depend the health, if not
the life, of our future hope.'
'then you really wish to get rid of I?'
'positively, I do; and I will take you down myself to Grassdale,
and then return. I shall not be absent above a week or fortnight
at most.'
'but if I must go, I will go alone: if you must stay, it be
needless to waste your time in the journey there and back.'
but he do not like the idea of send I alone.
'why, what helpless creature do you take I for,' I reply, 'that
you cannot trust I to go a hundred mile in our own carriage, with
our own footman and a maid to attend I? if you come with I I
shall assuredly keep you. but tell I, Arthur, what be this
tiresome business; and why do you never mention it before?'
'it be only a little business with my lawyer,' say he; and he tell
I something about a piece of property he want to sell, in order
to pay off a part of the incumbrance on his estate; but either the
account be a little confused, or I be rather dull of
comprehension, for I could not clearly understand how that should
keep he in town a fortnight after I. still less can I now
comprehend how it should keep he a month, for it be nearly that
time since I leave he, and no sign of his return as yet. in every
letter he promise to be with I in a few day, and every time
deceive I, or deceive himself. his excuse be vague and
insufficient. I cannot doubt that he have get among his former
companion again. oh, why do I leave he! I wish - I do
intensely wish he would return!
June 29th. - no Arthur yet; and for many day I have be look
and long in vain for a letter. his letter, when they come, be
kind, if fair word and endear epithet can give they a claim to
the title - but very short, and full of trivial excuse and
promise that I cannot trust; and yet how anxiously I look forward
to they I how eagerly I open and devour one of those little,
hastily-scribble return for the three or four long letter,
hitherto unanswered, he have have from I!
oh, it be cruel to leave I so long alone! he know I have no one
but Rachel to speak to, for we have no neighbour here, except the
Hargraves, whose residence I can dimly descry from these upper
window embosome among those low, woody hill beyond the Dale. I
be glad when I learn that Milicent be so near we; and her
company would be a soothe solace to I now; but she be still in
town with her mother; there be no one at the Grove but little
Esther and her french governess, for Walter be always away. I see
that paragon of manly perfection in London: he seem scarcely to
merit the eulogium of his mother and sister, though he certainly
appear more conversable and agreeable than Lord Lowborough, more
candid and high-minded than Mr. Grimsby, and more polished and
gentlemanly than Mr. Hattersley, Arthur's only other friend whom he
judge fit to introduce to I. - oh, Arthur, why willnot you come?
why willnot you write to I at least? you talk about my health:
how can you expect I to gather bloom and vigour here, pin in
solitude and restless anxiety from day to day? - it would serve you
right to come back and find my good look entirely waste away. I
would beg my uncle and aunt, or my brother, to come and see I, but
I do not like to complain of my loneliness to they, and indeed
loneliness be the least of my suffering. but what be he, do -
what be it that keep he away? it be this ever-recur
question, and the horrible suggestion it raise, that distract I.
July 3rd. - my last bitter letter have wring from he an answer at
last, and a rather long one than usual; but still I donot know
what to make of it. he playfully abuse I for the gall and
vinegar of my late effusion, tell I I can have no conception of
the multitudinous engagement that keep he away, but aver that,
in spite of they all, he will assuredly be with I before the close
of next week; though it be impossible for a man so circumstanced as
he be to fix the precise day of his return: meantime he exhort I
to the exercise of patience, 'that first of woman's virtue,' and
desire I to remember the saying, 'absence make the heart grow
fonder,' and comfort myself with the assurance that the long he
stay away the well he shall love I when he return; and till he
do return, he beg I will continue to write to he constantly,
for, though he be sometimes too idle and often too busy to answer
my letter as they come, he like to receive they daily; and if I
fulfil my threat of punish his seem neglect by cease to
write, he shall be so angry that he will do his utmost to forget
I. he add this piece of intelligence respect poor Milicent
Hargrave:
'your little friend Milicent be likely, before long, to follow your
example, and take upon she the yoke of matrimony in conjunction
with a friend of mine. Hattersley, you know, have not yet fulfil
his direful threat of throw his precious person away on the
first old maid that choose to evince a tenderness for he; but he
still preserve a resolute determination to see himself a married
man before the year be out. "only," say he to I, "I must have
somebody that will let I have my own way in everything - not like
your wife, Huntingdon: she be a charming creature, but she look
as if she have a will of her own, and could play the vixen upon
occasion" (I think "yoube right there, man," but I donot say
so). "I must have some good, quiet soul that will let I just do
what I like and go where I like, keep at home or stay away, without
a word of reproach or complaint; for I cannot do with be
bother." "well," say I, "I know somebody that will suit you to
a tee, if you donot care for money, and thatbe Hargrave's sister,
Milicent." he desire to be introduce to she forthwith, for he
say he have plenty of the needful himself, or should have when his
old governor choose to quit the stage. so you see, Helen, I have
manage pretty well, both for your friend and mine.'
Poor Milicent! but I cannot imagine she will ever be lead to accept
such a suitor - one so repugnant to all her idea of a man to be
honour and love.
5th. - alas! I be mistaken. I have get a long letter from she
this morning, tell I she be already engage, and expect to be
marry before the close of the month.
'I hardly know what to say about it,' she write, 'or what to
think. to tell you the truth, Helen, I donot like the thought of
it at all. if I be to be Mr. Hattersley's wife, I must try to love
he; and I do try with all my might; but I have make very little
progress yet; and the bad symptom of the case be, that the
furth he be from I the well I like he: he frighten I with
his abrupt manner and strange hectoring way, and I dread the
thought of marry he. "then why have you accept he?" you
will ask; and I donot know I have accept he; but mamma tell I
I have, and he seem to think so too. I certainly donot mean to
do so; but I do not like to give he a flat refusal, for fear
mamma should be grieve and angry (for I know she wish I to
marry he), and I want to talk to she first about it: so I give
he what I think be an evasive, half negative answer; but she
say it be as good as an acceptance, and he would think I very
capricious if I be to attempt to draw back - and indeed I be so
confused and frighten at the moment, I can hardly tell what I
say. and next time I see he, he accost I in all confidence as
his affianced bride, and immediately begin to settle matter with
mamma. I have not courage to contradict they then, and how can I do
it now? I cannot; they would think I mad. besides, mamma be so
delighted with the idea of the match; she think she have manage so
well for I; and I cannot bear to disappoint she. I do object
sometimes, and tell she what I feel, but you donot know how she
talk. Mr. Hattersley, you know, be the son of a rich banker, and
as Esther and I have no fortune, and Walter very little, our dear
mamma be very anxious to see we all well married, that is, unite
to rich partner. it be not my idea of be well married, but she
mean it all for the good. she say when I be safe off her hand
it will be such a relief to her mind; and she assure I it will be
a good thing for the family as well as for I. even Walter be
pleased at the prospect, and when I confess my reluctance to he,
he say it be all childish nonsense. do you think it nonsense,
Helen? I should not care if I could see any prospect of be able
to love and admire he, but I cannot. there be nothing about he to
hang one's esteem and affection upon; he be so diametrically
opposite to what I imagine my husband should be. do write to I,
and say all you can to encourage I. donot attempt to dissuade I,
for my fate be fix: preparation for the important event be
already go on around I; and donot say a word against Mr.
Hattersley, for I want to think well of he; and though I have
speak against he myself, it be for the last time: hereafter, I
shall never permit myself to utter a word in his dispraise, however
he may seem to deserve it; and whoever venture to speak
slightingly of the man I have promise to love, to honour, and
obey, must expect my serious displeasure. after all, I think he be
quite as good as Mr. Huntingdon, if not well; and yet you love
he, and seem to be happy and content; and perhaps I may manage
as well. you must tell I, if you can, that Mr. Hattersley be
well than he seem - that he be upright, honourable, and open-
hearted - in fact, a perfect diamond in the rough. he may be all
this, but I donot know he. I know only the exterior, and what, I
trust, be the bad part of he.'
she conclude with 'good-by, dear Helen. I be wait anxiously
for your advice - but mind you let it be all on the right side.'
alas! poor Milicent, what encouragement can I give you? or what
advice - except that it be well to make a bold stand now, though
at the expense of disappointing and anger both mother and
brother and lover, than to devote your whole life, hereafter, to
misery and vain regret?
Saturday, 13th. - the week be over, and he be not come. all the
sweet summer be pass away without one breath of pleasure to I
or benefit to he. and I have all along be look forward to
this season with the fond, delusive hope that we should enjoy it so
sweetly together; and that, with God's help and my exertion, it
would be the mean of elevate his mind, and refine his taste to
a due appreciation of the salutary and pure delight of nature, and
peace, and holy love. but now - at evening, when I see the round
red sun sink quietly down behind those woody hill, leave they
sleep in a warm, red, golden haze, I only think another lovely
day be lose to he and I; and at morning, when rouse by the
flutter and chirp of the sparrow, and the gleeful twitter of the
swallow - all intent upon feed their young, and full of life
and joy in their own little frame - I open the window to inhale
the balmy, soul-revive air, and look out upon the lovely
landscape, laugh in dew and sunshine - I too often shame that
glorious scene with tear of thankless misery, because he cannot
feel its freshen influence; and when I wander in the ancient
wood, and meet the little wild flower smile in my path, or sit
in the shadow of our noble ash-tree by the water-side, with their
branch gently sway in the light summer breeze that murmur
through their feathery foliage - my ear full of that low music
mingle with the dreamy hum of insect, my eye abstractedly gaze
on the glassy surface of the little lake before I, with the tree
that crowd about its bank, some gracefully bend to kiss its
water, some rear their stately head high above, but stretch
their wide arm over its margin, all faithfully mirror far, far
down in its glassy depth - though sometimes the image be
partially break by the sport of aquatic insect, and sometimes,
for a moment, the whole be shiver into trembling fragment by a
transient breeze that sweep the surface too roughly - still I have
no pleasure; for the great the happiness that nature set before
I, the more I lament that he be not here to taste it: the great
the bliss we might enjoy together, the more I feel our present
wretchedness apart (yes, our; he must be wretche, though he may
not know it); and the more my sens be pleased, the more my heart
be oppress; for he keep it with he confine amid the dust and
smoke of London - perhaps shut up within the wall of his own
abominable club.
but most of all, at night, when I enter my lonely chamber, and look
out upon the summer moon, 'sweet regent of the sky,' float above
I in the 'black blue vault of heaven,' shed a flood of silver
radiance over park, and wood, and water, so pure, so peaceful, so
divine - and think, where be he now? - what be he do at this
moment? wholly unconscious of this heavenly scene - perhaps
revel with his boon companion, perhaps - God help I, it be
too - too much!
23rd. - thank heaven, he be come at last! but how alter! flushed
and feverish, listless and languid, his beauty strangely
diminish, his vigour and vivacity quite depart. I have not
upbraid he by word or look; I have not even ask he what he
have be do. I have not the heart to do it, for I think he be
ashamed of himself-he must be so indeed, and such inquiry could
not fail to be painful to both. my forbearance please he -
touch he even, I be inclined to think. he say he be glad to be
home again, and God know how glad I be to get he back, even as he
be. he lie on the sofa, nearly all day long; and I play and sing
to he for hour together. I write his letter for he, and get
he everything he want; and sometimes I read to he, and sometimes
I talk, and sometimes only sit by he and soothe he with silent
caress. I know he do not deserve it; and I fear I be spoil
he; but this once, I will forgive he, freely and entirely. I
will shame he into virtue if I can, and I will never let he leave
I again.
he be pleased with my attention - it may be, grateful for they.
he like to have I near he: and though he be peevish and testy
with his servant and his dog, he be gentle and kind to I. what
he would be, if I do not so watchfully anticipate his want, and
so carefully avoid, or immediately desist from do anything that
have a tendency to irritate or disturb he, with however little
reason, I cannot tell. how intensely I wish he be worthy of all
this care! last night, as I sit beside he, with his head in my
lap, pass my finger through his beautiful curl, this thought
make my eye overflow with sorrowful tear - as it often do; but
this time, a tear fall on his face and make he look up. he
smile, but not insultingly.
'Dear Helen!' he say - 'why do you cry? you know that I love you'
(and he press my hand to his feverish lip), 'and what more could
you desire?'
'only, Arthur, that you would love yourself as truly and as
faithfully as you be love by I.'
'that would be hard, indeed!' he reply, tenderly squeeze my
hand.
August 24th. - Arthur be himself again, as lusty and reckless, as
light of heart and head as ever, and as restless and hard to amuse
as a spoilt child, and almost as full of mischief too, especially
when wet weather keep he within door. I wish he have something
to do, some useful trade, or profession, or employment - anything
to occupy his head or his hand for a few hour a day, and give he
something besides his own pleasure to think about. if he would
play the country gentleman and attend to the farm - but that he
know nothing about, and willnot give his mind to consider, - or if
he would take up with some literary study, or learn to draw or to
play - as he be so fond of music, I often try to persuade he to
learn the piano, but he be far too idle for such an undertaking:
he have no more idea of exert himself to overcome obstacle than
he have of restrain his natural appetite; and these two thing
be the ruin of he. I lie they both to the charge of his harsh
yet careless father, and his madly indulgent mother. - if ever I be
a mother I will zealously strive against this crime of over-
indulgence. I can hardly give it a milder name when I think of the
evil it bring.
happily, it will soon be the shoot season, and then, if the
weather permit, he will find occupation enough in the pursuit and
destruction of the partridge and pheasant: we have no grouse, or
he might have be similarly occupy at this moment, instead of
lie under the acacia-tree pull poor dash's ear. but he say
it be dull work shooting alone; he must have a friend or two to
help he.
'let they be tolerably decent then, Arthur,' say I. the word
'friend' in his mouth make I shudder: I know it be some of his
'friend' that induce he to stay behind I in London, and keep
he away so long: indeed, from what he have unguardedly tell I, or
hint from time to time, I cannot doubt that he frequently show
they my letter, to let they see how fondly his wife watch over
his interest, and how keenly she regret his absence; and that
they induce he to remain week after week, and to plunge into all
manner of excess, to avoid be laugh at for a wife-ride
fool, and, perhaps, to show how far he could venture to go without
danger of shake the fond creature's devoted attachment. it be a
hateful idea, but I cannot believe it be a false one.
'well,' reply he, 'I think of Lord Lowborough for one; but
there be no possibility of get he without his well half, our
mutual friend, Annabella; so we must ask they both. yoube not
afraid of she, be you, Helen?' he ask, with a mischievous
twinkle in his eye.
'of course not,' I answer: 'why should I? and who besides?'
'hargrave for one. he will be glad to come, though his own place
be so near, for he have little enough land of his own to shoot over,
and we can extend our depredation into it, if we like; and he be
thoroughly respectable, you know, Helen - quite a lady's man: and
I think, Grimsby for another: hebe a decent, quiet fellow enough.
youwill not object to Grimsby?'
'I hate he: but, however, if you wish it, Iwill try to endure his
presence for a while.'
'all a prejudice, Helen, a mere woman's antipathy.'
'no; I have solid ground for my dislike. and be that all?'
'why, yes, I think so. Hattersley will be too busy billing and
cooing, with his bride to have much time to spare for gun and dog
at present,' he reply. and that remind I, that I have have
several letter from Milicent since her marriage, and that she
either be, or pretend to be, quite reconcile to her lot. she
profess to have discover numberless virtue and perfection in
her husband, some of which, I fear, less partial eye would fail to
distinguish, though they seek they carefully with tear; and now
that she be accustomed to his loud voice, and abrupt, uncourteous
manner, she affirm she find no difficulty in love he as a
wife should do, and beg I will burn that letter wherein she speak
so unadvisedly against he. so that I trust she may yet be happy;
but, if she be, it will be entirely the reward of her own goodness
of heart; for have she choose to consider herself the victim of
fate, or of her mother's worldly wisdom, she might have be
thoroughly miserable; and if, for duty's sake, she have not make
every effort to love her husband, she would, doubtless, have hat
he to the end of her day.
CHAPTER XXVI
Sept. 23rd. - our guest arrive about three week ago. Lord and
Lady Lowborough have now be marry above eight month; and I
will do the lady the credit to say that her husband be quite an
altered man; his look, his spirit, and his temper, be all
perceptibly change for the well since I last see he. but there
be room for improvement still. he be not always cheerful, nor
always content, and she often complain of his ill-humour, which,
however, of all person, she ought to be the last to accuse he of,
as he never display it against she, except for such conduct as
would provoke a saint. he adore she still, and would go to the
world's end to please she. she know her power, and she use it
too; but well know that to wheedle and coax be safe than to
command, she judiciously temper her despotism with flattery and
blandishment enough to make he deem himself a favoured and a
happy man.
but she have a way of torment he, in which I be a fellow-
sufferer, or might be, if I choose to regard myself as such. this
be by openly, but not too glaringly, coquet with Mr.
Huntingdon, who be quite willing to be her partner in the game; but
I donot care for it, because, with he, I know there be nothing but
personal vanity, and a mischievous desire to excite my jealousy,
and, perhaps, to torment his friend; and she, no doubt, be actuate
by much the same motif; only, there be more of malice and less of
playfulness in her manoeuvre. it be obviously, therefore, my
interest to disappoint they both, as far as I be concern, by
preserve a cheerful, undisturbed serenity throughout; and,
accordingly, I endeavour to show the full confidence in my
husband, and the great indifference to the art of my attractive
guest. I have never reproach the former but once, and that be
for laugh at Lord Lowborough's depressed and anxious countenance
one evening, when they have both be particularly provoking; and
then, indeed, I say a good deal on the subject, and rebuke he
sternly enough; but he only laugh, and say, - 'you can feel for
he, Helen, cannot you?'
'I can feel for anyone that be unjustly treat,' I reply, 'and I
can feel for those that injure they too.'
'why, Helen, you be as jealous as he be!' cry he, laugh still
more; and I find it impossible to convince he of his mistake.
so, from that time, I have carefully refrain from any notice of
the subject whatever, and leave Lord Lowborough to take care of
himself. he either have not the sense or the power to follow my
example, though he do try to conceal his uneasiness as well as he
can; but still, it will appear in his face, and his ill-humour will
peep out at interval, though not in the expression of open
resentment - they never go far enough for that. but I confess I do
feel jealous at time, most painfully, bitterly so; when she sing
and play to he, and he hang over the instrument, and dwell upon
her voice with no affected interest; for then I know he be really
delighted, and I have no power to awaken similar fervour. I can
amuse and please he with my simple song, but not delight he
thus.
28th. - yesterday, we all go to the Grove, Mr. Hargrave's much-
neglect home. his mother frequently ask we over, that she may
have the pleasure of her dear Walter's company; and this time she
have invite we to a dinner-party, and get together as many of the
country gentry as be within reach to meet we. the entertainment
be very well get up; but I could not help think about the cost
of it all the time. I donot like Mrs. Hargrave; she be a hard,
pretentious, worldly-minded woman. she have money enough to live
very comfortably, if she only know how to use it judiciously, and
have teach her son to do the same; but she be ever strain to
keep up appearance, with that despicable pride that shun the
semblance of poverty as of a shameful crime. she grind her
dependent, pinch her servant, and deprive even her daughter
and herself of the real comfort of life, because she will not
consent to yield the palm in outward show to those who have three
time her wealth; and, above all, because she be determined she
cherish son shall be enable to 'hold up his head with the
high gentleman in the land.' this same son, I imagine, be a man
of expensive habit, no reckless spendthrift and no abandon
sensualist, but one who like to have 'everything handsome about
he,' and to go to a certain length in youthful indulgence, not so
much to gratify his own taste as to maintain his reputation as a
man of fashion in the world, and a respectable fellow among his own
lawless companion; while he be too selfish to consider how many
comfort might be obtain for his fond mother and sister with the
money he thus waste upon himself: as long as they can contrive to
make a respectable appearance once a year, when they come to town,
he give himself little concern about their private stinting and
struggle at home. this be a harsh judgment to form of 'dear,
noble-minded, generous-hearted Walter,' but I fear it be too just.
Mrs. Hargrave's anxiety to make good match for her daughter be
partly the cause, and partly the result, of these error: by
make a figure in the world, and show they off to advantage,
she hop to obtain well chance for they; and by thus live
beyond her legitimate mean, and lavish so much on their
brother, she render they portionless, and make they burden on
her hand. poor Milicent, I fear, have already fall a sacrifice
to the manoeuvring of this mistaken mother, who congratulate
herself on have so satisfactorily discharge her maternal duty,
and hop to do as well for Esther. but Esther be a child as yet,
a little merry romp of fourteen: as honest-hearted, and as
guileless and simple as her sister, but with a fearless spirit of
her own, that I fancy her mother will find some difficulty in
bend to her purpose.
CHAPTER XXVII
October 9th. - it be on the night of the 4th, a little after tea,
that Annabella have be sing and playing, with Arthur as usual
at her side: she have end her song, but still she sit at the
instrument; and he stand lean on the back of her chair,
converse in scarcely audible tone, with his face in very close
proximity with her. I look at Lord Lowborough. he be at the
other end of the room, talk with Messrs. Hargrave and Grimsby;
but I see he dart towards his lady and his host a quick, impatient
glance, expressive of intense disquietude, at which Grimsby smile.
determine to interrupt the TETE-e-tete, I rise, and, select a
piece of music from the music stand, step up to the piano,
intend to ask the lady to play it; but I stand transfix and
speechless on see she seat there, listen, with what seem
an exultant smile on her flushed face to his soft murmuring, with
her hand quietly surrender to his clasp. the blood rush first
to my heart, and then to my head; for there be more than this:
almost at the moment of my approach, he cast a hurried glance over
his shoulder towards the other occupant of the room, and then
ardently press the unresiste hand to his lip. on raise his
eye, he behold I, and drop they again, confound and
dismayed. she see I too, and confront I with a look of hard
defiance. I lay the music on the piano, and retire. I feel ill;
but I do not leave the room: happily, it be get late, and
could not be long before the company disperse.
I go to the fire, and leant my head against the chimney-piece.
in a minute or two, some one ask I if I feel unwell. I do not
answer; indeed, at the time, I know not what be say; but I
mechanically look up, and see Mr. Hargrave stand beside I on
the rug.
'shall I get you a glass of wine?' say he.
'no, thank you,' I reply; and, turn from he, I look round.
Lady Lowborough be beside her husband, bend over he as he sit,
with her hand on his shoulder, softly talk and smile in his
face; and Arthur be at the table, turn over a book of
engraving. I seat myself in the near chair; and Mr.
Hargrave, find his service be not desire, judiciously
withdraw. shortly after, the company break up, and, as the guest
be retire to their room, Arthur approach I, smile with
the utmost assurance.
'be you very angry, Helen?' murmur he.
'this be no jest, Arthur,' say I, seriously, but as calmly as I
could - 'unless you think it a jest to lose my affection for ever.'
'what! so bitter?' he exclaim, laughingly, clasp my hand
between both his; but I snatch it away, in indignation - almost
in disgust, for he be obviously affect with wine.
'then I must go down on my knee,' say he; and kneeling before I,
with clasped hand, uplifted in mock humiliation, he continue
imploringly - 'forgive I, Helen - dear Helen, forgive I, and Iwill
never do it again!' and, bury his face in his handkerchief, he
affect to sob aloud.
leave he thus employ, I take my candle, and, slip quietly
from the room, hasten up-stair as fast as I could. but he soon
discover that I have leave he, and, rush up after I, catch I
in his arm, just as I have enter the chamber, and be about to
shut the door in his face.
'no, no, by heaven, you sha'n't escape I so!' he cry. then,
alarm at my agitation, he beg I not to put myself in such a
passion, tell I I be white in the face, and should kill myself
if I do so.
'let I go, then,' I murmur; and immediately he release I - and
it be well he do, for I be really in a passion. I sink into the
easy-chair and endeavour to compose myself, for I want to speak
to he calmly. he stand beside I, but do not venture to touch I
or to speak for a few second; then, approach a little nearer,
he drop on one knee - not in mock humility, but to bring himself
nearer my level, and lean his hand on the arm of the chair, he
begin in a low voice: 'it be all nonsense, Helen - a jest, a mere
nothing - not worth a thought. will you never learn,' he continue
more boldly, 'that you have nothing to fear from I? that I love
you wholly and entirely? - or if,' he add with a lurking smile,
'I ever give a thought to another, you may well spare it, for those
fancy be here and go like a flash of lightning, while my love
for you burn on steadily, and for ever, like the sun. you little
exorbitant tyrant, will not that -?'
'be quiet a moment, will you, Arthur?' say I, 'and listen to I -
and donot think Ibe in a jealous fury: I be perfectly calm. feel
my hand.' and I gravely extend it towards he - but close it
upon his with an energy that seem to disprove the assertion, and
make he smile. 'you neednot smile, sir,' say I, still tighten
my grasp, and look steadfastly on he till he almost quail
before I. 'you may think it all very fine, Mr. Huntingdon, to
amuse yourself with rouse my jealousy; but take care you donot
rouse my hate instead. and when you have once extinguish my
love, you will find it no easy matter to kindle it again.'
'well, Helen, I willnot repeat the offence. but I mean nothing by
it, I assure you. I have take too much wine, and I be scarcely
myself at the time.'
'you often take too much; and that be another practice I detest.'
he look up astonish at my warmth. 'yes,' I continue; 'I never
mention it before, because I be ashamed to do so; but now Iwill
tell you that it distress I, and may disgust I, if you go on
and suffer the habit to grow upon you, as it will if you donot
check it in time. but the whole system of your conduct to Lady
Lowborough be not referable to wine; and this night you know
perfectly well what you be do.'
'well, Ibe sorry for it,' reply he, with more of sulkiness than
contrition: 'what more would you have?'
'you be sorry that I see you, no doubt,' I answer coldly.
'if you have not see I,' he mutter, fix his eye on the
carpet, 'it would have do no harm.'
my heart feel ready to burst; but I resolutely swallow back my
emotion, and answer calmly,
'you think not?'
'no,' reply he, boldly. 'after all, what have I do? itbe
nothing - except as you choose to make it a subject of accusation
and distress.'
'what would Lord Lowborough, your friend, think, if he know all? or
what would you yourself think, if he or any other have act the
same part to I, throughout, as you have to Annabella?'
'I would blow his brain out.'
'well, then, Arthur, how can you call it nothing - an offence for
which you would think yourself justify in blow another man's
brain out? be it nothing to trifle with your friend's feeling
and mine - to endeavour to steal a woman's affection from her
husband - what he value more than his gold, and therefore what it
be more dishonest to take? be the marriage vow a jest; and be it
nothing to make it your sport to break they, and to tempt another
to do the same? can I love a man that do such thing, and coolly
maintain it be nothing?'
'you be break your marriage vow yourself,' say he,
indignantly rise and pace to and fro. 'you promise to honour
and obey I, and now you attempt to hector over I, and threaten
and accuse I, and call I bad than a highwayman. if it be not
for your situation, Helen, I would not submit to it so tamely. I
willnot be dictate to by a woman, though she be my wife.'
'what will you do then? will you go on till I hate you, and then
accuse I of break my vow?'
he be silent a. moment, and then reply: 'you never will hate
I.' return and resume his former position at my foot, he
repeat more vehemently - 'you cannot hate I as long as I love
you.'
'but how can I believe that you love I, if you continue to act in
this way? just imagine yourself in my place: would you think I
love you, if I do so? would you believe my protestation, and
honour and trust I under such circumstance? '
'the case be different,' he reply. 'it be a woman's nature to
be constant - to love one and one only, blindly, tenderly, and for
ever - bless they, dear creature! and you above they all; but you
must have some commiseration for we, Helen; you must give we a
little more licence, for, as Shakespeare have it -
however we do praise ourselves,
our fancy be more giddy and unfirm,
More longing, wavering, soon lose and win
than woman's be.'
'do you mean by that, that your fancy be lose to I, and win by
Lady Lowborough?'
'No! heaven be my witness that I think her mere dust and ash in
comparison with you, and shall continue to think so, unless you
drive I from you by too much severity. she be a daughter of
earth; you be an angel of heaven; only be not too austere in your
divinity, and remember that I be a poor, fallible mortal. come
now, Helen; willnot you forgive I?' he say, gently take my hand,
and look up with an innocent smile.
'if I do, you will repeat the offence.'
'I swear by - '
'donot swear; Iwill believe your word as well as your oath. I wish
I could have confidence in either.'
'try I, then, Helen: only trust and pardon I this once, and you
shall see! come, I be in hell's torment till you speak the word.'
I do not speak it, but I put my hand on his shoulder and kiss
his forehead, and then burst into tear. he embrace I tenderly;
and we have be good friend ever since. he have be decently
temperate at table, and well-conduct towards Lady Lowborough.
the first day he hold himself aloof from she, as far as he could
without any flagrant breach of hospitality: since that he have be
friendly and civil, but nothing more - in my presence, at least,
nor, I think, at any other time; for she seem haughty and
displease, and Lord Lowborough be manifestly more cheerful, and
more cordial towards his host than before. but I shall be glad
when they be go, for I have so little love for Annabella that it
be quite a task to be civil to she, and as she be the only woman
here besides myself, we be necessarily throw so much together.
next time Mrs. Hargrave call I shall hail her advent as quite a
relief. I have a good mind to ask Arthur's leave to invite the old
lady to stay with we till our guest depart. I think I will. she
will take it as a kind attention, and, though I have little relish
for her society, she will be truly welcome as a third to stand
between Lady Lowborough and I.
the first time the latter and I be alone together, after that
unhappy evening, be an hour or two after breakfast on the
follow day, when the gentleman be go out, after the usual
time spend in the writing of letter, the reading of newspaper,
and desultory conversation. we sit silent for two or three
minute. she be busy with her work, and I be run over the
column of a paper from which I have extract all the pith some
twenty minute before. it be a moment of painful embarrassment to
I, and I think it must be infinitely more so to she; but it
seem I be mistaken. she be the first to speak; and, smile
with the cool assurance, she begin, -
'your husband be merry last night, Helen: be he often so?'
my blood boil in my face; but it be well she should seem to
attribute his conduct to this than to anything else.
'no,' reply I, 'and never will be so again, I trust.'
'you give he a curtain lecture, do you?'
'no! but I tell he I dislike such conduct, and he promise I not
to repeat it.'
'I think he look rather subdue this morning,' she continue;
'and you, Helen? youhave be weep, I see - thatbe our grand
resource, you know. but donot it make your eye smart? and do
you always find it to answer?'
'I never cry for effect; nor can I conceive how any one can.'
'well, I donot know: I never have occasion to try it; but I think
if Lowborough be to commit such impropriety, Iwould make he cry.
I donot wonder at your be angry, for Ibe sure Iwould give my
husband a lesson he would not soon forget for a light offence
than that. but then he never will do anything of the kind; for I
keep he in too good order for that.'
'be you sure you donot arrogate too much of the credit to
yourself. Lord Lowborough be quite as remarkable for his
abstemiousness for some time before you marry he, as he be now,
I have hear.'
'oh, about the wine you mean - yes, hebe safe enough for that. and
as to look askance to another woman, hebe safe enough for that
too, while I live, for he worship the very ground I tread on.'
'indeed! and be you sure you deserve it?'
'why, as to that, I cannot say: you know webe all fallible
creature, Helen; we none of we deserve to be worship. but be
you sure your darling Huntingdon deserve all the love you give to
he?'
I know not what to answer to this. I be burn with anger; but I
suppress all outward manifestation of it, and only bit my lip
and pretend to arrange my work.
'at any rate,' resume she, pursue her advantage, 'you can
console yourself with the assurance that you be worthy of all the
love he give to you.'
'you flatter I,' say I; 'but, at least, I can try to be worthy of
it.' and then I turn the conversation.
CHAPTER XXVIII
December 25th. - last Christmas I be a bride, with a heart
overflow with present bliss, and full of ardent hope for the
future, though not unmingled with foreboding fear. now I be a
wife: my bliss be sober, but not destroy; my hope diminish,
but not depart; my fear increase, but not yet thoroughly
confirm; and, thank heaven, I be a mother too. God have send I a
soul to educate for heaven, and give I a new and calmer bliss, and
strong hope to comfort I.
Dec. 25th, 1823. - another year be go. my little Arthur live
and thrive. he be healthy, but not robust, full of gentle
playfulness and vivacity, already affectionate, and susceptible of
passion and emotion it will be long ere he can find word to
express. he have win his father's heart at last; and now my
constant terror be, lest he should be ruin by that father's
thoughtless indulgence. but I must beware of my own weakness too,
for I never know till now how strong be a parent's temptation to
spoil an only child.
I have need of consolation in my son, for (to this silent paper I
may confess it) I have but little in my husband. I love he still;
and he love I, in his own way - but oh, how different from the
love I could have give, and once have hop to receive! how little
real sympathy there exist between we; how many of my thought and
feeling be gloomily cloister within my own mind; how much of my
high and well self be indeed unmarried - doom either to
harden and sour in the sunless shade of solitude, or to quite
degenerate and fall away for lack of nutriment in this unwholesome
soil! but, I repeat, I have no right to complain; only let I
state the truth - some of the truth, at least, - and see hereafter
if any dark truth will blot these page. we have now be full
two year unite; the 'romance' of our attachment must be wear
away. surely I have now get down to the low gradation in
Arthur's affection, and discover all the evil of his nature: if
there be any further change, it must be for the well, as we
become still more accustomed to each other; surely we shall find no
low depth than this. and, if so, I can bear it well - as well,
at least, as I have bear it hitherto.
Arthur be not what be commonly call a bad man: he have many good
quality; but he be a man without self-restraint or lofty
aspiration, a lover of pleasure, give up to animal enjoyment:
he be not a bad husband, but his notion of matrimonial duty and
comfort be not my notion. judge from appearance, his idea of
a wife be a thing to love one devotedly, and to stay at home to
wait upon her husband, and amuse he and minister to his comfort in
every possible way, while he choose to stay with she; and, when he
be absent, to attend to his interest, domestic or otherwise, and
patiently wait his return, no matter how he may be occupy in the
meantime.
early in spring he announce his intention of go to London: his
affair there demand his attendance, he say, and he could refuse
it no long. he express his regret at have to leave I, but
hop I would amuse myself with the baby till he return.
'but why leave I?' I say. 'I can go with you: I can be ready at
any time.'
'you would not take that child to town?'
'yes; why not?'
the thing be absurd: the air of the town would be certain to
disagree with he, and with I as a nurse; the late hour and
London habit would not suit I under such circumstance; and
altogether he assure I that it would be excessively troublesome,
injurious, and unsafe. I over-rule his objection as well as I
could, for I tremble at the thought of his go alone, and would
sacrifice almost anything for myself, much even for my child, to
prevent it; but at length he tell I, plainly, and somewhat
testily, that he could not do with I: he be wear out with the
baby's restless night, and must have some repose. I propose
separate apartment; but it would not do.
'the truth be, Arthur,' I say at last, 'you be weary of my
company, and determine not to have I with you. you might as well
have say so at once.'
he deny it; but I immediately leave the room, and fly to the
nursery, to hide my feeling, if I could not soothe they, there.
I be too much hurt to express any further dissatisfaction with his
plan, or at all to refer to the subject again, except for the
necessary arrangement concern his departure and the conduct of
affair during his absence, till the day before he go, when I
earnestly exhort he to take care of himself and keep out of the
way of temptation. he laugh at my anxiety, but assure I there
be no cause for it, and promise to attend to my advice.
'I suppose it be no use ask you to fix a day for your return?'
say I.
'why, no; I hardly can, under the circumstance; but be assure,
love, I shall not be long away.'
'I donot wish to keep you a prisoner at home,' I reply; 'I should
not grumble at your staying whole month away - if you can be happy
so long without I - provide I know you be safe; but I donot
like the idea of your be there among your friend, as you call
they.'
'Pooh, pooh, you silly girl! do you think I cannot take care of
myself?'
'you donot last time. but this time, Arthur,' I add, earnestly,
'show I that you can, and teach I that I need not fear to trust
you!'
he promise fair, but in such a manner as we seek to soothe a
child. and do he keep his promise? no; and henceforth I can
never trust his word. bitter, bitter confession! tear blind I
while I write. it be early in March that he go, and he do not
return till July. this time he do not trouble himself to make
excuse as before, and his letter be less frequent, and short
and less affectionate, especially after the first few week: they
come slow and slow, and more terse and careless every time.
but still, when I omit writing, he complain of my neglect.
when I write sternly and coldly, as I confess I frequently do at
the last, he blame my harshness, and say it be enough to scare
he from his home: when I try mild persuasion, he be a little
more gentle in his reply, and promise to return; but I have
learn, at last, to disregard his promise.
CHAPTER XXIX
those be four miserable month, alternate between intense
anxiety, despair, and indignation, pity for he and pity for
myself. and yet, through all, I be not wholly comfortless: I have
my darling, sinless, inoffensive little one to console I; but even
this consolation be embitter by the constantly-recur
thought, 'how shall I teach he hereafter to respect his father,
and yet to avoid his example?'
but I remember that I have bring all these affliction, in a
manner wilfully, upon myself; and I determine to bear they without
a murmur. at the same time I resolve not to give myself up to
misery for the transgression of another, and endeavour to divert
myself as much as I could; and besides the companionship of my
child, and my dear, faithful Rachel, who evidently guess my
sorrow and feel for they, though she be too discreet to allude to
they, I have my book and pencil, my domestic affair, and the
welfare and comfort of Arthur's poor tenant and labourer to
attend to: and I sometimes seek and obtain amusement in the
company of my young friend Esther Hargrave: occasionally I ride
over to see she, and once or twice I have she to spend the day with
I at the Manor. Mrs. Hargrave do not visit London that season:
have no daughter to marry, she think it as well to stay at home
and economise; and, for a wonder, Walter come down to join she in
the beginning of June, and stay till near the close of August.
the first time I see he be on a sweet, warm evening, when I be
saunter in the park with little Arthur and Rachel, who be head-
nurse and lady's-maid in one - for, with my secluded life and
tolerably active habit, I require but little attendance, and as
she have nurse I and covet to nurse my child, and be moreover
so very trustworthy, I prefer commit the important charge to
she, with a young nursery-maid under her direction, to engage
any one else: besides, it save money; and since I have make
acquaintance with Arthur's affair, I have learn to regard that as
no trifling recommendation; for, by my own desire, nearly the whole
of the income of my fortune be devote, for year to come, to the
pay off of his debt, and the money he contrive to squander
away in London be incomprehensible. but to return to Mr. Hargrave.
I be stand with Rachel beside the water, amuse the laugh
baby in her arm with a twig of willow laden with golden catkin,
when, greatly to my surprise, he enter the park, mount on his
costly black hunter, and cross over the grass to meet I. he
salute I with a very fine compliment, delicately word, and
modestly deliver withal, which he have doubtless concocted as he
ride along. he tell I he have bring a message from his mother,
who, as he be rid that way, have desire he to call at the
Manor and beg the pleasure of my company to a friendly family
dinner to-morrow.
'there be no one to meet but ourselves,' say he; 'but Esther be
very anxious to see you; and my mother fear you will feel solitary
in this great house so much alone, and wish she could persuade
you to give she the pleasure of your company more frequently, and
make yourself at home in our more humble dwelling, till Mr.
Huntingdon's return shall render this a little more conducive to
your comfort.'
'she be very kind,' I answer, 'but I be not alone, you see; - and
those whose time be fully occupy seldom complain of solitude.'
'will you not come to-morrow, then? she will be sadly disappointed
if you refuse.'
I do not relish be thus compassionate for my loneliness; but,
however, I promise to come.
'what a sweet evening this be!' observe he, look round upon the
sunny park, with its impose swell and slope, its placid water,
and majestic clump of tree. 'and what a paradise you live in!'
'it be a lovely evening,' answer I; and I sigh to think how
little I have feel its loveliness, and how little of a paradise
sweet Grassdale be to I - how still less to the voluntary exile
from its scene. whether Mr. Hargrave divine my thought, I
cannot tell, but, with a half-hesitating, sympathise seriousness
of tone and manner, he ask if I have lately hear from Mr.
Huntingdon.
'not lately,' I reply.
'I think not,' he mutter, as if to himself, look
thoughtfully on the ground.
'be you not lately return from London?' I ask.
'only yesterday.'
'and do you see he there?'
'yes - I see he.'
'be he well?'
'yes - that be,' say he, with increase hesitation and an
appearance of suppress indignation, 'he be as well as - as he
deserve to be, but under circumstance I should have deem
incredible for a man so favour as he be.' he here look up and
point the sentence with a serious bow to I. I suppose my face
be crimson.
'pardon I, Mrs. Huntingdon,' he continue, 'but I cannot suppress
my indignation when I behold such infatuated blindness and
perversion of taste; - but, perhaps, you be not aware - ' he
pause.
'I be aware of nothing, sir - except that he delay his come
long than I expect; and if, at present, he prefer the society
of his friend to that of his wife, and the dissipation of the
town to the quiet of country life, I suppose I have those friend
to thank for it. their taste and occupation be similar to his,
and I donot see why his conduct should awaken either their
indignation or surprise.'
'you wrong I cruelly,' answer he. 'I have share but little of
Mr. Huntingdon's society for the last few week; and as for his
taste and occupation, they be quite beyond I - lonely wanderer
as I be. where I have but sip and taste, he drain the cup to
the dreg; and if ever for a moment I have seek to drown the
voice of reflection in madness and folly, or if I have waste too
much of my time and talent among reckless and dissipate
companion, God know I would gladly renounce they entirely and for
ever, if I have but half the blessing that man so thanklessly cast
behind his back - but half the inducement to virtue and domestic,
orderly habit that he despise - but such a home, and such a
partner to share it! it be infamous!' he mutter, between his
tooth. 'and donot think, Mrs. Huntingdon,' he add aloud, 'that I
could be guilty of incite he to persevere in his present
pursuit: on the contrary, I have remonstrate with he again and
again; I have frequently express my surprise at his conduct, and
remind he of his duty and his privilege - but to no purpose;
he only - '
'enough, Mr. Hargrave; you ought to be aware that whatever my
husband's fault may be, it can only aggravate the evil for I to
hear they from a stranger's lip.'
'be I then a stranger?' say he in a sorrowful tone. 'I be your
near neighbour, your son's godfather, and your husband's friend;
may I not be yours also?'
'intimate acquaintance must precede real friendship; I know but
little of you, Mr. Hargrave, except from report.'
'have you then forget the six or seven week I spend under your
roof last autumn? I have not forget they. and I know enough of
you, Mrs. Huntingdon, to think that your husband be the most
enviable man in the world, and I should be the next if you would
deem I worthy of your friendship.'
'if you know more of I, you would not think it, or if you do you
would not say it, and expect I to be flatter by the compliment.'
I step backward as I speak. he see that I wish the
conversation to end; and immediately take the hint, he gravely
bow, wish I good-evening, and turn his horse towards the
road. he appear grieve and hurt at my unkind reception of his
sympathising overture. I be not sure that I have do right in
speak so harshly to he; but, at the time, I have feel irritated
- almost insult by his conduct; it seem as if he be presume
upon the absence and neglect of my husband, and insinuate even
more than the truth against he.
Rachel have move on, during our conversation, to some yard'
distance. he ride up to she, and ask to see the child. he take
it carefully into his arm, look upon it with an almost paternal
smile, and I hear he say, as I approach, -
'and this, too, he have forsake!'
he then tenderly kiss it, and restore it to the gratified nurse.
'be you fond of child, Mr. Hargrave?' say I, a little soften
towards he.
'not in general,' he reply, 'but that be such a sweet child, and
so like its mother,' he add in a low tone.
'you be mistaken there; it be its father it resemble.'
'be I not right, nurse?' say he, appeal to Rachel.
'I think, sir, therebe a bit of both,' she reply.
he depart; and Rachel pronounce he a very nice gentleman. I
have still my doubt on the subject.
in the course of the follow six week I meet he several time,
but always, save once, in company with his mother, or his sister,
or both. when I call on they, he always happen to be at home,
and, when they call on I, it be always he that drive they over
in the phaeton. his mother, evidently, be quite delighted with
his dutiful attention and newly-acquire domestic habit.
the time that I meet he alone be on a bright, but not oppressively
hot day, in the beginning of July: I have take little Arthur into
the wood that skirt the park, and there seat he on the moss-
cushion root of an old oak; and, have gather a handful of
bluebell and wild-rose, I be kneel before he, and present
they, one by one, to the grasp of his tiny finger; enjoy the
heavenly beauty of the flower, through the medium of his smile
eye: forget, for the moment, all my care, laugh at his
gleeful laughter, and delight myself with his delight, - when a
shadow suddenly eclipse the little space of sunshine on the grass
before we; and look up, I behold Walter Hargrave standing and
gaze upon we.
'excuse I, Mrs. Huntingdon,' say he, 'but I be spell-bind; I
have neither the power to come forward and interrupt you, nor to
withdraw from the contemplation of such a scene. how vigorous my
little godson grow! and how merry he be this morning!' he
approach the child, and stoop to take his hand; but, on see
that his caress be likely to produce tear and lamentation,
instead of a reciprocation of friendly demonstration, he prudently
draw back.
'what a pleasure and comfort that little creature must be to you,
Mrs. Huntingdon!' he observe, with a touch of sadness in his
intonation, as he admiringly contemplate the infant.
'it be,' reply I; and then I ask after his mother and sister.
he politely answer my inquiry, and then return again to the
subject I wish to avoid; though with a degree of timidity that
witness his fear to offend.
'you have not hear from Huntingdon lately?' he say.
'not this week,' I reply. not these three week, I might have
say.
'I have a letter from he this morning. I wish it be such a one
as I could show to his lady.' he half draw from his waistcoat-
pocket a letter with Arthur's still beloved hand on the address,
scowl at it, and put it back again, add - 'but he tell I he
be about to return next week.'
'he tell I so every time he write.'
'indeed! well, it be like he. but to I he always avow it his
intention to stay till the present month.'
it strike I like a blow, this proof of premeditate transgression
and systematic disregard of truth.
'it be only of a piece with the rest of his conduct,' observe Mr.
Hargrave, thoughtfully regard I, and read, I suppose, my
feeling in my face.
'then he be really come next week?' say I, after a pause.
'you may rely upon it, if the assurance can give you any pleasure.
and be it possible, Mrs. Huntingdon, that you can rejoice at his
return?' he exclaim, attentively peruse my feature again.
'of course, Mr. Hargrave; be he not my husband?'
'oh, Huntingdon; you know not what you slight!' he passionately
murmur.
I take up my baby, and, wish he good-morning, depart, to
indulge my thought unscrutinize, within the sanctum of my home.
and be I glad? yes, delight; though I be anger by Arthur's
conduct, and though I feel that he have wrong I, and be
determine he should feel it too.
CHAPTER XXX
on the follow morning I receive a few line from he myself,
confirm Hargrave's intimation respect his approach
return. and he do come next week, but in a condition of body and
mind even bad than before. I do not, however, intend to pass
over his dereliction this time without a remark; I find it would
not do. but the first day he be weary with his journey, and I be
glad to get he back: I would not upbraid he then; I would wait
till to-morrow. next morning he be weary still: I would wait a
little long. but at dinner, when, after breakfast at twelve
o'clock on a bottle of soda-water and a cup of strong coffee, and
lunch at two on another bottle of soda-water mingle with
brandy, he be find fault with everything on the table, and
declare we must change our cook, I think the time be come.
'it be the same cook as we have before you go, Arthur,' say I.
'you be generally pretty well satisfied with she then.'
'you must have be let she get into slovenly habit, then,
while I be away. it be enough to poison one, eat such a
disgusting mess!' and he pettishly push away his plate, and
leant back despairingly in his chair.
'I think it be you that be change, not she,' say I, but with the
utmost gentleness, for I do not wish to irritate he.
'it may be so,' he reply carelessly, as he seize a tumbler of
wine and water, add, when he have toss it off, 'for I have an
infernal fire in my vein, that all the water of the ocean cannot
quench!'
'what kindle it?' I be about to ask, but at that moment the
butler enter and begin to take away the thing.
'be quick, Benson; do have do with that infernal clatter!' cry
his master. 'and donot bring the cheese, unless you want to make
I sick outright!'
Benson, in some surprise, remove the cheese, and do his good to
effect a quiet and speedy clearance of the rest; but,
unfortunately, there be a rumple in the carpet, cause by the
hasty push back of his master's chair, at which he trip and
stumble, cause a rather alarming concussion with the trayful of
crockery in his hand, but no positive damage, save the fall and
breaking of a sauce tureen; but, to my unspeakable shame and
dismay, Arthur turn furiously around upon he, and swear at he
with savage coarseness. the poor man turn pale, and visibly
tremble as he stoop to pick up the fragment.
'he couldnot help it, Arthur,' say I; 'the carpet catch his foot,
and therebe no great harm do. never mind the piece now, Benson;
you can clear they away afterwards.'
Glad to be release, Benson expeditiously set out the dessert and
withdraw.
'what could you mean, Helen, by take the servant's part against
I,' say Arthur, as soon as the door be close, 'when you know I
be distract?'
'I do not know you be distract, Arthur: and the poor man be
quite frightened and hurt at your sudden explosion.'
'poor man, indeed! and do you think I could stop to consider the
feeling of an insensate brute like that, when my own nerve be
rack and tear to piece by his confounded blunder?'
'I never hear you complain of your nerve before.'
'and why shouldnot I have nerve as well as you?'
'oh, I donot dispute your claim to their possession, but I never
complain of mine.'
'no, how should you, when you never do anything to try they?'
'then why do you try your, Arthur?'
'do you think I have nothing to do but to stay at home and take
care of myself like a woman?'
'be it impossible, then, to take care of yourself like a man when
you go abroad? you tell I that you could, and would too; and you
promise - '
'come, come, Helen, donot begin with that nonsense now; I cannot
bear it.'
'cannot bear what? - to be remind of the promise you have
break?'
'Helen, you be cruel. if you know how my heart throb, and how
every nerve thrill through I while you speak, you would spare
I. you can pity a dolt of a servant for break a dish; but you
have no compassion for I when my head be split in two and all on
fire with this consume fever.'
he lean his head on his hand, and sigh. I go to he and put
my hand on his forehead. it be burn indeed.
'then come with I into the drawing-room, Arthur; and donot take
any more wine: you have take several glass since dinner, and
eat next to nothing all the day. how can that make you well?'
with some coaxing and persuasion, I get he to leave the table.
when the baby be bring I try to amuse he with that; but poor
little Arthur be cut his tooth, and his father could not bear
his complaint: sentence of immediate banishment be pass upon
he on the first indication of fretfulness; and because, in the
course of the evening, I go to share his exile for a little
while, I be reproach, on my return, for prefer my child to
my husband. I find the latter recline on the sofa just as I have
leave he.
'well!' exclaim the injure man, in a tone of pseudo-resignation.
'I think I wouldnot send for you; I think Iwould just see how long
it would please you to leave I alone.'
'I have not be very long, have I, Arthur? I have not be an
hour, Ibe sure.'
'oh, of course, an hour be nothing to you, so pleasantly employ;
but to I - '
'it have not be pleasantly employ,' interrupt I. 'I have be
nurse our poor little baby, who be very far from well, and I
could not leave he till I get he to sleep.'
'oh, to be sure, yoube overflow with kindness and pity for
everything but I.'
'and why should I pity you? what be the matter with you?'
'well! that pass everything! after all the wear and tear that
Ihave have, when I come home sick and weary, long for comfort, and
expect to find attention and kindness, at least from my wife,
she calmly ask what be the matter with I!'
'there be nothing the matter with you,' return I, 'except what
you have wilfully bring upon yourself, against my earnest
exhortation and entreaty.'
'now, Helen,' say he emphatically, half rise from his recumbent
posture, 'if you bother I with another word, Iwill ring the bell
and order six bottle of wine, and, by heaven, Iwill drink they dry
before I stir from this place!'
I say no more, but sit down before the table and draw a book
towards I.
'do let I have quietness at least!' continue he, 'if you deny I
every other comfort;' and sink back into his former position,
with an impatient expiration between a sigh and a groan, he
languidly close his eye, as if to sleep.
what the book be that lie open on the table before I, I cannot
tell, for I never look at it. with an elbow on each side of it,
and my hand clasp before my eye, I deliver myself up to
silent weeping. but Arthur be not asleep: at the first slight
sob, he raise his head and look round, impatiently exclaim,
'what be you cry for, Helen? what the deuce be the matter
now?'
'Ibe cry for you, Arthur,' I reply, speedily dry my tear;
and start up, I throw myself on my knee before he, and
clasp his nerveless hand between my own, continue: 'donot you
know that you be a part of myself? and do you think you can
injure and degrade yourself, and I not feel it?'
'Degrade myself, Helen?'
'yes, degrade! what have you be do all this time?'
'youwould well not ask,' say he, with a faint smile.
'and you have well not tell; but you cannot deny that you have
degrade yourself miserably. you have shamefully wrong yourself,
body and soul, and I too; and I cannot endure it quietly, and I
willnot!'
'well, donot squeeze my hand so frantically, and donot agitate I
so, for heaven's sake! oh, Hattersley! you be right: this woman
will be the death of I, with her keen feeling and her interesting
force of character. there, there, do spare I a little.'
'Arthur, you must repent!' cry I, in a frenzy of desperation,
throw my arm around he and bury my face in his bosom. 'you
shall say you be sorry for what you have do!'
'well, well, I be.'
'you be not! youwill do it again.'
'I shall never live to do it again if you treat I so savagely,'
reply he, push I from he. 'youhave nearly squeeze the
breath out of my body.' he press his hand to his heart, and
look really agitated and ill.
'now get I a glass of wine,' say he, 'to remedy what youhave do,
you she tiger! Ibe almost ready to faint.'
I fly to get the require remedy. it seem to revive he
considerably.
'what a shame it be,' say I, as I take the empty glass from his
hand, 'for a strong young man like you to reduce yourself to such a
state!'
'if you know all, my girl, youwould say rather, "what a wonder it be
you can bear it so well as you do!" Ihave live more in these four
month, Helen, than you have in the whole course of your existence,
or will to the end of your day, if they number a hundred year;
so I must expect to pay for it in some shape.'
'you will have to pay a high price than you anticipate, if you
donot take care: there will be the total loss of your own health,
and of my affection too, if that be of any value to you.'
'what! yoube at that game of threaten I with the loss of your
affection again, be you? I think it couldnot have be very
genuine stuff to begin with, if itbe so easily demolish. if you
donot mind, my pretty tyrant, youwill make I regret my choice in
good earnest, and envy my friend Hattersley his meek little wife:
shebe quite a pattern to her sex, Helen. he have she with he in
London all the season, and she be no trouble at all. he might
amuse himself just as he please, in regular bachelor style, and
she never complain of neglect; he might come home at any hour of
the night or morning, or not come home at all; be sullen, sober, or
glorious drunk; and play the fool or the madman to his own heart's
desire, without any fear or botheration. she never give he a
word of reproach or complaint, do what he will. he say therebe
not such a jewel in all England, and swear he wouldnot take a
kingdom for she.'
'but he make her life a curse to she.'
'not he! she have no will but his, and be always content and
happy as long as he be enjoy himself.'
'in that case she be as great a fool as he be; but it be not so. I
have several letter from she, express the great anxiety
about his proceeding, and complain that you incite he to
commit those extravagance - one especially, in which she implore
I to use my influence with you to get you away from London, and
affirm that her husband never do such thing before you come, and
would certainly discontinue they as soon as you depart and leave
he to the guidance of his own good sense.'
'the detestable little traitor! give I the letter, and he shall
see it as sure as Ibe a live man.'
'no, he shall not see it without her consent; but if he do, there
be nothing there to anger he, nor in any of the other. she never
speak a word against he: it be only anxiety for he that she
express. she only allude to his conduct in the most delicate
term, and make every excuse for he that she can possibly think
of; and as for her own misery, I rather feel it than see it
express in her letter.'
'but she abuse I; and no doubt you help she.'
'no; I tell she she over-rat my influence with you, that I would
gladly draw you away from the temptation of the town if I could,
but have little hope of success, and that I think she be wrong in
suppose that you entice Mr. Hattersley or any one else into
error. I have myself hold the contrary opinion at one time, but I
now believe that you mutually corrupt each other; and, perhaps,
if she use a little gentle but serious remonstrance with her
husband, it might be of some service; as, though he be more rough-
hewn than mine, I believe he be of a less impenetrable material.'
'and so that be the way you go on - hearten each other up to
mutiny, and abuse each other's partner, and throw out
implication against your own, to the mutual gratification of
both!'
'accord to your own account,' say I, 'my evil counsel have have
but little effect upon she. and as to abuse and aspersion, we be
both of we far too deeply ashamed of the error and vice of our
other half, to make they the common subject of our
correspondence. friend as we be, we would willingly keep your
failing to ourselves - even from ourselves if we could, unless by
know they we could deliver you from they.'
'well, well! donot worry I about they: youwill never effect any
good by that. have patience with I, and bear with my languor and
crossness a little while, till I get this cursed low fever out of
my vein, and then youwill find I cheerful and kind as ever. why
cannot you be gentle and good, as you be last time? - Ibe sure I
be very grateful for it.'
'and what good do your gratitude do? I delude myself with the
idea that you be ashamed of your transgression, and hop you
would never repeat they again; but now you have leave I nothing to
hope!'
'my case be quite desperate, be it? a very blessed consideration,
if it will only secure I from the pain and worry of my dear
anxious wife's effort to convert I, and she from the toil and
trouble of such exertion, and her sweet face and silver accent
from the ruinous effect of the same. a burst of passion be a fine
rouse thing upon occasion, Helen, and a flood of tear be
marvellously affect, but, when indulge too often, they be both
deuce plaguy thing for spoil one's beauty and tire out one's
friend.'
Thenceforth I restrain my tear and passion as much as I could.
I spar he my exhortation and fruitless effort at conversion
too, for I see it be all in vain: God might awaken that heart,
supine and stupefy with self-indulgence, and remove the film of
sensual darkness from his eye, but I could not. his injustice and
ill-humour towards his inferior, who could not defend themselves,
I still resent and withstood; but when I alone be their object,
as be frequently the case, I endure it with calm forbearance,
except at time, when my temper, wear out by repeat annoyance,
or sting to distraction by some new instance of irrationality, give
way in spite of myself, and expose I to the imputation of
fierceness, cruelty, and impatience. I attend carefully to his
want and amusement, but not, I own, with the same devoted
fondness as before, because I could not feel it; besides, I have now
another claimant on my time and care - my ail infant, for whose
sake I frequently brave and suffer the reproach and complaint
of his unreasonably exact father.
but Arthur be not naturally a peevish or irritable man; so far from
it, that there be something almost ludicrous in the incongruity of
this adventitious fretfulness and nervous irritability, rather
calculate to excite laughter than anger, if it be not for the
intensely painful consideration attendant upon those symptom of a
disorder frame, and his temper gradually improve as his bodily
health be restore, which be much soon than would have be the
case but for my strenuous exertion; for there be still one thing
about he that I do not give up in despair, and one effort for his
preservation that I would not remit. his appetite for the stimulus
of wine have increase upon he, as I have too well foresee. it be
now something more to he than an accessory to social enjoyment:
it be an important source of enjoyment in itself. in this time of
weakness and depression he would have make it his medicine and
support, his comforter, his recreation, and his friend, and thereby
sink deeply and deep, and bind himself down for ever in the
bathos whereinto he have fall. but I determine this should never
be, as long as I have any influence leave; and though I could not
prevent he from take more than be good for he, still, by
incessant perseverance, by kindness, and firmness, and vigilance,
by coax, and daring, and determination, I succeed in
preserve he from absolute bondage to that detestable propensity,
so insidious in its advance, so inexorable in its tyranny, so
disastrous in its effect.
and here I must not forget that I be not a little indebted to his
friend Mr. Hargrave. about that time he frequently call at
Grassdale, and often din with we, on which occasion I fear
Arthur would willingly have cast prudence and decorum to the wind,
and make 'a night of it,' as often as his friend would have
consent to join he in that exalt pastime; and if the latter
have choose to comply, he might, in a night or two, have ruin the
labour of week, and overthrow with a touch the frail bulwark it
have cost I such trouble and toil to construct. I be so fearful
of this at first, that I humble myself to intimate to he, in
private, my apprehension of Arthur's proneness to these excess,
and to express a hope that he would not encourage it. he be
pleased with this mark of confidence, and certainly do not betray
it. on that and every subsequent occasion his presence serve
rather as a check upon his host, than an incitement to further act
of intemperance; and he always succeed in bring he from the
dining-room in good time, and in tolerably good condition; for if
Arthur disregard such intimation as 'well, I must not detain you
from your lady,' or 'we must not forget that Mrs. Huntingdon be
alone,' he would insist upon leave the table himself, to join I,
and his host, however unwillingly, be oblige to follow.
hence I learn to welcome Mr. Hargrave as a real friend to the
family, a harmless companion for Arthur, to cheer his spirit and
preserve he from the tedium of absolute idleness and a total
isolation from all society but mine, and a useful ally to I. I
could not but feel grateful to he under such circumstance; and I
do not scruple to acknowledge my obligation on the first
convenient opportunity; yet, as I do so, my heart whisper all
be not right, and bring a glow to my face, which he heighten
by his steady, serious gaze, while, by his manner of receive
those acknowledgment, he more than double my misgiving. his
high delight at be able to serve I be chasten by sympathy
for I and commiseration for himself - about, I know not what, for
I would not stay to inquire, or suffer he to unburden his sorrow
to I. his sigh and intimation of suppress affliction seem
to come from a full heart; but either he must contrive to retain
they within it, or breathe they forth in other ear than mine:
there be enough of confidence between we already. it seem wrong
that there should exist a secret understanding between my husband's
friend and I, unknown to he, of which he be the object. but my
after-thought be, 'if it be wrong, surely Arthur's be the fault,
not mine.'
and indeed I know not whether, at the time, it be not for he
rather than myself that I blush; for, since he and I be one, I
so identify myself with he, that I feel his degradation, his
failing, and transgression as my own: I blush for he, I fear
for he; I repent for he, weep, pray, and feel for he as for
myself; but I cannot act for he; and hence I must be, and I be,
debase, contaminate by the union, both in my own eye and in the
actual truth. I be so determined to love he, so intensely anxious
to excuse his error, that I be continually dwell upon they, and
labour to extenuate the loose of his principle and the bad
of his practice, till I be familiarise with vice, and almost a
partaker in his sin. thing that formerly shock and disgust
I, now seem only natural. I know they to be wrong, because reason
and God's word declare they to be so; but I be gradually lose
that instinctive horror and repulsion which be give I by
nature, or instill into I by the precept and example of my
aunt. perhaps then I be too severe in my judgment, for I
abhor the sinner as well as the sin; now I flatter myself I be
more charitable and considerate; but be I not become more
indifferent and insensate too? fool that I be, to dream that I
have strength and purity enough to save myself and he! such vain
presumption would be rightly serve, if I should perish with he in
the gulf from which I seek to save he! yet, God preserve I
from it, and he too! yes, poor Arthur, I will still hope and pray
for you; and though I write as if you be some abandon wretch,
past hope and past reprieve, it be only my anxious fear, my strong
desire that make I do so; one who love you less would be less
bitter, less dissatisfied.
his conduct have, of late, be what the world call irreproachable;
but then I know his heart be still unchanged; and I know that
spring be approach, and deeply dread the consequence.
as he begin to recover the tone and vigour of his exhausted frame,
and with it something of his former impatience of retirement and
repose, I suggest a short residence by the sea-side, for his
recreation and further restoration, and for the benefit of our
little one as well. but no: watering-place be so intolerably
dull; besides, he have be invite by one of his friend to spend a
month or two in Scotland for the well recreation of grouse-
shooting and deer-stalk, and have promise to go.
'then you will leave I again, Arthur?' say I.
'yes, dearest, but only to love you the well when I come back,
and make up for all past offence and short-coming; and you
neednot fear I this time: there be no temptation on the
mountain. and during my absence you may pay a visit to
Staningley, if you like: your uncle and aunt have long be
want we to go there, you know; but somehow therebe such a
repulsion between the good lady and I, that I never could bring
myself up to the scratch.'
about the third week in August, Arthur set out for Scotland, and
Mr. Hargrave accompany he thither, to my private satisfaction.
shortly after, I, with little Arthur and Rachel, go to
Staningley, my dear old home, which, as well as my dear old friend
its inhabitant, I see again with mingled feeling of pleasure and
pain so intimately blend that I could scarcely distinguish the
one from the other, or tell to which to attribute the various
tear, and smile, and sigh awaken by those old familiar scene,
and tone, and face.
Arthur do not come home till several week after my return to
Grassdale; but I do not feel so anxious about he now; to think of
he engage in active sport among the wild hill of Scotland, be
very different from know he to be immerse amid the corruption
and temptation of London. his letter now; though neither long
nor loverlike, be more regular than ever they have be before;
and when he do return, to my great joy, instead of be bad
than when he go, he be more cheerful and vigorous, and well in
every respect. since that time I have have little cause to
complain. he still have an unfortunate predilection for the
pleasure of the table, against which I have to struggle and watch;
but he have begin to notice his boy, and that be an increase
source of amusement to he within-door, while his fox-hunting and
coursing be a sufficient occupation for he without, when the
ground be not harden by frost; so that he be not wholly dependent
on I for entertainment. but it be now January; spring be
approach; and, I repeat, I dread the consequence of its
arrival. that sweet season, I once so joyously welcome as the
time of hope and gladness, awaken now far other anticipation by
its return.
CHAPTER XXXI
March 20th, 1824. the dreaded time be come, and Arthur be go, as
I expect. this time he announce it his intention to make but a
short stay in London, and pass over to the Continent, where he
should probably stay a few week; but I shall not expect he till
after the lapse of many week: I now know that, with he, day
signify week, and week month.
July 30th. - he return about three week ago, rather well in
health, certainly, than before, but still bad in temper. and
yet, perhaps, I be wrong: it be I that be less patient and
forbearing. I be tired out with his injustice, his selfishness and
hopeless depravity. I wish a milder word would do; I be no angel,
and my corruption rise against it. my poor father die last week:
Arthur be vex to hear of it, because he see that I be shock
and grieve, and he fear the circumstance would mar his comfort.
when I speak of order my mourning, he exclaim, - 'oh, I hate
black! but, however, I suppose you must wear it awhile, for form's
sake; but I hope, Helen, you willnot think it your bounden duty to
compose your face and manner into conformity with your funereal
garb. why should you sigh and groan, and I be make uncomfortable,
because an old gentleman in -shire, a perfect stranger to we both,
have think proper to drink himself to death? there, now, I
declare yoube cry! well, it must be affectation.'
he would not hear of my attend the funeral, or go for a day
or two, to cheer poor Frederick's solitude. it be quite
unnecessary, he say, and I be unreasonable to wish it. what be
my father to I? I have never see he but once since I be a baby,
and I well know he have never care a stiver about I; and my
brother, too, be little well than a stranger. 'besides, dear
Helen,' say he, embrace I with flattering fondness, 'I cannot
spare you for a single day.'
'then how have you manage without I these many day?' say I.
'ah! then I be knock about the world, now I be at home, and
home without you, my household deity, would be intolerable.'
'yes, as long as I be necessary to your comfort; but you do not
say so before, when you urge I to leave you, in order that you
might get away from your home without I,' retort I; but before
the word be well out of my mouth, I regret have utter
they. it seem so heavy a charge: if false, too gross an insult;
if true, too humiliating a fact to be thus openly cast in his
tooth. but I might have spar myself that momentary pang of self-
reproach. the accusation awake neither shame nor indignation in
he: he attempt neither denial nor excuse, but only answer
with a long, low, chuckle laugh, as if he view the whole
transaction as a clever, merry jest from begin to end. surely
that man will make I dislike he at last!
Sine as ye brew, my maiden fair,
keep mind that ye maun drink the yill.
yes; and I will drink it to the very dreg: and none but myself
shall know how bitter I find it!
August 20th. - we be shake down again to about our usual
position. Arthur have return to nearly his former condition and
habit; and I have find it my wise plan to shut my eye against
the past and future, as far as he, at least, be concern, and live
only for the present: to love he when I can; to smile (if
possible) when he smile, be cheerful when he be cheerful, and
please when he be agreeable; and when he be not, to try to make
he so; and if that willnot answer, to bear with he, to excuse he,
and forgive he as well as I can, and restrain my own evil passion
from aggravate his; and yet, while I thus yield and minister to
his more harmless propensity to self-indulgence, to do all in my
power to save he from the bad.
but we shall not be long alone together. I shall shortly be call
upon to entertain the same select body of friend as we have the
autumn before last, with the addition of Mr. Hattersley and, at my
special request, his wife and child. I long to see Milicent, and
her little girl too. the latter be now above a year old; she will
be a charming playmate for my little Arthur.
September 30th. - our guest have be here a week or two; but I
have have no leisure to pass any comment upon they till now. I
cannot get over my dislike to Lady Lowborough. it be not found
on mere personal pique; it be the woman herself that I dislike,
because I so thoroughly disapprove of she. I always avoid her
company as much as I can without violate the law of hospitality;
but when we do speak or converse together, it be with the utmost
civility, even apparent cordiality on her part; but preserve I
from such cordiality! it be like handle bri-rose and may-
blossom, bright enough to the eye, and outwardly soft to the
touch, but you know there be thorn beneath, and every now and
then you feel they too; and perhaps resent the injury by crush
they in till you have destroy their power, though somewhat to the
detriment of your own finger.
of late, however, I have see nothing in her conduct towards Arthur
to anger or alarm I. during the first few day I think she
seem very solicitous to win his admiration. her effort be not
unnoticed by he: I frequently see he smile to himself at her
artful manoeuvre: but, to his praise be it speak, her shaft
fall powerless by his side. her most bewitch smile, her
haughty frown be ever receive with the same immutable,
careless good-humour; till, find he be indeed impenetrable, she
suddenly remit her effort, and become, to all appearance, as
perfectly indifferent as himself. nor have I since witness any
symptom of pique on his part, or renew attempt at conquest upon
her.
this be as it should be; but Arthur never will let I be satisfy
with he. I have never, for a single hour since I marry he,
know what it be to realise that sweet idea, 'in quietness and
confidence shall be your rest.' those two detestable man, Grimsby
and Hattersley, have destroy all my labour against his love of
wine. they encourage he daily to overstep the bound of
moderation, and not unfrequently to disgrace himself by positive
excess. I shall not soon forget the second night after their
arrival. just as I have retire from the dining-room with the
lady, before the door be close upon we, Arthur exclaim, -
'now then, my lad, what say you to a regular jollification?'
Milicent glance at I with a half-reproachful look, as if I could
hinder it; but her countenance change when she hear Hattersley's
voice, shout through door and wall, - 'Ibe your man! send for
more wine: here benot half enough!'
we have scarcely enter the drawing-room before we be join by
Lord Lowborough.
'what can induce you to come so soon?' exclaim his lady, with a
most ungracious air of dissatisfaction.
'you know I never drink, Annabella,' reply he seriously.
'well, but you might stay with they a little: it look so silly to
be always dangle after the woman; I wonder you can!'
he reproach she with a look of mingled bitterness and surprise,
and, sink into a chair, suppress a heavy sigh, bite his pale
lip, and fix his eye upon the floor.
'you do right to leave they, Lord Lowborough,' say I. 'I trust
you will always continue to honour we so early with your company.
and if Annabella know the value of true wisdom, and the misery of
folly and - and intemperance, she would not talk such nonsense -
even in jest.'
he raise his eye while I speak, and gravely turn they upon I,
with a half-surprised, half-abstract look, and then bent they on
his wife.
'at least,' say she, 'I know the value of a warm heart and a bold,
manly spirit.'
'well, Annabella,' say he, in a deep and hollow tone, 'since my
presence be disagreeable to you, I will relieve you of it.'
'be you go back to they, then?' say she, carelessly.
'no,' exclaim he, with harsh and startling emphasis. 'I will not
go back to they! and I will never stay with they one moment long
than I think right, for you or any other tempter! but you neednot
mind that; I shall never trouble you again by intrude my company
upon you so unseasonably.'
he leave the room: I hear the hall-door open and shut, and
immediately after, on put aside the curtain, I see he pace
down the park, in the comfortless gloom of the damp, cloudy
twilight.
'it would serve you right, Annabella,' say I, at length, 'if Lord
Lowborough be to return to his old habit, which have so nearly
effect his ruin, and which it cost he such an effort to break:
you would then see cause to repent such conduct as this.'
'not at all, my dear! I should not mind if his lordship be to
see fit to intoxicate himself every day: I should only the soon
be rid of he.'
'oh, Annabella!' cry Milicent. 'how can you say such wicked
thing! it would, indeed, be a just punishment, as far as you be
concerned, if Providence should take you at your word, and make you
feel what other feel, that - ' she pause as a sudden burst of
loud talking and laughter reach we from the dining-room, in which
the voice of Hattersley be pre-eminently conspicuous, even to my
unpractised ear.
'what you feel at this moment, I suppose?' say Lady Lowborough,
with a malicious smile, fix her eye upon her cousin's
distressed countenance.
the latter offer no reply, but avert her face and brush away
a tear. at that moment the door open and admit Mr. Hargrave,
just a little flushed, his dark eye sparkle with unwonted
vivacity.
'oh, Ibe so glad yoube come, Walter?' cry his sister. 'but I
wish you could have get Ralph to come too.'
'utterly impossible, dear Milicent,' reply he, gaily. 'I have
much ado to get away myself. Ralph attempt to keep I by
violence; Huntingdon threaten I with the eternal loss of his
friendship; and Grimsby, bad than all, endeavour to make I
ashamed of my virtue, by such galling sarcasm and innuendo as he
know would wound I the most. so you see, lady, you ought to
make I welcome when I have brave and suffer so much for the
favour of your sweet society.' he smilingly turn to I and bow
as he finish the sentence.
'benot he handsome now, Helen!' whisper Milicent, her sisterly
pride overcome, for the moment, all other consideration.
'he would be,' I return, 'if that brilliance of eye, and lip, and
cheek be natural to he; but look again, a few hour hence.'
here the gentleman take a seat near I at the table, and petition
for a cup of coffee.
'I consider this an apt illustration of heaven take by storm,'
say he, as I hand one to he. 'I be in paradise, now; but I
have fight my way through flood and fire to win it. Ralph
Hattersley's last resource be to set his back against the door,
and swear I should find no passage but through his body (a pretty
substantial one too). happily, however, that be not the only
door, and I effect my escape by the side entrance through the
butler's pantry, to the infinite amazement of Benson, who be
clean the plate.'
Mr. Hargrave laugh, and so do his cousin; but his sister and I
remain silent and grave.
'pardon my levity, Mrs. Huntingdon,' murmur he, more seriously,
as he raise his eye to my face. 'you be not use to these
thing: you suffer they to affect your delicate mind too sensibly.
but I think of you in the midst of those lawless roysterer; and
I endeavour to persuade Mr. Huntingdon to think of you too; but
to no purpose: I fear he be fully determined to enjoy himself this
night; and it will be no use keep the coffee wait for he or
his companion; it will be much if they join we at tea. meantime,
I earnestly wish I could banish the thought of they from your mind
- and my own too, for I hate to think of they - yes - even of my
dear friend Huntingdon, when I consider the power he possess over
the happiness of one so immeasurably superior to himself, and the
use he make of it - I positively detest the man!'
'you have well not say so to I, then,' say I; 'for, bad as he
be, he be part of myself, and you cannot abuse he without
offend I.'
'pardon I, then, for I would soon die than offend you. but let
we say no more of he for the present, if you please.'
at last they come; but not till after ten, when tea, which have be
delay for more than half an hour, be nearly over. much as I have
long for their coming, my heart fail I at the riotous uproar
of their approach; and Milicent turn pale, and almost start
from her seat, as Mr. Hattersley burst into the room with a
clamorous volley of oath in his mouth, which Hargrave endeavour
to check by entreat he to remember the lady.
'ah! you do well to remind I of the lady, you dastardly
deserter,' cry he, shake his formidable fist at his brother-in-
law. 'if it be not for they, you well know, Iwould demolish you in
the twinkling of an eye, and give your body to the fowl of heaven
and the lily of the field!' then, plant a chair by Lady
Lowborough's side, he station himself in it, and begin to talk to
she with a mixture of absurdity and impudence that seem rather to
amuse than to offend she; though she affect to resent his
insolence, and to keep he at bay with sally of smart and
spirited repartee.
meantime Mr. Grimsby seat himself by I, in the chair vacate by
Hargrave as they enter, and gravely state that he would thank I
for a cup of tea: and Arthur place himself beside poor Milicent,
confidentially push his head into her face, and draw in
close to she as she shrink away from he. he be not so noisy as
Hattersley, but his face be exceedingly flushed: he laugh
incessantly, and while I blush for all I see and hear of he, I
be glad that he choose to talk to his companion in so low a tone
that no one could hear what he say but herself.
'what fool they be!' drawl Mr. Grimsby, who have be talk
away, at my elbow, with sententious gravity all the time; but I have
be too much absorb in contemplate the deplorable state of the
other two - especially Arthur - to attend to he.
'do you ever hear such nonsense as they talk, Mrs. Huntingdon?' he
continue. 'Ibe quite ashamed of they for my part: they cannot
take so much as a bottle between they without its get into
their head - '
'you be pour the cream into your saucer, Mr. Grimsby.'
'ah! yes, I see, but webe almost in darkness here. Hargrave,
snuff those candle, will you?'
'theybe wax; they donot require snuff,' say I.
'"the light of the body be the eye,"' observe Hargrave, with a
sarcastic smile. '"if thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be
full of light."'
Grimsby repulse he with a solemn wave of the hand, and then
turn to I, continue, with the same drawling tone and strange
uncertainty of utterance and heavy gravity of aspect as before:
'but as I be say, Mrs. Huntingdon, they have no head at all:
they cannot take half a bottle without be affect some way;
whereas I - well, Ihave take three time as much as they have to-
night, and you see Ibe perfectly steady. now that may strike you
as very singular, but I think I can explain it: you see their
brain - I mention no name, but youwill understand to whom I allude
- their brain be light to begin with, and the fume of the
ferment liquor render they lighter still, and produce an entire
light-headedness, or giddiness, result in intoxication; whereas
my brain, be compose of more solid material, will absorb a
considerable quantity of this alcoholic vapour without the
production of any sensible result - '
'I think you will find a sensible result produce on that tea,'
interrupt Mr. Hargrave, 'by the quantity of sugar you have put
into it. instead of your usual complement of one lump, you have
put in six.'
'have I so?' reply the philosopher, diving with his spoon into
the cup, and bring up several half-dissolve piece in
confirmation of the assertion. 'Hum! I perceive. thus, Madam,
you see the evil of absence of mind - of think too much while
engage in the common concern of life. now, if I have have my wit
about I, like ordinary man, instead of within I like a
philosopher, I should not have spoil this cup of tea, and be
constrain to trouble you for another.'
'that be the sugar-basin, Mr. Grimsby. now you have spoil the
sugar too; and Iwill thank you to ring for some more, for here be
Lord Lowborough at last; and I hope his lordship will condescend to
sit down with we, such as we be, and allow I to give he some
tea.'
his lordship gravely bow in answer to my appeal, but say
nothing. meantime, Hargrave volunteer to ring for the sugar,
while Grimsby lament his mistake, and attempt to prove that it
be owe to the shadow of the urn and the badness of the light.
Lord Lowborough have enter a minute or two before, unobserve by
an one but I, and have be stand before the door, grimly
survey the company. he now step up to Annabella, who sit
with she back towards he, with Hattersley still beside she, though
not now attend to she, be occupy in vociferously abuse
and bully his host.
'well, Annabella,' say her husband, as he leant over the back of
her chair, 'which of these three "bold, manly spirit" would you
have I to resemble?'
'by heaven and earth, you shall resemble we all!' cry Hattersley,
start up and rudely seize he by the arm. 'hallo,
Huntingdon!' he shout - 'Ihave get he! come, man, and help I!
and d-n I, if I donot make he drunk before I let he go! he
shall make up for all past delinquency as sure as Ibe a living
soul!'
there follow a disgraceful contest: Lord Lowborough, in
desperate earn, and pale with anger, silently struggle to
release himself from the powerful madman that be strive to drag
he from the room. I attempt to urge Arthur to interfere in
behalf of his outraged guest, but he could do nothing but laugh.
'Huntingdon, you fool, come and help I, cannot you!' cry
Hattersley, himself somewhat weaken by his excess.
'Ibe wish you God-speed, Hattersley,' cry Arthur, 'and aid
you with my prayer: I cannot do anything else if my life depend
on it! Ibe quite use up. oh - oh!' and lean back in his seat,
he clap his hand on his side and groan aloud.
'Annabella, give I a candle!' say Lowborough, whose antagonist
have now get he round the waist and be endeavour to root he
from the door-post, to which he madly cling with all the energy of
desperation.
'I shall take no part in your rude sport!' reply the lady coldly
draw back. 'I wonder you can expect it.' but I snatch up a
candle and bring it to he. he take it and hold the flame to
Hattersley's hand, till, roar like a wild beast, the latter
unclasp they and let he go. he vanish, I suppose to his own
apartment, for nothing more be see of he till the morning.
swearing and cursing like a maniac, Hattersley throw himself on to
the ottoman beside the window. the door be now free, Milicent
attempt to make her escape from the scene of her husband's
disgrace; but he call she back, and insist upon she come to
he.
'what do you want, Ralph?' murmur she, reluctantly approach
he.
'I want to know whatbe the matter with you,' say he, pull she
on to his knee like a child. 'what be you cry for, Milicent? -
tell I!'
'Ibe not cry.'
'you be,' persist he, rudely pull her hand from her face.
'how dare you tell such a lie!'
'Ibe not cry now,' plead she.
'but you have be, and just this minute too; and I will know what
for. Come, now, you shall tell I!'
'do let I alone, Ralph! Remember, we be not at home.'
'no matter: you shall answer my question!' exclaim she
tormentor; and he attempt to extort the confession by shake
she, and remorselessly crush her slight arm in the gripe of his
powerful finger.
'donot let he treat your sister in that way,' say I to Mr.
Hargrave.
'come now, Hattersley, I cannot allow that,' say that gentleman,
step up to the ill-assorted couple. 'let my sister alone, if
you please.'
and he make an effort to unclasp the ruffian's finger from her
arm, but be suddenly drive backward, and nearly lay upon the
floor by a violent blow on the chest, accompany with the
admonition, 'take that for your insolence! and learn to interfere
between I and mine again.'
'if you be not drunk, Iwould have satisfaction for that!' gasp
Hargrave, white and breathless as much from passion as from the
immediate effect of the blow.
'go to the devil!' respond his brother-in-law. 'now, Milicent,
tell I what you be cry for.'
'Iwill tell you some other time,' murmur she, 'when we be alone.'
'tell I now!' say he, with another shake and a squeeze that make
her draw in her breath and bite her lip to suppress a cry of pain.
'Iwill tell you, Mr. Hattersley,' say I. 'she be cry from pure
shame and humiliation for you; because she could not bear to see
you conduct yourself so disgracefully.'
'confound you, Madam!' mutter he, with a stare of stupid
amazement at my 'impudence.' 'it be not that - be it, Milicent?'
she be silent.
'come, speak up, child!'
'I cannot tell now,' sob she.
'but you can say "yes" or "no" as well as "I cannot tell." - come!'
'yes,' she whisper, hang her head, and blush at the awful
acknowledgment.
'curse you for an impertinent hussy, then!' cry he, throw she
from he with such violence that she fall on her side; but she be
up again before either I or her brother could come to her
assistance, and make the good of her way out of the room, and, I
suppose, up-stair, without loss of time.
the next object of assault be Arthur, who sit opposite, and have,
no doubt, richly enjoy the whole scene.
'now, Huntingdon,' exclaim his irascible friend, 'I will not have
you sit there and laugh like an idiot!'
'oh, Hattersley,' cry he, wipe his swimming eye - 'youwill be
the death of I.'
'yes, I will, but not as you suppose: Iwill have the heart out of
your body, man, if you irritate I with any more of that imbecile
laughter! - what! be you at it yet? - there! see if thatwill settle
you!' cry Hattersley, snatch up a footstool and hurt it at
the head of his host; but he as well as miss his aim, and the
latter still sit collapse and quake with feeble laughter, with
tear run down his face: a deplorable spectacle indeed.
Hattersley try curse and swearing, but it would not do: he
then take a number of book from the table beside he, and throw
they, one by one, at the object of his wrath; but Arthur only
laugh the more; and, finally, Hattersley rush upon he in a
frenzy and seize he by the shoulder, give he a violent
shaking, under which he laugh and shriek alarmingly. but I see
no more: I think I have witness enough of my husband's
degradation; and leave Annabella and the rest to follow when they
please, I withdraw, but not to bed. dismiss Rachel to her
rest, I walk up and down my room, in an agony of misery for what
have be do, and suspense, not know what might far happen,
or how or when that unhappy creature would come up to bed.
at last he come, slowly and stumblingly ascend the stair,
support by Grimsby and Hattersley, who neither of they walk
quite steadily themselves, but be both laugh and joke at
he, and make noise enough for all the servant to hear. he
himself be no long laugh now, but sick and stupid. I will
write no more about that.
such disgraceful scene (or nearly such) have be repeat more
than once. I donot say much to Arthur about it, for, if I do, it
would do more harm than good; but I let he know that I intensely
dislike such exhibition; and each time he have promise they should
never again be repeat. but I fear he be lose the little self-
command and self-respect he once possess: formerly, he would
have be ashamed to act thus - at least, before any other
witness than his boon companion, or such as they. his friend
Hargrave, with a prudence and self-government that I envy for he,
never disgrace himself by take more than sufficient to render
he a little 'elevated,' and be always the first to leave the table
after Lord Lowborough, who, wise still, persevere in vacate the
dining-room immediately after we: but never once, since Annabella
offend he so deeply, have he enter the drawing-room before the
rest; always spend the interim in the library, which I take care
to have light for his accommodation; or, on fine moonlight
night, in roam about the ground. but I think she regret her
misconduct, for she have never repeat it since, and of late she
have comport herself with wonderful propriety towards he,
treat he with more uniform kindness and consideration than ever
I have observe she to do before. I date the time of this
improvement from the period when she cease to hope and strive for
Arthur's admiration.
CHAPTER XXXII
October 5th. - Esther Hargrave be get a fine girl. she be not
out of the school-room yet, but her mother frequently bring she
over to call in the morning when the gentleman be out, and
sometimes she spend an hour or two in company with her sister and
I, and the child; and when we go to the Grove, I always
contrive to see she, and talk more to she than to any one else, for
I be very much attach to my little friend, and so be she to I.
I wonder what she can see to like in I though, for I be no long
the happy, lively girl I use to be; but she have no other society,
save that of her uncongenial mother, and her governess (as
artificial and conventional a person as that prudent mother could
procure to rectify the pupil's natural quality), and, now and
then, her subdue, quiet sister. I often wonder what will be her
lot in life, and so do she; but her speculation on the future
be full of buoyant hope; so be mine once. I shudder to think of
she be awaken, like I, to a sense of their delusive vanity.
it seem as if I should feel her disappointment, even more deeply
than my own. I feel almost as if I be bear for such a fate, but
she be so joyous and fresh, so light of heart and free of spirit,
and so guileless and unsuspecting too. oh, it would be cruel to
make she feel as I feel now, and know what I have know!
her sister tremble for she too. yesterday morning, one of
October's bright, loveliest day, Milicent and I be in the
garden enjoy a brief half-hour together with our child, while
Annabella be lie on the drawing-room sofa, deep in the last new
novel. we have be romp with the little creature, almost as
merry and wild as themselves, and now pause in the shade of the
tall copper beech, to recover breath and rectify our hair,
disorder by the rough play and the frolicsome breeze, while they
toddle together along the broad, sunny walk; my Arthur support
the feebler step of her little Helen, and sagaciously point out
to she the bright beauty of the border as they pass, with
semi-articulate prattle, that do as well for she as any other mode
of discourse. from laugh at the pretty sight, we begin to talk
of the child's future life; and that make we thoughtful. we
both relapse into silent musing as we slowly proceed up the
walk; and I suppose Milicent, by a train of association, be lead
to think of her sister.
'Helen,' say she, 'you often see Esther, donot you?'
'not very often.'
'but you have more frequent opportunity of meet she than I
have; and she love you, I know, and reverence you too: there be
nobody's opinion she think so much of; and she say you have more
sense than mamma.'
'that be because she be self-willed, and my opinion more generally
coincide with her own than your mamma's. but what then, Milicent?'
'well, since you have so much influence with she, I wish you would
seriously impress it upon she, never, on any account, or for
anybody's persuasion, to marry for the sake of money, or rank, or
establishment, or any earthly thing, but true affection and well-
ground esteem.'
'there be no necessity for that,' say I, 'for we have have some
discourse on that subject already, and I assure you her idea of
love and matrimony be as romantic as any one could desire.'
'but romantic notion will not do: I want she to have true
notion.'
'very right: but in my judgment, what the world stigmatise as
romantic, be often more nearly ally to the truth than be commonly
suppose; for, if the generous idea of youth be too often over-
cloud by the sordid view of after-life, that scarcely prove
they to be false.'
'well, but if you think her idea be what they ought to be,
strengthen they, will you? and confirm they, as far as you can; for
I have romantic notion once, and - I donot mean to say that I
regret my lot, for I be quite sure I donot, but - '
'I understand you,' say I; 'you be content for yourself, but
you would not have your sister to suffer the same as you.'
'no - or bad. she might have far bad to suffer than I, for I
be really content, Helen, though you maynot think it: I speak
the solemn truth in say that I would not exchange my husband for
any man on earth, if I might do it by the plucking of this leaf.'
'well, I believe you: now that you have he, you would not
exchange he for another; but then you would gladly exchange some
of his quality for those of well man.'
'yes: just as I would gladly exchange some of my own quality for
those of well woman; for neither he nor I be perfect, and I
desire his improvement as earnestly as my own. and he will
improve, donot you think so, Helen? hebe only six-and-twenty yet.'
'he may,' I answer,
'he will, he will!' repeat she.
'excuse the faintness of my acquiescence, Milicent, I would not
discourage your hope for the world, but mine have be so often
disappoint, that I be become as cold and doubtful in my
expectation as the flat of octogenarian.'
'and yet you do hope, still, even for Mr. Huntingdon?'
'I do, I confess, "even" for he; for it seem as if life and hope
must cease together. and be he so much bad, Milicent, than Mr.
Hattersley?'
'well, to give you my candid opinion, I think there be no
comparison between they. but you mustnot be offend, Helen, for
you know I always speak my mind, and you may speak yours too. I
sha'n't care.'
'I be not offend, love; and my opinion be, that if there be a
comparison make between the two, the difference, for the most part,
be certainly in Hattersley's favour.'
Milicent's own heart tell she how much it cost I to make this
acknowledgment; and, with a childlike impulse, she express she
sympathy by suddenly kiss my cheek, without a word of reply, and
then turn quickly away, catch up her baby, and hide her face in
its frock. how odd it be that we so often weep for each other's
distress, when we shed not a tear for our own! her heart have
be full enough of her own sorrow, but it overflow at the idea
of mine; and I, too, shed tear at the sight of her sympathetic
emotion, though I have not weep for myself for many a week.
it be one rainy day last week; most of the company be kill
time in the billiard-room, but Milicent and I be with little
Arthur and Helen in the library, and between our book, our
child, and each other, we expect to make out a very agreeable
morning. we have not be thus seclude above two hour, however,
when Mr. Hattersley come in, attract, I suppose, by the voice of
his child, as he be cross the hall, for he be prodigiously fond
of she, and she of he.
he be redolent of the stable, where he have be regale himself
with the company of his fellow-creature the horse ever since
breakfast. but that be no matter to my little namesake; as soon
as the colossal person of her father darken the door, she utter
a shrill scream of delight, and, quit her mother's side, run
crowing towards he, balance her course with outstretched arm,
and embrace his knee, throw back her head and laugh in his
face. he might well look smilingly down upon those small, fair
feature, radiant with innocent mirth, those clear blue shin
eye, and that soft flaxen hair cast back upon the little ivory
neck and shoulder. do he not think how unworthy he be of such a
possession? I fear no such idea cross his mind. he catch she
up, and there follow some minute of very rough play, during
which it be difficult to say whether the father or the daughter
laugh and shout the loud. at length, however, the
boisterous pastime terminate, suddenly, as might be expect: the
little one be hurt, and begin to cry; and the ungentle play-fellow
toss it into its mother's lap, bid she 'make all straight.'
as happy to return to that gentle comforter as it have be to leave
she, the child nestle in her arm, and hush its cry in a
moment; and sink its little weary head on her bosom, soon
drop asleep.
meantime Mr. Hattersley stride up to the fire, and interpose his
height and breadth between we and it, stand with arm akimbo,
expand his chest, and gaze round he as if the house and all
its appurtenance and content be his own undisputed possession.
'deuce bad weather this!' he begin. 'therewill be no shooting to-
day, I guess.' then, suddenly lift up his voice, he regale we
with a few bar of a rollick song, which abruptly cease, he
finish the tune with a whistle, and then continued:- 'I say, Mrs.
Huntingdon, what a fine stud your husband have! not large, but good.
Ihave be look at they a bit this morning; and upon my word,
Black Boss, and Grey Tom, and that young Nimrod be the fine
animal Ihave see for many a day!' then follow a particular
discussion of their various merit, succeed by a sketch of the
great thing he intend to do in the horse-jockey line, when his
old governor think proper to quit the stage. 'not that I wish
he to close his account,' add he: 'the old Trojan be welcome
to keep his book open as long as he please for I.'
'I hope so, indeed, Mr. Hattersley.'
'oh, yes! itbe only my way of talk. the event must come some
time, and so I look to the bright side of it: thatbe the right
plan - benot it, Mrs. H.? what be you two do here? by-the-by,
wherebe Lady Lowborough?'
'in the billiard-room.'
'what a splendid creature she be!' continue he, fix his eye on
his wife, who change colour, and look more and more disconcert
as he proceed. 'what a noble figure she have; and what
magnificent black eye; and what a fine spirit of her own; and what
a tongue of her own, too, when she like to use it. I perfectly
adore she! but never mind, Milicent: I wouldnot have she for my
wife, not if shehave a kingdom for her dowry! Ibe well satisfied
with the one I have. now then! what do you look so sulky for?
donot you believe I?'
'yes, I believe you,' murmur she, in a tone of half sad, half
sullen resignation, as she turn away to stroke the hair of she
sleep infant, that she have lay on the sofa beside she.
'well, then, what make you so cross? come here, Milly, and tell
I why you cannot be satisfied with my assurance.'
she go, and put she little hand within his arm, look up in
his face, and say softly, -
'what do it amount to, Ralph? only to this, that though you
admire Annabella so much, and for quality that I donot possess,
you would still rather have I than she for your wife, which merely
prove that you donot think it necessary to love your wife; you be
satisfied if she can keep your house, and take care of your child.
but Ibe not cross; Ibe only sorry; for,' add she, in a low,
tremulous accent, withdraw her hand from his arm, and bend
her look on the rug, 'if you donot love I, you donot, and it
cannot be help.'
'very true; but who tell you I donot? do I say I love
Annabella?'
'you say you adore she.'
'true, but adoration benot love. I adore Annabella, but I donot
love she; and I love thee, Milicent, but I donot adore thee.' in
proof of his affection, he clutch a handful of her light brown
ringlet, and appear to twist they unmercifully.
'do you really, Ralph?' murmur she, with a faint smile beam
through her tear, just put up her hand to his, in token that
he pull rather too hard.
'to be sure I do,' respond he: 'only you bother I rather,
sometimes.'
'I bother you!' cry she, in very natural surprise.
'yes, you - but only by your exceeding goodness. when a boy have
be eat raisin and sugar-plum all day, he long for a squeeze
of sour orange by way of a change. and do you never, milly,
observe the sand on the sea-shore; how nice and smooth they look,
and how soft and easy they feel to the foot? but if you plod
along, for half an hour, over this soft, easy carpet - give way
at every step, yield the more the hard you press, - youwill
find it rather wearisome work, and be glad enough to come to a bit
of good, firm rock, that willnot budge an inch whether you stand,
walk, or stamp upon it; and, though it be hard as the nether
millstone, youwill find it the easy footing after all.'
'I know what you mean, Ralph,' say she, nervously play with she
watchguard and trace the figure on the rug with the point of her
tiny foot - 'I know what you mean: but I think you always like
to be yield to, and I cannot alter now.'
'I do like it,' reply he, bring she to he by another tug at
her hair. 'you mustnot mind my talk, Milly. a man must have
something to grumble about; and if he cannot complain that his wife
harry he to death with her perversity and ill-humour, he must
complain that she wear he out with her kindness and gentleness.'
'but why complain at all, unless because you be tired and
dissatisfied?'
'to excuse my own failing, to be sure. do you think Iwill bear all
the burden of my sin on my own shoulder, as long as therebe
another ready to help I, with none of her own to carry?'
'there be no such one on earth,' say she seriously; and then,
take his hand from her head, she kiss it with an air of genuine
devotion, and trip away to the door.
'what now?' say he. 'where be you go?'
'to tidy my hair,' she answer, smile through her disorder
lock; 'youhave make it all come down.'
'off with you then! - an excellent little woman,' he remark when
she be go, 'but a thought too soft - she almost melt in one's
hand. I positively think I ill-use she sometimes, when Ihave take
too much - but I cannot help it, for she never complain, either at
the time or after. I suppose she donot mind it.'
'I can enlighten you on that subject, Mr. Hattersley,' say I:
'she do mind it; and some other thing she mind still more,
which yet you may never hear her complain of.'
'how do you know? - do she complain to you?' demand he, with a
sudden spark of fury ready to burst into a flame if I should answer
"yes."
'no,' I reply; 'but I have know she long and study she more
closely than you have do. - and I can tell you, Mr. Hattersley,
that Milicent love you more than you deserve, and that you have it
in your power to make she very happy, instead of which you be her
evil genius, and, I will venture to say, there be not a single day
pass in which you do not inflict upon she some pang that you
might spare she if you would.'
'well - itbe not my fault,' say he, gaze carelessly up at the
ceiling and plunge his hand into his pocket: 'if my ongoing
donot suit she, she should tell I so.'
'be she not exactly the wife you want? do you not tell Mr.
Huntingdon you must have one that would submit to anything without
a murmur, and never blame you, whatever you do?'
'true, but we shouldnot always have what we want: it spoil the
good of we, donot it? how can I help play the deuce when I
see itbe all one to she whether I behave like a Christian or like a
scoundrel, such as nature make I? and how can I help tease she
when shebe so invitingly meek and mim, when she lie down like a
spaniel at my foot and never so much as squeak to tell I thatbe
enough?'
'if you be a tyrant by nature, the temptation be strong, I allow;
but no generous mind delight to oppress the weak, but rather to
cherish and protect.'
'I donot oppress she; but itbe so confound flat to be always
cherish and protect; and then, how can I tell that I be
oppress she when she "melt away and make no sign"? I
sometimes think she have no feeling at all; and then I go on till
she cry, and that satisfy I.'
'then you do delight to oppress she?'
'I donot, I tell you! only when Ibe in a bad humour, or a
particularly good one, and want to afflict for the pleasure of
comfort; or when she look flat and want shake up a bit. and
sometimes she provoke I by cry for nothing, and willnot tell I
what itbe for; and then, I allow, it enrage I past bearing,
especially when Ibe not my own man.'
'as be no doubt generally the case on such occasion,' say I.
'but in future, Mr. Hattersley, when you see her look flat, or
cry for "nothing" (as you call it), ascribe it all to yourself:
be assure it be something you have do amiss, or your general
misconduct, that distress she.'
'I donot believe it. if it be, she should tell I so: I donot
like that way of moping and fret in silence, and say
nothing: itbe not honest. how can she expect I to mend my way
at that rate?'
'perhaps she give you credit for have more sense than you
possess, and delude herself with the hope that you will one day
see your own error and repair they, if leave to your own
reflection.'
'none of your sneer, Mrs. Huntingdon. I have the sense to see
that Ibe not always quite correct, but sometimes I think thatbe no
great matter, as long as I injure nobody but myself - '
'it be a great matter,' interrupt I, 'both to yourself (as you
will hereafter find to your cost) and to all connect with you,
most especially your wife. but, indeed, it be nonsense to talk
about injure no one but yourself: it be impossible to injure
yourself, especially by such act as we allude to, without injure
hundred, if not thousand, besides, in a great or less, degree,
either by the evil you do or the good you leave undo.'
'and as I be say,' continue he, 'or would have say if you
havenot take I up so short, I sometimes think I should do well
if I be join to one that would always remind I when I be
wrong, and give I a motive for do good and eschew evil, by
decidedly show her approval of the one and disapproval of the
other.'
'if you have no high motive than the approval of your fellow-
mortal, it would do you little good.'
'well, but if I have a mate that would not always be yield, and
always equally kind, but that would have the spirit to stand at bay
now and then, and honestly tell I her mind at all time, such a
one as yourself for instance. now, if I go on with you as I do
with she when Ibe in London, youwould make the house too hot to hold
I at time, Iwill be swear.'
'you mistake I: Ibe no termagant.'
'well, all the well for that, for I cannot stand contradiction, in
a general way, and Ibe as fond of my own will as another; only I
think too much of it donot answer for any man.'
'well, I would never contradict you without a cause, but certainly
I would always let you know what I think of your conduct; and if
you oppress I, in body, mind, or estate, you should at least
have no reason to suppose "I donot mind it."'
'I know that, my lady; and I think if my little wife be to follow
the same plan, it would be well for we both.'
'Iwill tell she.'
'no, no, let she be; therebe much to be say on both side, and,
now I think upon it, Huntingdon often regret that you be not more
like she, scoundrelly dog that he be, and you see, after all, you
cannot reform he: hebe ten time bad than i. hebe afraid of
you, to be sure; that is, hebe always on his good behaviour in your
presence - but - '
'I wonder what his bad behaviour be like, then?' I could not
forbear observe.
'why, to tell you the truth, itbe very bad indeed - benot it,
Hargrave?' say he, address that gentleman, who have enter the
room unperceive by I, for I be now stand near the fire, with
my back to the door. 'benot Huntingdon,' he continue, 'as great a
reprobate as ever be d-d?'
'his lady will not hear he censure with impunity,' reply Mr.
Hargrave, come forward; 'but I must say, I thank God I be not
such another.'
'perhaps it would become you well,' say I, 'to look at what you
be, and say, "God be merciful to I a sinner."'
'you be severe,' return he, bow slightly and draw himself
up with a proud yet injure air. Hattersley laugh, and clap
he on the shoulder. move from under his hand with a gesture of
insult dignity, Mr. Hargrave take himself away to the other end
of the rug.
'benot it a shame, Mrs. Huntingdon?' cry his brother-in-law; 'I
strike Walter Hargrave when I be drunk, the second night after we
come, and hebe turn a cold shoulder on I ever since; though I
ask his pardon the very morning after it be do!'
'your manner of ask it,' return the other, 'and the clearness
with which you remember the whole transaction, show you be
not too drunk to be fully conscious of what you be about, and
quite responsible for the deed.'
'you want to interfere between I and my wife,' grumble
Hattersley, 'and that be enough to provoke any man.'
'you justify it, then?' say his opponent, dart upon he a most
vindictive glance.
'no, I tell you I wouldnot have do it if I havenot be under
excitement; and if you choose to bear malice for it after all the
handsome thing Ihave say, do so and be d-d!'
'I would refrain from such language in a lady's presence, at
least,' say Mr. Hargrave, hide his anger under a mask of
disgust.
'what have I say?' return Hattersley: 'nothing but heaven's
truth. he will be damn, willnot he, Mrs. Huntingdon, if he donot
forgive his brother's trespass?'
'you ought to forgive he, Mr. Hargrave, since he ask you,' say
I.
'do you say so? then I will!' and, smile almost frankly, he
step forward and offer his hand. it be immediately clasp
in that of his relative, and the reconciliation be apparently
cordial on both side.
'the affront,' continue Hargrave, turn to I, 'owe half its
bitterness to the fact of its being offer in your presence; and
since you bid I forgive it, I will, and forget it too.'
'I guess the good return I can make will be to take myself off,'
mutter Hattersley, with a broad grin. his companion smile, and
he leave the room. this put I on my guard. Mr. Hargrave turn
seriously to I, and earnestly begin, -
'Dear Mrs. Huntingdon, how I have long for, yet dread, this
hour! do not be alarm,' he add, for my face be crimson with
anger: 'I be not about to offend you with any useless entreaty
or complaint. I be not go to presume to trouble you with the
mention of my own feeling or your perfection, but I have
something to reveal to you which you ought to know, and which, yet,
it pain I inexpressibly - '
'then donot trouble yourself to reveal it!'
'but it be of importance - '
'if so I shall hear it soon enough, especially if it be bad news,
as you seem to consider it. at present I be go to take the
child to the nursery.'
'but cannot you ring and send they?'
'no; I want the exercise of a run to the top of the house. come,
Arthur.'
'but you will return?'
'not yet; donot wait.'
'then when may I see you again?'
'at lunch,' say I, depart with little Helen in one arm and
lead Arthur by the hand.
he turn away, mutter some sentence of impatient censure or
complaint, in which 'heartless' be the only distinguishable word.
'what nonsense be this, Mr. Hargrave?' say I, pause in the
doorway. 'what do you mean?'
'oh, nothing; I do not intend you should hear my soliloquy. but
the fact be, Mrs. Huntingdon, I have a disclosure to make, painful
for I to offer as for you to hear; and I want you to give I a few
minute of your attention in private at any time and place you like
to appoint. it be from no selfish motive that I ask it, and not
for any cause that could alarm your superhuman purity: therefore
you need not kill I with that look of cold and pitiless disdain.
I know too well the feeling with which the bearer of bad tiding
be commonly regard not to - '
'what be this wonderful piece of intelligence?' say I, impatiently
interrupt he. 'if it be anything of real importance, speak it
in three word before I go.'
'in three word I cannot. send those child away and stay with
I.'
'no; keep your bad tiding to yourself. I know it be something I
donot want to hear, and something you would displease I by
telling.'
'you have divine too truly, I fear; but still, since I know it, I
feel it my duty to disclose it to you.'
'oh, spare we both the infliction, and I will exonerate you from
the duty. you have offer to tell; I have refuse to hear: my
ignorance will not be charge on you.'
'be it so: you shall not hear it from I. but if the blow fall
too suddenly upon you when it come, remember I wish to soften
it!'
I leave he. I be determine his word should not alarm I. what
could he, of all man, have to reveal that be of importance for I
to hear? it be no doubt some exaggerated tale about my
unfortunate husband that he wish to make the most of to serve his
own bad purpose.
6th. - he have not allude to this momentous mystery since, and I
have see no reason to repent of my unwillingness to hear it. the
threaten blow have not be strike yet, and I do not greatly fear
it. at present I be pleased with Arthur: he have not positively
disgrace himself for upwards of a fortnight, and all this last
week have be so very moderate in his indulgence at table that I
can perceive a marked difference in his general temper and
appearance. dare I hope this will continue?
CHAPTER XXXIII
Seventh. - yes, I will hope! to-night I hear Grimsby and
Hattersley grumble together about the inhospitality of their
host. they do not know I be near, for I happen to be stand
behind the curtain in the bow of the window, watch the moon
rise over the clump of tall dark elm-tree below the lawn, and
wonder why Arthur be so sentimental as to stand without,
lean against the outer pillar of the portico, apparently
watch it too.
'so, I suppose wehave see the last of our merry carousal in this
house,' say Mr. Hattersley; 'I think his good-fellowship
wouldnot last long. but,' add he, laugh, 'I donot expect it
would meet its end this way. I rather think our pretty hostess
would be set up her porcupine quill, and threaten to turn
we out of the house if we donot mind our manner.'
'you donot foresee this, then?' answer Grimsby, with a guttural
chuckle. 'but hewill change again when hebe sick of she. if we
come here a year or two hence, we shall have all our own way,
youwill see.'
'I donot know,' reply the other: 'shebe not the style of woman
you soon tire of. but be that as it may, itbe devilish provoking
now that we cannot be jolly, because he choose to be on his good
behaviour.'
'itbe all these cursed woman!' muttered Grimsby: 'theybe the very
bane of the world! they bring trouble and discomfort wherever they
come, with their false, fair face and their deceitful tongue.'
at this juncture I issue from my retreat, and smile on Mr.
Grimsby as I pass, leave the room and go out in search of
Arthur. have see he bend his course towards the shrubbery, I
follow he thither, and find he just enter the shadowy walk.
I be so light of heart, so overflow with affection, that I
spring upon he and clasp he in my arm. this startling conduct
have a singular effect upon he: first, he murmur, 'bless you,
darling!' and return my close embrace with a fervour like old
time, and then he start, and, in a tone of absolute terror,
exclaim, 'Helen! what the devil be this?' and I see, by the faint
light gleam through the overshadow tree, that he be
positively pale with the shock.
how strange that the instinctive impulse of affection should come
first, and then the shock of the surprise! it show, at least,
that the affection be genuine: he be not sick of I yet.
'I startle you, Arthur,' say I, laugh in my glee. 'how
nervous you be!'
'what the deuce do you do it for?' cry he, quite testily,
extricate himself from my arm, and wipe his forehead with his
handkerchief. 'go back, Helen - go back directly! youwill get your
death of cold!'
'I willnot, till Ihave tell you what I come for. they be blame
you, Arthur, for your temperance and sobriety, and Ibe come to
thank you for it. they say it be all "these cursed woman," and
that we be the bane of the world; but donot let they laugh or
grumble you out of your good resolution, or your affection for
I.'
he laugh. I squeeze he in my arm again, and cry in tearful
earnest, 'do, do persevere! and Iwill love you well than ever I
do before!'
'well, well, I will!' say he, hastily kiss I. 'there, now,
go. you mad creature, how could you come out in your light evening
dress this chill autumn night?'
'it be a glorious night,' say I.
'it be a night that will give you your death, in another minute.
run away, do!'
'do you see my death among those tree, Arthur?' say I, for he be
gaze intently at the shrub, as if he see it come, and I be
reluctant to leave he, in my new-find happiness and revival of
hope and love. but he grow angry at my delay, so I kiss he and
run back to the house.
I be in such a good humour that night: Milicent tell I I be the
life of the party, and whisper she have never see I so
brilliant. certainly, I talk enough for twenty, and smile upon
they all. Grimsby, Hattersley, Hargrave, Lady Lowborough, all
share my sisterly kindness. Grimsby star and wonder;
Hattersley laugh and jest (in spite of the little wine he have
be suffer to imbibe), but still behave as well as he know how.
Hargrave and Annabella, from different motif and in different
way, emulate I, and doubtless both surpass I, the former in
his discursive versatility and eloquence, the latter in boldness
and animation at least. Milicent, delight to see her husband,
her brother, and her over-estimate friend acquit themselves so
well, be lively and gay too, in her quiet way. even Lord
Lowborough catch the general contagion: his dark greenish eye
be light up beneath their moody brow; his sombre countenance
be beautify by smile; all trace of gloom and proud or cold
reserve have vanish for the time; and he astonish we all, not
only by his general cheerfulness and animation, but by the positive
flash of true force and brilliance he emit from time to time.
Arthur do not talk much, but he laugh, and listen to the rest,
and be in perfect good-humour, though not excited by wine. so
that, altogether, we make a very merry, innocent, and entertain
party.
9th. - yesterday, when Rachel come to dress I for dinner, I see
that she have be cry. I want to know the cause of it, but
she seem reluctant to tell. be she unwell? no. have she hear
bad news from her friend? no. have any of the servant vex she?
'oh, no, ma'am!' she answer; 'itbe not for myself.'
'what then, Rachel? have you be read novel?'
'bless you, no!' say she, with a sorrowful shake of the head; and
then she sigh and continue: 'but to tell you the truth, ma'am,
I donot like master's way of go on.'
'what do you mean, Rachel? hebe go on very properly at
present.'
'well, ma'am, if you think so, itbe right.'
and she go on dress my hair, in a hurried way, quite unlike
her usual calm, collect manner, murmuring, half to herself, she
be sure it be beautiful hair: she 'could like to see them match
it.' when it be do, she fondly stroke it, and gently pat my
head.
'be that affectionate ebullition intend for my hair, or myself,
nurse?' say I, laughingly turn round upon she; but a tear be
even now in her eye.
'what do you mean, Rachel?' I exclaim.
'well, ma'am, I donot know; but if - '
'if what?'
'well, if I be you, I wouldnot have that Lady Lowborough in the
house another minute - not another minute I wouldnot!
I be thunderstruck; but before I could recover from the shock
sufficiently to demand an explanation, Milicent enter my room, as
she frequently do when she be dress before I; and she stay
with I till it be time to go down. she must have find I a very
unsociable companion this time, for Rachel's last word ring in my
ear. but still I hop, I trust they have no foundation but in
some idle rumour of the servant from what they have see in Lady
Lowborough's manner last month; or perhaps from something that have
pass between their master and she during her former visit. at
dinner I narrowly observe both she and Arthur, and see nothing
extraordinary in the conduct of either, nothing calculate to
excite suspicion, except in distrustful mind, which mine be not,
and therefore I would not suspect.
almost immediately after dinner Annabella go out with her husband
to share his moonlight ramble, for it be a splendid evening like
the last. Mr. Hargrave enter the drawing-room a little before
the other, and challenge I to a game of chess. he do it
without any of that sad but proud humility he usually assume in
address I, unless he be excited with wine. I look at his
face to see if that be the case now. his eye meet mine keenly, but
steadily: there be something about he I do not understand, but
he seem sober enough. not choose to engage with he, I
refer he to Milicent.
'she play badly,' say he, 'I want to match my skill with your.
come now! you cannot pretend you be reluctant to lay down your
work. I know you never take it up except to pass an idle hour,
when there be nothing well you can do.'
'but chess-player be so unsociable,' I object; 'they be no
company for any but themselves.'
'there be no one here but Milicent, and she - '
'oh, I shall be delighted to watch you!' cry our mutual friend.
'two such player - it will be quite a treat! I wonder which will
conquer.'
I consent.
'now, Mrs. Huntingdon,' say Hargrave, as he arrange the man on
the board, speak distinctly, and with a peculiar emphasis, as if
he have a double meaning to all his word, 'you be a good player,
but I be a well: we shall have a long game, and you will give I
some trouble; but I can be as patient as you, and in the end I
shall certainly win.' he fix his eye upon I with a glance I
do not like, keen, crafty, bold, and almost impudent; - already
half triumphant in his anticipated success.
'I hope not, Mr. Hargrave!' return I, with vehemence that must
have startle Milicent at least; but he only smile and murmur,
'Time will show.'
we set to work: he sufficiently interested in the game, but calm
and fearless in the consciousness of superior skill: I, intensely
eager to disappoint his expectation, for I consider this the
type of a more serious contest, as I imagine he do, and I feel an
almost superstitious dread of be beat: at all event, I could
ill endure that present success should add one tittle to his
conscious power (his insolent self-confidence I ought to say), or
encourage for a moment his dream of future conquest. his play be
cautious and deep, but I struggle hard against he. for some time
the combat be doubtful: at length, to my joy, the victory seem
incline to my side: I have take several of his good piece, and
manifestly baffle his project. he put his hand to his brow and
pause, in evident perplexity. I rejoice in my advantage, but
dare not glory in it yet. at length, he lift his head, and
quietly make his move, look at I and say, calmly, 'now you
think you will win, donot you?'
'I hope so,' reply I, take his pawn that he have push into the
way of my bishop with so careless an air that I think it be an
oversight, but be not generous enough, under the circumstance, to
direct his attention to it, and too heedless, at the moment, to
foresee the after-consequence of my move.
'it be those bishop that trouble I,' say he; 'but the bold
knight can overleap the reverend gentleman,' take my last bishop
with his knight; 'and now, those sacred person once remove, I
shall carry all before I.'
'oh, Walter, how you talk!' cry Milicent; 'she have far more
piece than you still.'
'I intend to give you some trouble yet,' say I; 'and perhaps, sir,
you will find yourself checkmate before you be aware. look to
your queen.'
the combat deepen. the game be a long one, and I do give he
some trouble: but he be a well player than I.
'what keen gamester you be!' say Mr. Hattersley, who have now
enter, and be watch we for some time. 'why, Mrs.
Huntingdon, your hand tremble as if you have stake your all upon
it! and, Walter, you dog, you look as deep and cool as if you be
certain of success, and as keen and cruel as if you would drain her
heart's blood! but if I be you, I wouldnot beat she, for very
fear: shewill hate you if you do - she will, by heaven! I see it
in her eye.'
'hold your tongue, will you?' say I: his talk distract I, for
I be drive to extremity. a few more move, and I be
inextricably entangle in the snare of my antagonist.
'check,' cry he: I seek in agony some mean of escape.
'mate!' he add, quietly, but with evident delight. he have
suspend the utterance of that last fatal syllable the well to
enjoy my dismay. I be foolishly disconcert by the event.
Hattersley laugh; Milicent be troubled to see I so disturbed.
Hargrave place his hand on mine that rest on the table, and
squeeze it with a firm but gentle pressure, murmur, 'beat,
beat!' and gaze into my face with a look where exultation be
blend with an expression of ardour and tenderness yet more
insulting.
'no, never, Mr. Hargrave!' exclaim I, quickly withdraw my
hand.
'do you deny?' reply he, smilingly point to the board. 'no,
no,' I answer, recollect how strange my conduct must appear:
'you have beat I in that game.'
'will you try another, then?'
'no.'
'you acknowledge my superiority?'
'yes, as a chess-player.'
I rise to resume my work.
'where be Annabella?' say Hargrave, gravely, after glance round
the room.
'go out with Lord Lowborough,' answer I, for he look at I
for a reply.
'and not yet return!' he say, seriously.
'I suppose not.'
'where be Huntingdon?' look round again.
'go out with Grimsby, as you know,' say Hattersley, suppress
a laugh, which break forth as he conclude the sentence. why do
he laugh? why do Hargrave connect they thus together? be it
true, then? and be this the dreadful secret he have wish to
reveal to I? I must know, and that quickly. I instantly rise and
leave the room to go in search of Rachel and demand an explanation
of her word; but Mr. Hargrave follow I into the anteroom, and
before I could open its outer door, gently lay his hand upon the
lock. 'may I tell you something, Mrs. Huntingdon?' say he, in a
subdue tone, with serious, downcast eye.
'if it be anything worth hearing,' reply I, struggle to be
compose, for I tremble in every limb.
he quietly push a chair towards I. I merely leant my hand upon
it, and bid he go on.
'do not be alarm,' say he: 'what I wish to say be nothing in
itself; and I will leave you to draw your own inference from it.
you say that Annabella be not yet return?'
'yes, yes - go on!' say I, impatiently; for I fear my forced
calmness would leave I before the end of his disclosure, whatever
it might be.
'and you hear,' continue he, 'that Huntingdon be go out with
Grimsby?'
'well?'
'I hear the latter say to your husband - or the man who call
himself so - '
'go on, sir!'
he bow submissively, and continue: 'I hear he say, - "I shall
manage it, youwill see! theybe go down by the water; I shall
meet they there, and tell he I want a bit of talk with he about
some thing that we neednot trouble the lady with; and shewill say
she can be walk back to the house; and then I shall apologise,
you know, and all that, and tip she a wink to take the way of the
shrubbery. Iwill keep he talk there, about those matter I
mention, and anything else I can think of, as long as I can, and
then bring he round the other way, stop to look at the tree,
the field, and anything else I can find to discourse of."' Mr.
Hargrave pause, and look at I.
without a word of comment or further questioning, I rise, and
dart from the room and out of the house. the torment of suspense
be not to be endure: I would not suspect my husband falsely, on
this man's accusation, and I would not trust he unworthily - I
must know the truth at once. I fly to the shrubbery. scarcely
have I reach it, when a sound of voice arrest my breathless
speed.
'we have linger too long; he will be back,' say Lady
Lowborough's voice.
'surely not, dearest!' be his reply; 'but you can run across the
lawn, and get in as quietly as you can; Iwill follow in a while.'
my knee tremble under I; my brain swam round. I be ready to
faint. she must not see I thus. I shrink among the bush, and
leant against the trunk of a tree to let she pass.
'ah, Huntingdon!' say she reproachfully, pause where I have stand
with he the night before - 'it be here you kiss that woman!'
she look back into the leafy shade. advance thence, he
answer, with a careless laugh, -
'well, dearest, I couldnot help it. you know I must keep straight
with she as long as I can. havenot I see you kiss your dolt of a
husband score of time? - and do I ever complain?'
'but tell I, donot you love she still - a little?' say she,
place her hand on his arm, look earnestly in his face - for I
could see they, plainly, the moon shin full upon they from
between the branch of the tree that shelter I.
'not one bit, by all thatbe sacred!' he reply, kiss she
glow cheek.
'Good heaven, I must be go!' cry she, suddenly break from
he, and away she fly.
there he stand before I; but I have not strength to confront he
now: my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; I be well-nigh
sink to the earth, and I almost wonder he do not hear the
beating of my heart above the low sighing of the wind and the
fitful rustle of the fall leaf. my sens seem to fail I,
but still I see his shadowy form pass before I, and through the
rushing sound in my ear I distinctly hear he say, as he stand
look up the lawn, - 'there go the fool! Run, Annabella, run!
there - in with you! ah, - he donot see! thatbe right, Grimsby,
keep he back!' and even his low laugh reach I as he walk
away.
'God help I now!' I murmur, sink on my knee among the damp
weed and brushwood that surround I, and look up at the
moonlit sky, through the scant foliage above. it seem all dim
and quiver now to my darken sight. my burning, burst heart
strove to pour forth its agony to God, but could not frame its
anguish into prayer; until a gust of wind sweep over I, which,
while it scatter the dead leaf, like blighted hope, around,
cool my forehead, and seem a little to revive my sink frame.
then, while I lift up my soul in speechless, earnest
supplication, some heavenly influence seem to strengthen I
within: I breathe more freely; my vision clear; I see
distinctly the pure moon shin on, and the light cloud skim
the clear, dark sky; and then I see the eternal star twinkle
down upon I; I know their God be mine, and he be strong to save
and swift to hear. 'I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee,'
seem whisper from above their myriad orb. no, no; I feel he
would not leave I comfortless: in spite of earth and hell I
should have strength for all my trial, and win a glorious rest at
last!
Refreshed, invigorate, if not compose, I rise and return to the
house. much of my new-bear strength and courage forsook I, I
confess, as I enter it, and shut out the fresh wind and the
glorious sky: everything I see and hear seem to sicken my heart
- the hall, the lamp, the staircase, the door of the different
apartment, the social sound of talk and laughter from the drawing-
room. how could I bear my future life! in this house, among those
people - oh, how could I endure to live! John just then enter
the hall, and see I, tell I he have be send in search of I,
add that he have take in the tea, and master wish to know if I
be come.
'ask Mrs. Hattersley to be so kind as to make the tea, John,' say
I. 'say I be not well to-night, and wish to be excuse.'
I retire into the large, empty dining-room, where all be silence
and darkness, but for the soft sighing of the wind without, and the
faint gleam of moonlight that pierce the blind and curtain; and
there I walk rapidly up and down, think of my bitter thought
alone. how different be this from the evening of yesterday!
that, it seem, be the last expiring flash of my life's happiness.
Poor, blind fool that I be to be so happy! I could now see the
reason of Arthur's strange reception of I in the shrubbery; the
burst of kindness be for his paramour, the start of horror for his
wife. now, too, I could well understand the conversation between
Hattersley and Grimsby; it be doubtless of his love for she they
speak, not for I.
I hear the drawing-room door open: a light quick step come out of
the ante-room, cross the hall, and ascend the stair. it be
Milicent, poor Milicent, go to see how I be - no one else care
for I; but she still be kind. I shed no tear before, but now
they come, fast and free. thus she do I good, without
approach I. disappoint in her search, I hear she come down,
more slowly than she have ascend. would she come in there, and
find I out? no, she turn in the opposite direction and re-
enter the drawing-room. I be glad, for I know not how to meet
she, or what to say. I want no confidante in my distress. I
deserve none, and I want none. I have take the burden upon
myself; let I bear it alone.
as the usual hour of retirement approach I dry my eye, and
try to clear my voice and calm my mind. I must see Arthur to-
night, and speak to he; but I would do it calmly: there should be
no scene - nothing to complain or to boast of to his companion -
nothing to laugh at with his lady-love. when the company be
retire to their chamber I gently open the door, and just as he
pass, beckon he in.
'whatbe to do with you, Helen?' say he. 'why couldnot you come to
make tea for we? and what the deuce be you here for, in the dark?
what ail you, young woman: you look like a ghost!' he continue,
survey I by the light of his candle.
'no matter,' I answer, 'to you; you have no long any regard for
I it appear; and I have no long any for you.'
'Hal-lo! what the devil be this?' he mutter.
'I would leave you to-morrow,' continue I, 'and never again come
under this roof, but for my child' - I pause a moment to steady,
my voice.
'what in the devil's name be this, Helen?' cry he. 'what can you
be drive at?'
'you know perfectly well. let we waste no time in useless
explanation, but tell I, will you -?'
he vehemently swear he know nothing about it, and insist upon
hear what poisonous old woman have be blacken his name, and
what infamous lie I have be fool enough to believe.
'spare yourself the trouble of forswear yourself and rack
your brain to stifle truth with falsehood,' I coldly reply. 'I
have trust to the testimony of no third person. I be in the
shrubbery this evening, and I see and hear for myself.'
this be enough. he utter a suppress exclamation of
consternation and dismay, and mutter, 'I shall catch it now!'
set down his candle on the near chair, and rear his back
against the wall, stand confront I with fold arm.
'well, what then?' say he, with the calm insolence of mingle
shamelessness and desperation.
'only this,' return I; 'will you let I take our child and what
remain of my fortune, and go?'
'go where?'
'anywhere, where he will be safe from your contaminating influence,
and I shall be deliver from your presence, and you from mine.'
'no.'
'will you let I have the child then, without the money?'
'no, nor yourself without the child. do you think Ibe go to be
make the talk of the country for your fastidious caprice?'
'then I must stay here, to be hat and despise. but henceforth
we be husband and wife only in the name.'
'very good.'
'I be your child's mother, and your housekeeper, nothing more. so
you need not trouble yourself any long to feign the love you
cannot feel: I will exact no more heartless caress from you, nor
offer nor endure they either. I will not be mock with the empty
husk of conjugal endearment, when you have give the substance to
another!'
'very good, if you please. we shall see who will tire first, my
lady.'
'if I tire, it will be of live in the world with you: not of
live without your mockery of love. when you tire of your sinful
way, and show yourself truly repentant, I will forgive you, and,
perhaps, try to love you again, though that will be hard indeed.'
'Humph! and meantime you will go and talk I over to Mrs. Hargrave,
and write long letter to aunt Maxwell to complain of the wicked
wretch you have marry?'
'I shall complain to no one. Hitherto I have struggle hard to
hide your vice from every eye, and invest you with virtue you
never possess; but now you must look to yourself.'
I leave he mutter bad language to himself, and go up-stair.
'you be poorly, ma'am,' say Rachel, survey I with deep
anxiety.
'it be too true, Rachel,' say I, answer her sad look rather
than her word.
'I know it, or I wouldnot have mention such a thing.'
'but donot you trouble yourself about it,' say I, kiss she
pale, time-waste cheek. 'I can bear it well than you imagine.'
'yes, you be always for "bear." but if I be you I wouldnot
bear it; Iwould give way to it, and cry right hard! and Iwould talk too,
I just would - Iwould let he know what it be to - '
'I have talk,' say I; 'Ihave say enough.'
'then Iwould cry,' persist she. 'I wouldnot look so white and so
calm, and burst my heart with keep it in.'
'I have cry,' say I, smile, in spite of my misery; 'and I be
calm now, really: so donot discompose I again, nurse: let we say
no more about it, and donot mention it to the servant. there, you
may go now. good-night; and donot disturb your rest for I: I
shall sleep well - if I can.'
notwithstanding this resolution, I find my bed so intolerable
that, before two o'clock, I rise, and light my candle by the
rushlight that be still burn, I get my desk and sit down in my
dressing-gown to recount the event of the past evening. it be
well to be so occupied than to be lie in bed torture my brain
with recollection of the far past and anticipation of the
dreadful future. I have find relief in describe the very
circumstance that have destroy my peace, as well as the little
trivial detail attendant upon their discovery. no sleep I could
have get this night would have do so much towards compose my
mind, and prepare I to meet the trial of the day. I fancy so,
at least; and yet, when I cease writing, I find my head ache
terribly; and when I look into the glass, I be startle at my
haggard, wear appearance.
Rachel have be to dress I, and say I have have a sad night of it,
she can see. Milicent have just look in to ask I how I be. I
tell she I be well, but to excuse my appearance admit I have
have a restless night. I wish this day be over! I shudder at the
thought of go down to breakfast. how shall I encounter they
all? yet let I remember it be not I that be guilty: I have no
cause to fear; and if they scorn I as a victim of their guilt, I
can pity their folly and despise their scorn.
CHAPTER XXXIV
Evening. - Breakfast pass well over: I be calm and cool
throughout. I answer composedly all inquiry respect my
health; and whatever be unusual in my look or manner be generally
attribute to the trifling indisposition that have occasion my
early retirement last night. but how be I to get over the ten or
twelve day that must yet elapse before they go? yet why so long
for their departure? when they be go, how shall I get through
the month or year of my future life in company with that man - my
great enemy? for none could injure I as he have do. oh! when
I think how fondly, how foolishly I have love he, how madly I
have trust he, how constantly I have labour, and study, and
pray, and struggle for his advantage; and how cruelly he have
trample on my love, betray my trust, scorn my prayer and
tear, and effort for his preservation, crush my hope,
destroy my youth's good feeling, and doom I to a life of
hopeless misery, as far as man can do it, it be not enough to say
that I no long love my husband - I hate he! the word star I
in the face like a guilty confession, but it be true: I hate he -
I hate he! but God have mercy on his miserable soul! and make he
see and feel his guilt - I ask no other vengeance! if he could but
fully know and truly feel my wrong I should be well avenge, and I
could freely pardon all; but he be so lost, so harden in his
heartless depravity, that in this life I believe he never will.
but it be useless dwelling on this theme: let I seek once more to
dissipate reflection in the minor detail of pass event.
Mr. Hargrave have annoy I all day long with his serious,
sympathising, and (as he think) unobtrusive politeness. if it
be more obtrusive it would trouble I less, for then I could snub
he; but, as it be, he contrive to appear so really kind and
thoughtful that I cannot do so without rudeness and seeming
ingratitude. I sometimes think I ought to give he credit for the
good feeling he simulate so well; and then again, I think it be my
duty to suspect he under the peculiar circumstance in which I be
place. his kindness may not all be feign; but still, let not
the pure impulse of gratitude to he induce I to forget myself:
let I remember the game of chess, the expression he use on the
occasion, and those indescribable look of his, that so justly
rouse my indignation, and I think I shall be safe enough. I have
do well to record they so minutely.
I think he wish to find an opportunity of speak to I alone:
he have seem to be on the watch all day; but I have take care to
disappoint he - not that I fear anything he could say, but I have
trouble enough without the addition of his insulting consolation,
condolence, or whatever else he might attempt; and, for Milicent's
sake, I do not wish to quarrel with he. he excuse himself from
go out to shoot with the other gentleman in the morning, under
the pretext of have letter to write; and instead of retire for
that purpose into the library, he send for his desk into the
morning-room, where I be seat with Milicent and Lady Lowborough.
they have betake themselves to their work; I, less to divert my
mind than to deprecate conversation, have provide myself with a
book. Milicent see that I wish to be quiet, and accordingly let
I alone. Annabella, doubtless, see it too: but that be no
reason why she should restrain her tongue, or curb her cheerful
spirit: she accordingly chat away, address herself almost
exclusively to I, and with the utmost assurance and familiarity,
grow the more animated and friendly the colder and briefer my
answer become. Mr. Hargrave see that I could ill endure it, and,
look up from his desk, he answer her question and
observation for I, as far as he could, and attempt to transfer
her social attention from I to himself; but it would not do.
perhaps she think I have a headache, and could not bear to talk;
at any rate, she see that her loquacious vivacity annoy I, as I
could tell by the malicious pertinacity with which she persist.
but I check it effectually by put into her hand the book I
have be try to read, on the fly-leaf of which I have hastily
scribble, -
'I be too well acquainted with your character and conduct to feel
any real friendship for you, and as I be without your talent for
dissimulation, I cannot assume the appearance of it. I must,
therefore, beg that hereafter all familiar intercourse may cease
between we; and if I still continue to treat you with civility, as
if you be a woman worthy of consideration and respect, understand
that it be out of regard for your cousin Milicent's feeling, not
for your.'
upon peruse this she turn scarlet, and bit her lip. covertly
tear away the leaf, she crumple it up and put it in the fire,
and then employ herself in turn over the page of the book,
and, really or apparently, peruse its content. in a little
while Milicent announce it her intention to repair to the nursery,
and ask if I would accompany she.
'Annabella will excuse we,' say she; 'shebe busy read.'
'no, I willnot,' cry Annabella, suddenly look up, and throw
her book on the table; 'I want to speak to Helen a minute. you may
go, Milicent, and shewill follow in a while.' (Milicent go.)
'will you oblige I, Helen?' continue she.
her impudence astound I; but I comply, and follow she into
the library. she close the door, and walk up to the fire.
'who tell you this?' say she.
'no one: I be not incapable of see for myself.'
'ah, you be suspicious!' cry she, smile, with a gleam of hope.
Hitherto there have be a kind of desperation in her hardihood; now
she be evidently relieve.
'if I be suspicious,' I reply, 'I should have discover your
infamy long before. no, Lady Lowborough, I do not find my charge
upon suspicion.'
'on what do you find it, then?' say she, throw herself into an
arm-chair, and stretch out her foot to the fender, with an
obvious effort to appear compose.
'I enjoy a moonlight ramble as well as you,' I answer, steadily
fix my eye upon she; 'and the shrubbery happen to be one of my
favourite resort.'
she colour again excessively, and remain silent, press she
finger against her tooth, and gaze into the fire. I watch she
a few moment with a feeling of malevolent gratification; then,
move towards the door, I calmly ask if she have anything more to
say.
'yes, yes!' cry she eagerly, start up from her reclining
posture. 'I want to know if you will tell Lord Lowborough?'
'suppose I do?'
'well, if you be disposed to publish the matter, I cannot dissuade
you, of course - but there will be terrible work if you do - and if
you donot, I shall think you the most generous of mortal being -
and if there be anything in the world I can do for you - anything
short of - ' she hesitate.
'short of renounce your guilty connection with my husband, I
suppose you mean?' say I.
she pause, in evident disconcertion and perplexity, mingle with
anger she dare not show.
'I cannot renounce what be dearer than life,' she mutter, in a
low, hurried tone. then, suddenly raise her head and fix she
gleam eye upon I, she continue earnestly: 'but, Helen - or
Mrs. Huntingdon, or whatever you would have I call you - will you
tell he? if you be generous, here be a fitting opportunity for
the exercise of your magnanimity: if you be proud, here be I -
your rival - ready to acknowledge myself your debtor for an act of
the most noble forbearance.'
'I shall not tell he.'
'you will not!' cry she, delightedly. 'accept my sincere thank,
then!'
she spring up, and offer I her hand. I draw back.
'give I no thank; it be not for your sake that I refrain.
neither be it an act of any forbearance: I have no wish to publish
your shame. I should be sorry to distress your husband with the
knowledge of it.'
'and Milicent? will you tell she?'
'no: on the contrary, I shall do my utmost to conceal it from she.
I would not for much that she should know the infamy and disgrace
of her relation!'
'you use hard word, Mrs. Huntingdon, but I can pardon you.'
'and now, Lady Lowborough,' continue I, 'let I counsel you to
leave this house as soon as possible. you must be aware that your
continuance here be excessively disagreeable to I - not for Mr.
Huntingdon's sake,' say I, observe the dawn of a malicious smile
of triumph on her face - 'you be welcome to he, if you like he,
as far as I be concerned - but because it be painful to be always
disguise my true sentiment respect you, and strain to keep
up an appearance of civility and respect towards one for whom I
have not the most distant shadow of esteem; and because, if you
stay, your conduct cannot possibly remain conceal much long
from the only two person in the house who do not know it already.
and, for your husband's sake, Annabella, and even for your own, I
wish - I earnestly advise and entreat you to break off this
unlawful connection at once, and return to your duty while you may,
before the dreadful consequence - '
'yes, yes, of course,' say she, interrupt I with a gesture of
impatience. 'but I cannot go, Helen, before the time appoint for
our departure. what possible pretext could I frame for such a
thing? whether I propose go back alone - which Lowborough
would not hear of - or take he with I, the very circumstance
itself would be certain to excite suspicion - and when our visit be
so nearly at an end too - little more than a week - surely you can
endure my presence so long! I will not annoy you with any more of
my friendly impertinence.'
'well, I have nothing more to say to you.'
'have you mention this affair to Huntingdon?' ask she, as I be
leave the room.
'how dare you mention his name to I!' be the only answer I give.
no word have pass between we since, but such as outward decency
or pure necessity demand.
CHAPTER XXXV
Nineteenth. - in proportion as Lady Lowborough find she have
nothing to fear from I, and as the time of departure draw nigh,
the more audacious and insolent she become. she do not scruple
to speak to my husband with affectionate familiarity in my
presence, when no one else be by, and be particularly fond of
display her interest in his health and welfare, or in anything
that concern he, as if for the purpose of contrast her kind
solicitude with my cold indifference. and he reward she by such
smile and glance, such whisper word, or boldly-speak
insinuation, indicative of his sense of her goodness and my
neglect, as make the blood rush into my face, in spite of myself -
for I would be utterly regardless of it all - deaf and blind to
everything that pass between they, since the more I show myself
sensible of their wickedness the more she triumph in her victory,
and the more he flatter himself that I love he devotedly still,
in spite of my pretended indifference. on such occasion I have
sometimes be startle by a subtle, fiendish suggestion incite
I to show he the contrary by a seeming encouragement of
Hargrave's advance; but such idea be banish in a moment with
horror and self-abasement; and then I hate he tenfold more than
ever for have bring I to this! - God pardon I for it and all
my sinful thought! instead of be humble and purify by my
affliction, I feel that they be turn my nature into gall.
this must be my fault as much as theirs that wrong I. no true
Christian could cherish such bitter feeling as I do against he
and she, especially the latter: he, I still feel that I could
pardon - freely, gladly - on the slight token of repentance; but
she - word cannot utter my abhorrence. reason forbid, but
passion urge strongly; and I must pray and struggle long ere I
subdue it.
it be well that she be leave to-morrow, for I could not well
endure her presence for another day. this morning she rise early
than usual. I find she in the room alone, when I go down to
breakfast.
'oh, Helen! be it you?' say she, turn as I enter.
I give an involuntary start back on see she, at which she
utter a short laugh, observe, 'I think we be both
disappoint.'
I come forward and busy myself with the breakfast thing.
'this be the last day I shall burden your hospitality,' say she,
as she seat herself at the table. 'ah, here come one that will
not rejoice at it!' she murmur, half to herself, as Arthur
enter the room.
he shake hand with she and wish her good-morning: then, look
lovingly in her face, and still retain her hand in his, murmur
pathetically, 'the last - last day!'
'yes,' say she with some asperity; 'and I rise early to make the
good of it - I have be here alone this half-hour, and you - you
lazy creature - '
'well, I think I be early too,' say he; 'but,' drop his
voice almost to a whisper, 'you see we be not alone.'
'we never be,' return she. but they be almost as good as
alone, for I be now stand at the window, watch the cloud,
and struggle to suppress my wrath.
some more word pass between they, which, happily, I do not
overhear; but Annabella have the audacity to come and place herself
beside I, and even to put her hand upon my shoulder and say
softly, 'you need not grudge he to I, Helen, for I love he more
than ever you could do.'
this put I beside myself. I take her hand and violently dash it
from I, with an expression of abhorrence and indignation that
could not be suppress. startle, almost appal, by this sudden
outbreak, she recoil in silence. I would have give way to my
fury and say more, but Arthur's low laugh recall I to myself.
I check the half-utter invective, and scornfully turn away,
regret that I have give he so much amusement. he be still
laugh when Mr. Hargrave make his appearance. how much of the
scene he have witness I do not know, for the door be ajar when he
enter. he greet his host and his cousin both coldly, and I
with a glance intend to express the deep sympathy mingle with
high admiration and esteem.
'how much allegiance do you owe to that man?' he ask below his
breath, as he stand beside I at the window, affect to be make
observation on the weather.
'none,' I answer. and immediately return to the table, I
employ myself in make the tea. he follow, and would have
enter into some kind of conversation with I, but the other
guest be now begin to assemble, and I take no more notice of
he, except to give he his coffee.
after breakfast, determined to pass as little of the day as
possible in company with Lady Lowborough, I quietly steal away from
the company and retire to the library. Mr. Hargrave follow I
thither, under pretence of come for a book; and first, turn to
the shelf, he select a volume, and then quietly, but by no
mean timidly, approach I, he stand beside I, rest his hand
on the back of my chair, and say softly, 'and so you consider
yourself free at last?'
'yes,' say I, without move, or raise my eye from my book,
'free to do anything but offend God and my conscience.'
there be a momentary pause.
'very right,' say he, 'provide your conscience be not too
morbidly tender, and your idea of God not too erroneously severe;
but can you suppose it would offend that benevolent be to make
the happiness of one who would die for your? - to raise a devoted
heart from purgatorial torment to a state of heavenly bliss, when
you could do it without the slight injury to yourself or any
other?'
this be speak in a low, earnest, melt tone, as he bend over
I. I now raise my head; and steadily confront his gaze, I
answer calmly, 'Mr. Hargrave, do you mean to insult I?'
he be not prepare for this. he pause a moment to recover the
shook; then, draw himself up and remove his hand from my
chair, he answer, with proud sadness, - 'that be not my
intention.'
I just glance towards the door, with a slight movement of the
head, and then return to my book. he immediately withdraw. this
be well than if I have answer with more word, and in the
passionate spirit to which my first impulse would have prompt.
what a good thing it be to be able to command one's temper! I must
labour to cultivate this inestimable quality: God only know how
often I shall need it in this rough, dark road that lie before I.
in the course of the morning I drive over to the Grove with the two
lady, to give Milicent an opportunity for bid farewell to her
mother and sister. they persuade she to stay with they the rest
of the day, Mrs. Hargrave promise to bring she back in the
evening and remain till the party break up on the morrow.
consequently, Lady Lowborough and I have the pleasure of return
TETE-e-tete in the carriage together. for the first mile or two we
keep silence, I look out of my window, and she lean back in
her corner. but I be not go to restrict myself to any
particular position for she; when I be tired of lean forward,
with the cold, raw wind in my face, and survey the russet hedge
and the damp, tangle grass of their bank, I give it up and leant
back too. with her usual impudence, my companion then make some
attempt to get up a conversation; but the monosyllable 'yes,' or
'no' or 'humph,' be the utmost her several remark could elicit
from I. at last, on she ask my opinion upon some immaterial
point of discussion, I answer, - 'why do you wish to talk to I,
Lady Lowborough? you must know what I think of you.'
'well, if you will be so bitter against I,' reply she, 'I cannot
help it; but Ibe not go to sulk for anybody.'
our short drive be now at an end. as soon as the carriage door
be open, she spring out, and go down the park to meet the
gentleman, who be just return from the wood. of course I do
not follow.
but I have not do with her impudence yet: after dinner, I retire
to the drawing-room, as usual, and she accompany I, but I have
the two child with I, and I give they my whole attention, and
determine to keep they till the gentleman come, or till Milicent
arrive with her mother. little Helen, however, be soon tired of
playing, and insist upon go to sleep; and while I sit on the
sofa with she on my knee, and Arthur seat beside I, gently
play with her soft, flaxen hair, Lady Lowborough composedly come
and place herself on the other side.
'to-morrow, Mrs. Huntingdon,' say she, 'you will be deliver from
my presence, which, no doubt, you will be very glad of - it be
natural you should; but do you know I have render you a great
service? shall I tell you what it be?'
'I shall be glad to hear of any service you have render I,' say
I, determine to be calm, for I know by the tone of her voice she
want to provoke I.
'well,' resume she, 'have you not observe the salutary change in
Mr. Huntingdon? donot you see what a sober, temperate man he be
become? you see with regret the sad habit he be contract, I
know: and I know you do your utmost to deliver he from they, but
without success, until I come to your assistance. I tell he in
few word that I could not bear to see he degrade himself so, and
that I should cease to - no matter what I tell he, but you see the
reformation I have work; and you ought to thank I for it.'
I rise and ring for the nurse.
'but I desire no thank,' she continue; 'all the return I ask be,
that you will take care of he when I be go, and not, by
harshness and neglect, drive he back to his old course.'
I be almost sick with passion, but Rachel be now at the door. I
point to the child, for I could not trust myself to speak:
she take they away, and I follow.
'will you, Helen?' continue the speaker.
I give she a look that blight the malicious smile on her face, or
check it, at least for a moment, and depart. in the ante-room
I meet Mr. Hargrave. he see I be in no humour to be speak to, and
suffer I to pass without a word; but when, after a few minute'
seclusion in the library, I have regain my composure, and be
return to join Mrs. Hargrave and Milicent, whom I have just hear
come downstairs and go into the drawing-room, I find he there
still linger in the dimly-light apartment, and evidently
wait for I.
'Mrs. Huntingdon,' say he as I pass, 'will you allow I one
word?'
'what be it then? be quick, if you please.'
'I offend you this morning; and I cannot live under your
displeasure.'
'then go, and sin no more,' reply I, turn away.
'no, no!' say he, hastily, set himself before I. 'pardon I,
but I must have your forgiveness. I leave you to-morrow, and I may
not have an opportunity of speak to you again. I be wrong to
forget myself and you, as I do; but let I implore you to forget
and forgive my rash presumption, and think of I as if those word
have never be speak; for, believe I, I regret they deeply, and
the loss of your esteem be too severe a penalty: I cannot bear
it.'
'Forgetfulness be not to be purchase with a wish; and I cannot
bestow my esteem on all who desire it, unless they deserve it too.'
'I shall think my life well spend in labour to deserve it, if
you will but pardon this offence - will you?'
'yes.'
'yes! but that be coldly speak. give I your hand and Iwill
believe you. you willnot? then, Mrs. Huntingdon, you do not forgive
I!'
'yes; here it be, and my forgiveness with it: only, SIN no more.'
he press my cold hand with sentimental fervour, but say nothing,
and stand aside to let I pass into the room, where all the company
be now assemble. Mr. Grimsby be seat near the door: on
see I enter, almost immediately follow by Hargrave, he leer
at I with a glance of intolerable significance, as I pass. I
look he in the face, till he sullenly turn away, if not
ashamed, at least confound for the moment. Meantime Hattersley
have seize Hargrave by the arm, and be whisper something in his
ear - some coarse joke, no doubt, for the latter neither laugh
nor speak in answer, but, turn from he with a slight curl of
the lip, disengage himself and go to his mother, who be tell
Lord Lowborough how many reason she have to be proud of her son.
thank heaven, they be all go to-morrow.
CHAPTER XXXVI
December 20th, 1824. - this be the third anniversary of our
felicitous union. it be now two month since our guest leave we to
the enjoyment of each other's society; and I have have nine week'
experience of this new phase of conjugal life - two person live
together, as master and mistress of the house, and father and
mother of a winsome, merry little child, with the mutual
understanding that there be no love, friendship, or sympathy
between they. as far as in I lie, I endeavour to live peaceably
with he: I treat he with unimpeachable civility, give up my
convenience to his, wherever it may reasonably be do, and consult
he in a business-like way on household affair, defer to his
pleasure and judgment, even when I know the latter to be inferior
to my own.
as for he, for the first week or two, he be peevish and low,
fret, I suppose, over his dear Annabella's departure, and
particularly ill-temper to I: everything I do be wrong; I be
cold-hearted, hard, insensate; my sour, pale face be perfectly
repulsive; my voice make he shudder; he know not how he could live
through the winter with I; I should kill he by inch. again I
propose a separation, but it would not do: he be not go to be
the talk of all the old gossip in the neighbourhood: he would not
have it say that he be such a brute his wife could not live with
he. no; he must contrive to bear with I.
'I must contrive to bear with you, you mean,' say I; 'for so long
as I discharge my function of steward and house-keeper, so
conscientiously and well, without pay and without thank, you
cannot afford to part with I. I shall therefore remit these
duty when my bondage become intolerable.' this threat, I
think, would serve to keep he in check, if anything would.
I believe he be much disappointed that I do not feel his
offensive saying more acutely, for when he have say anything
particularly well calculate to hurt my feeling, he would stare I
searchingly in the face, and then grumble against my 'marble heart'
or my 'brutal insensibility.' if I have bitterly weep and deplore
his lose affection, he would, perhaps, have condescend to pity
I, and take I into favour for a while, just to comfort his
solitude and console he for the absence of his beloved Annabella,
until he could meet she again, or some more fitting substitute.
thank heaven, I be not so weak as that! I be infatuate once with
a foolish, besotte affection, that clung to he in spite of his
unworthiness, but it be fairly go now - wholly crush and
wither away; and he have none but himself and his vice to thank
for it.
at first (in compliance with his sweet lady's injunction, I
suppose), he abstain wonderfully well from seek to solace his
care in wine; but at length he begin to relax his virtuous
effort, and now and then exceed a little, and still continue to
do so; nay, sometimes, not a little. when he be under the exciting
influence of these excess, he sometimes fire up and attempt to
play the brute; and then I take little pain to suppress my scorn
and disgust. when he be under the depressing influence of the
after-consequence, he bemoan his suffering and his error, and
charge they both upon I; he know such indulgence injure his
health, and do he more harm than good; but he say I drive he
to it by my unnatural, unwomanly conduct; it will be the ruin of
he in the end, but it be all my fault; and then I be rouse to
defend myself, sometimes with bitter recrimination. this be a kind
of injustice I cannot patiently endure. have I not labour long
and hard to save he from this very vice? would I not labour still
to deliver he from it if I could? but could I do so by fawn
upon he and caress he when I know that he scorn I? be it my
fault that I have lose my influence with he, or that he have
forfeit every claim to my regard? and should I seek a
reconciliation with he, when I feel that I abhor he, and that he
despise I? and while he continue still to correspond with Lady
Lowborough, as I know he do? no, never, never, never! he may
drink himself dead, but it be not my fault!
yet I do my part to save he still: I give he to understand that
drinking make his eye dull, and his face red and bloated; and
that it tend to render he imbecile in body and mind; and if
Annabella be to see he as often as I do, she would speedily be
disenchant; and that she certainly will withdraw her favour from
he, if he continue such course. such a mode of admonition win
only coarse abuse for I - and, indeed, I almost feel as if I
deserve it, for I hate to use such argument; but they sink into
his stupefied heart, and make he pause, and ponder, and abstain,
more than anything else I could say.
at present I be enjoy a temporary relief from his presence: he
be go with Hargrave to join a distant hunt, and will probably not
be back before to-morrow evening. how differently I use to feel
his absence!
Mr. Hargrave be still at the Grove. he and Arthur frequently meet
to pursue their rural sport together: he often call upon we
here, and Arthur not unfrequently rid over to he. I do not
think either of these soi-disant friend be overflow with love
for the other; but such intercourse serve to get the time on, and
I be very willing it should continue, as it save I some hour of
discomfort in Arthur's society, and give he some well
employment than the sottish indulgence of his sensual appetite.
the only objection I have to Mr. Hargrave's be in the
neighbourhood, be that the fear of meet he at the Grove
prevent I from see his sister so often as I otherwise should;
for, of late, he have conduct himself towards I with such
unerring propriety, that I have almost forget his former
conduct. I suppose he be strive to 'win my esteem.' if he
continue to act in this way, he may win it; but what then? the
moment he attempt to demand anything more, he will lose it again.
February 10th. - it be a hard, embitter thing to have one's kind
feeling and good intention cast back in one's tooth. I be
begin to relent towards my wretched partner; to pity his
forlorn, comfortless condition, unalleviate as it be by the
consolation of intellectual resource and the answer of a good
conscience towards God; and to think I ought to sacrifice my pride,
and renew my effort once again to make his home agreeable and lead
he back to the path of virtue; not by false profession of love,
and not by pretended remorse, but by mitigate my habitual
coldness of manner, and commute my frigid civility into kindness
wherever an opportunity occur; and not only be I begin to
think so, but I have already begin to act upon the thought - and
what be the result? no answer spark of kindness, no awakening
penitence, but an unappeasable ill-humour, and a spirit of
tyrannous exaction that increase with indulgence, and a lurking
gleam of self-complacent triumph at every detection of relent
softness in my manner, that congeal I to marble again as often
as it recur; and this morning he finish the business:- I think
the petrifaction be so completely effect at last that nothing can
melt I again. among his letter be one which he peruse with
symptom of unusual gratification, and then throw it across the
table to I, with the admonition, -
'there! read that, and take a lesson by it!'
it be in the free, dash hand of Lady Lowborough. I glance at
the first page; it seem full of extravagant protestation of
affection; impetuous longing for a speedy reunion - and impious
defiance of God's mandate, and railing against his providence for
have cast their lot asunder, and doom they both to the hateful
bondage of alliance with those they could not love. he give a
slight titter on see I change colour. I fold up the letter,
rise, and return it to he, with no remark, but -
'thank you, I will take a lesson by it!'
my little Arthur be stand between his knee, delightedly
play with the bright, ruby ring on his finger. urge by a
sudden, imperative impulse to deliver my son from that
contaminate influence, I catch he up in my arm and carry he
with I out of the room. not like this abrupt removal, the child
begin to pout and cry. this be a new stab to my already torture
heart. I would not let he go; but, take he with I into the
library, I shut the door, and, kneel on the floor beside he, I
embrace he, kiss he, weep over with he with passionate
fondness. rather frightened than console by this, he turn
struggle from I, and cry out aloud for his papa. I release
he from my arm, and never be more bitter tear than those that
now conceal he from my blinded, burn eye. hear his
cry, the father come to the room. I instantly turn away, lest
he should see and misconstrue my emotion. he swear at I, and take
the now pacified child away.
it be hard that my little darling should love he more than I; and
that, when the well-being and culture of my son be all I have to
live for, I should see my influence destroy by one whose selfish
affection be more injurious than the cold indifference or the
harsh tyranny could be. if I, for his good, deny he some
trifle indulgence, he go to his father, and the latter, in
spite of his selfish indolence, will even give himself some trouble
to meet the child's desire: if I attempt to curb his will, or
look gravely on he for some act of childish disobedience, he know
his other parent will smile and take his part against I. thus,
not only have I the father's spirit in the son to contend against,
the germ of his evil tendency to search out and eradicate, and
his corrupting intercourse and example in after-life to counteract,
but already he counteract my arduous labour for the child's
advantage, destroy my influence over his tender mind, and rob I
of his very love; I have no earthly hope but this, and he seem to
take a diabolical delight in tear it away.
but it be wrong to despair; I will remember the counsel of the
inspire writer to he 'that feareth the Lord and obeyeth the voice
of his servant, that sitteth in darkness and hath no light; let he
trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God!'
CHAPTER XXXVII
December 20th, 1825. - another year be past; and I be weary of this
life. and yet I cannot wish to leave it: whatever affliction
assail I here, I cannot wish to go and leave my darling in this
dark and wicked world alone, without a friend to guide he through
its weary maze, to warn he of its thousand snare, and guard he
from the peril that beset he on every hand. I be not well fit
to be his only companion, I know; but there be no other to supply
my place. I be too grave to minister to his amusement and enter
into his infantile sport as a nurse or a mother ought to do, and
often his burst of gleeful merriment trouble and alarm I; I see
in they his father's spirit and temperament, and I tremble for the
consequence; and too often damp the innocent mirth I ought to
share. that father, on the contrary, have no weight of sadness on
his mind; be trouble with no fear, no scruple concern his
son's future welfare; and at evening especially, the time when
the child see he the most and the oftenest, he be always
particularly jocund and open-hearted: ready to laugh and to jest
with anything or anybody but I, and I be particularly silent and
sad: therefore, of course, the child dot upon his seemingly
joyous amusing, ever-indulgent papa, and will at any time gladly
exchange my company for his. this disturb I greatly; not so much
for the sake of my son's affection (though I do prize that highly,
and though I feel it be my right, and know I have do much to earn
it) as for that influence over he which, for his own advantage, I
would strive to purchase and retain, and which for very spite his
father delight to rob I of, and, from motif of mere idle
egotism, be pleased to win to himself; make no use of it but to
torment I and ruin the child. my only consolation be, that he
spend comparatively little of his time at home, and, during the
month he pass in London or elsewhere, I have a chance of
recover the ground I have lose, and overcome with good the evil
he have work by his wilful mismanagement. but then it be a
bitter trial to behold he, on his return, do his utmost to
subvert my labour and transform my innocent, affectionate,
tractable darling into a selfish, disobedient, and mischievous boy;
thereby prepare the soil for those vice he have so successfully
cultivate in his own perverted nature.
happily, there be none of Arthur's 'friend' invite to Grassdale
last autumn: he take himself off to visit some of they instead. I
wish he would always do so, and I wish his friend be numerous
and love enough to keep he amongst they all the year round. Mr.
Hargrave, considerably to my annoyance, do not go with he; but I
think I have do with that gentleman at last.
for seven or eight month he behave so remarkably well, and
manage so skilfully too, that I be almost completely off my
guard, and be really begin to look upon he as a friend, and
even to treat he as such, with certain prudent restriction (which
I deem scarcely necessary); when, presume upon my unsuspecting
kindness, he think he might venture to overstep the bound of
decent moderation and propriety that have so long restrain he.
it be on a pleasant evening at the close of May: I be wander
in the park, and he, on see I there as he ride past, make bold
to enter and approach I, dismount and leave his horse at the
gate. this be the first time he have venture to come within its
inclosure since I have be leave alone, without the sanction of his
mother's or sister's company, or at least the excuse of a message
from they. but he manage to appear so calm and easy, so
respectful and self-possess in his friendliness, that, though a
little surprised, I be neither alarmed nor offend at the unusual
liberty, and he walk with I under the ash-tree and by the
water-side, and talk, with considerable animation, good taste,
and intelligence, on many subject, before I begin to think about
get rid of he. then, after a pause, during which we both
stand gaze on the calm, blue water - I revolve in my mind the
good mean of politely dismiss my companion, he, no doubt,
ponder other matter equally alien to the sweet sight and
sound that alone be present to his sens, - he suddenly
electrify I by begin, in a peculiar tone, low, soft, but
perfectly distinct, to pour forth the most unequivocal expression
of earnest and passionate love; plead his cause with all the
bold yet artful eloquence he could summon to his aid. but I cut
short his appeal, and repulse he so determinately, so decidedly,
and with such a mixture of scornful indignation, temper with
cool, dispassionate sorrow and pity for his benighted mind, that he
withdraw, astonish, mortify, and discomforte; and, a few day
after, I hear that he have depart for London. he return,
however, in eight or nine week, and do not entirely keep aloof
from I, but comport himself in so remarkable a manner that his
quick-sighted sister could not fail to notice the change.
'what have you do to Walter, Mrs. Huntingdon?' say she one
morning, when I have call at the Grove, and he have just leave the
room after exchange a few word of the cold civility. 'he have
be so extremely ceremonious and stately of late, I cannot imagine
what it be all about, unless you have desperately offend he.
tell I what it be, that I may be your mediator, and make you
friend again.'
'I have do nothing willingly to offend he,' say I. 'if he be
offend, he can well tell you himself what it be about.'
'Iwill ask he,' cry the giddy girl, spring up and put she
head out of the window: 'hebe only in the garden - Walter!'
'no, no, Esther! you will seriously displease I if you do; and I
shall leave you immediately, and not come again for month -
perhaps year.'
'do you call, Esther?' say her brother, approach the window
from without.
'yes; I want to ask you - '
'good-morning, Esther,' say I, talk her hand and give it a
severe squeeze.
'to ask you,' continue she, 'to get I a rose for Mrs.
Huntingdon.' he depart. 'Mrs. Huntingdon,' she exclaim,
turn to I and still hold I fast by the hand, 'Ibe quite
shocked at you - yoube just as angry, and distant, and cold as he
be: and Ibe determined you shall be as good friend as ever before
you go.'
'Esther, how can you be so rude!' cry Mrs. Hargrave, who be
seat gravely knit in her easy-chair. 'surely, you never will
learn to conduct yourself like a lady!'
'well, mamma, you say yourself - ' but the young lady be
silence by the uplifted finger of her mamma, accompany with a
very stern shake of the head.
'benot she cross?' whisper she to I; but, before I could add my
share of reproof, Mr. Hargrave reappear at the window with a
beautiful moss-rise in his hand.
'here, Esther, Ihave bring you the rose,' say he, extend it
towards she.
'give it her yourself, you blockhead!' cry she, recoil with a
spring from between we.
'Mrs. Huntingdon would rather receive it from you,' reply he, in
a very serious tone, but lower his voice that his mother might
not hear. his sister take the rose and give it to I.
'my brother's compliment, Mrs. Huntingdon, and he hop you and he
will come to a well understanding by-and-by. will that do,
Walter?' add the saucy girl, turn to he and put her arm
round his neck, as he stand lean upon the sill of the window -
'or should I have say that you be sorry you be so touchy? or
that you hope she will pardon your offence?'
'you silly girl! you donot know what you be talk about,'
reply he gravely.
'indeed I donot: for Ibe quite in the dark!'
'now, Esther,' interpose Mrs. Hargrave, who, if equally benighted
on the subject of our estrangement, see at least that her daughter
be behave very improperly, 'I must insist upon your leave the
room!'
'pray donot, Mrs. Hargrave, for Ibe go to leave it myself,' say
I, and immediately make my adieux.
about a week after Mr. Hargrave bring his sister to see I. he
conduct himself, at first, with his usual cold, distant, half-
stately, half-melancholy, altogether injure air; but Esther make
no remark upon it this time: she have evidently be school into
well manner. she talk to I, and laugh and romp with
little Arthur, her love and love playmate. he, somewhat to my
discomfort, entice she from the room to have a run in the hall,
and thence into the garden. I get up to stir the fire. Mr.
Hargrave ask if I feel cold, and shut the door - a very
unseasonable piece of officiousness, for I have meditate follow
the noisy playfellow if they do not speedily return. he then
take the liberty of walk up to the fire himself, and ask I
if I be aware that Mr. Huntingdon be now at the seat of Lord
Lowborough, and likely to continue there some time.
'no; but itbe no matter,' I answer carelessly; and if my cheek
glow like fire, it be rather at the question than the
information it convey.
'you donot object to it?' he say.
'not at all, if Lord Lowborough like his company.'
'you have no love leave for he, then?'
'not the least.'
'I know that - I know you be too high-minded and pure in your own
nature to continue to regard one so utterly false and polluted with
any feeling but those of indignation and scornful abhorrence!'
'be he not your friend?' say I, turn my eye from the fire to
his face, with perhaps a slight touch of those feeling he assign
to another.
'he be,' reply he, with the same calm gravity as before; 'but do
not wrong I by suppose that I could continue my friendship and
esteem to a man who could so infamously, so impiously forsake and
injure one so transcendently - well, I willnot speak of it. but tell
I, do you never think of revenge?'
'revenge! no - what good would that do? - it would make he no
well, and I no happy.'
'I donot know how to talk to you, Mrs. Huntingdon,' say he,
smile; 'you be only half a woman - your nature must be half
human, half angelic. such goodness overawe I; I donot know what
to make of it.'
'then, sir, I fear you must be very much bad than you should be,
if I, a mere ordinary mortal, be, by your own confession, so vastly
your superior; and since there exist so little sympathy between
we, I think we have well each look out for some more congenial
companion.' and forthwith move to the window, I begin to look
out for my little son and his gay young friend.
'no, I be the ordinary mortal, I maintain,' reply Mr. Hargrave.
'I will not allow myself to be bad than my fellow; but you,
Madam - I equally maintain there be nobody like you. but be you
happy?' he ask in a serious tone.
'as happy as some other, I suppose.'
'be you as happy as you desire to be?'
'no one be so blest as that come to on this side eternity.'
'one thing I know,' return he, with a deep sad sigh; 'you be
immeasurably happy than I be.'
'I be very sorry for you, then,' I could not help reply.
'be you, indeed? no, for if you be you would be glad to relieve
I.'
'and so I should if I could do so without injure myself or any
other.'
'and can you suppose that I should wish you to injure yourself?
no: on the contrary, it be your own happiness I long for more than
mine. you be miserable now, Mrs. Huntingdon,' continue he,
look I boldly in the face. 'you do not complain, but I see -
and feel - and know that you be miserable - and must remain so as
long as you keep those wall of impenetrable ice about your still
warm and palpitate heart; and I be miserable, too. deign to
smile on I and I be happy: trust I, and you shall be happy also,
for if you be a woman I can make you so - and I will do it in
spite of yourself!' he mutter between his tooth; 'and as for
other, the question be between ourselves alone: you cannot injure
your husband, you know, and no one else have any concern in the
matter.'
'I have a son, Mr. Hargrave, and you have a mother,' say I,
retire from the window, whither he have follow I.
'they need not know,' he begin; but before anything more could be
say on either side, Esther and Arthur re-enter the room. the
former glance at Walter's flushed, excited countenance, and then
at mine - a little flushed and excite too, I daresay, though from
far different cause. she must have think we have be
quarrel desperately, and be evidently perplex and disturb
at the circumstance; but she be too polite or too much afraid of
her brother's anger to refer to it. she seat herself on the
sofa, and put back her bright, golden ringlet, that be
scatter in wild profusion over her face, she immediately begin to
talk about the garden and her little playfellow, and continue to
chatter away in her usual strain till her brother summon she to
depart.
'if I have speak too warmly, forgive I,' he murmur on take
his leave, 'or I shall never forgive myself.' Esther smile and
glance at I: I merely bow, and her countenance fall. she
think it a poor return for Walter's generous concession, and be
disappointed in her friend. poor child, she little know the world
she live in!
Mr. Hargrave have not an opportunity of meet I again in private
for several week after this; but when he do meet I there be
less of pride and more of touch melancholy in his manner than
before. oh, how he annoy I! I be oblige at last almost
entirely to remit my visit to the Grove, at the expense of deeply
offend Mrs. Hargrave and seriously afflict poor Esther, who
really value my society for want of well, and who ought not to
suffer for the fault of her brother. but that indefatigable foe
be not yet vanquish: he seem to be always on the watch. I
frequently see he rid lingeringly past the premise, look
searchingly round he as he go - or, if I do not, Rachel do.
that sharp-sight woman soon guess how matter stand between we,
and descry the enemy's movement from her elevation at the
nursery-window, she would give I a quiet intimation if she see I
prepare for a walk when she have reason to believe he be about,
or to think it likely that he would meet or overtake I in the way
I mean to traverse. I would then defer my ramble, or confine
myself for that day to the park and garden, or, if the propose
excursion be a matter of importance, such as a visit to the sick
or afflict, I would take Rachel with I, and then I be never
molest.
but one mild, sunshiny day, early in November, I have venture forth
alone to visit the village school and a few of the poor tenant,
and on my return I be alarmed at the clatter of a horse's foot
behind I, approach at a rapid, steady trot. there be no stile
or gap at hand by which I could escape into the field, so I walk
quietly on, say to myself, 'it may not be he after all; and if
it be, and if he do annoy I, it shall be for the last time, I be
determine, if there be power in word and look against cool
impudence and mawkish sentimentality so inexhaustible as his.'
the horse soon overtake I, and be rein up close beside I. it
be Mr. Hargrave. he greet I with a smile intend to be soft
and melancholy, but his triumphant satisfaction at have catch I
at last so shine through that it be quite a failure. after
briefly answer his salutation and inquire after the lady at
the Grove, I turn away and walk on; but he follow and keep
his horse at my side: it be evident he intend to be my
companion all the way.
'well! I donot much care. if you want another rebuff, take it -
and welcome,' be my inward remark. 'now, sir, what next?'
this question, though unspoken, be not long unanswered; after a
few pass observation upon indifferent subject, he begin in
solemn tone the follow appeal to my humanity:-
'it will be four year next April since I first see you, Mrs.
Huntingdon - you may have forget the circumstance, but I never
can. I admire you then most deeply, but I dare not love you. in
the follow autumn I see so much of your perfection that I could
not fail to love you, though I dare not show it. for upwards of
three year I have endure a perfect martyrdom. from the anguish
of suppress emotion, intense and fruitless longing, silent
sorrow, crush hope, and trample affection, I have suffer
more than I can tell, or you imagine - and you be the cause of
it, and not altogether the innocent cause. my youth be waste
away; my prospect be darken; my life be a desolate blank; I
have no rest day or night: I be become a burden to myself and
other, and you might save I by a word - a glance, and will not do
it - be this right?'
'in the first place, I donot believe you,' answer I; 'in the
second, if you will be such a fool, I cannot hinder it.'
'if you affect,' reply he, earnestly, 'to regard as folly the
good, the strong, the most godlike impulse of our nature, I
donot believe you. I know you be not the heartless, icy be you
pretend to be - you have a heart once, and give it to your husband.
when you find he utterly unworthy of the treasure, you reclaim
it; and you will not pretend that you love that sensual, earthly-
minded profligate so deeply, so devotedly, that you can never love
another? I know that there be feeling in your nature that have
never yet be call forth; I know, too, that in your present
neglect lonely state you be and must be miserable. you have it
in your power to raise two human being from a state of actual
suffering to such unspeakable beatitude as only generous, noble,
self-forget love can give (for you can love I if you will);
you may tell I that you scorn and det I, but, since you have
set I the example of plain speaking, I will answer that I do not
believe you. but you will not do it! you choose rather to leave we
miserable; and you coolly tell I it be the will of God that we
should remain so. you may call this religion, but I call it wild
fanaticism!'
'there be another life both for you and for I,' say I. 'if it be
the will of God that we should sow in tear now, it be only that we
may reap in joy hereafter. it be his will that we should not
injure other by the gratification of our own earthly passion; and
you have a mother, and sister, and friend who would be seriously
injure by your disgrace; and I, too, have friend, whose peace of
mind shall never be sacrifice to my enjoyment, or yours either,
with my consent; and if I be alone in the world, I have still my
God and my religion, and I would soon die than disgrace my
calling and break my faith with heaven to obtain a few brief year
of false and fleeting happiness - happiness sure to end in misery
even here - for myself or any other!'
'there need be no disgrace, no misery or sacrifice in any quarter,'
persist he. 'I do not ask you to leave your home or defy the
world's opinion.' but I need not repeat all his argument. I
refute they to the good of my power; but that power be
provokingly small, at the moment, for I be too much flurry with
indignation - and even shame - that he should thus dare to address
I, to retain sufficient command of thought and language to enable
I adequately to contend against his powerful sophistry.
Finding, however, that he could not be silence by reason, and even
covertly exult in his seem advantage, and venture to deride
those assertion I have not the coolness to prove, I change my
course and try another plan.
'do you really love I?' say I, seriously, pause and look he
calmly in the face.
'do I love you!' cry he.
'truly?' I demand.
his countenance brighten; he think his triumph be at hand. he
commence a passionate protestation of the truth and fervour of his
attachment, which I cut short by another question:-
'but be it not a selfish love? have you enough disinterested
affection to enable you to sacrifice your own pleasure to mine?'
'I would give my life to serve you.'
'I donot want your life; but have you enough real sympathy for my
affliction to induce you to make an effort to relieve they, at the
risk of a little discomfort to yourself?'
'try I, and see.'
'if you have, never mention this subject again. you cannot recur
to it in any way without double the weight of those suffering
you so feelingly deplore. I have nothing leave I but the solace of
a good conscience and a hopeful trust in heaven, and you labour
continually to rob I of these. if you persist, I must regard you
as my deadly foe.'
'but hear I a moment - '
'no, sir! you say you would give your life to serve I; I only
ask your silence on one particular point. I have speak plainly;
and what I say I mean. if you torment I in this way any more, I
must conclude that your protestation be entirely false, and that
you hate I in your heart as fervently as you profess to love I!'
he bite his lip, and bent his eye upon the ground in silence for a
while.
'then I must leave you,' say he at length, look steadily upon
I, as if with the last hope of detect some token of
irrepressible anguish or dismay awaken by those solemn word. 'I
must leave you. I cannot live here, and be for ever silent on the
all-absorb subject of my thought and wish.'
'formerly, I believe, you spend but little of your time at home,' I
answer; 'it will do you no harm to absent yourself again, for a
while - if that be really necessary.'
'if that be really possible,' he mutter; 'and can you bid I go
so coolly? do you really wish it?'
'most certainly I do. if you cannot see I without torment I
as you have lately do, I would gladly say farewell and never see
you more.'
he make no answer, but, bend from his horse, hold out his hand
towards I. I look up at his face, and see therein such a look
of genuine agony of soul, that, whether bitter disappointment, or
wound pride, or linger love, or burn wrath be uppermost,
I could not hesitate to put my hand in his as frankly as if I bade
a friend farewell. he grasp it very hard, and immediately put
spur to his horse and gallop away. very soon after, I learn
that he be go to Paris, where he still be; and the long he
stay there the well for I.
I thank God for this deliverance!
CHAPTER XXXVIII
December 20th, 1826. - the fifth anniversary of my wedding-day,
and, I trust, the last I shall spend under this roof. my
resolution be form, my plan concoct, and already partly put in
execution. my conscience do not blame I, but while the purpose
ripen let I beguile a few of these long winter evening in
state the case for my own satisfaction: a dreary amusement
enough, but have the air of a useful occupation, and be
pursue as a task, it will suit I well than a light one.
in September, quiet Grassdale be again alive with a party of
lady and gentleman (so call), consist of the same
individual as those invite the year before last, with the
addition of two or three other, among whom be Mrs. Hargrave and
her young daughter. the gentleman and Lady Lowborough be
invite for the pleasure and convenience of the host; the other
lady, I suppose, for the sake of appearance, and to keep I in
check, and make I discreet and civil in my demeanour. but the
lady stay only three week; the gentleman, with two exception,
above two month: for their hospitable entertainer be loth to
part with they and be leave alone with his bright intellect, his
stainless conscience, and his loved and love wife.
on the day of Lady Lowborough's arrival, I follow she into her
chamber, and plainly tell she that, if I find reason to believe
that she still continue her criminal connection with Mr.
Huntingdon, I should think it my absolute duty to inform she
husband of the circumstance - or awaken his suspicion at least -
however painful it might be, or however dreadful the consequence.
she be startle at first by the declaration, so unexpected, and so
determinately yet calmly deliver; but rally in a moment, she
coolly reply that, if I see anything at all reprehensible or
suspicious in her conduct, she would freely give I leave to tell
his lordship all about it. willing to be satisfied with this, I
leave she; and certainly I see nothing thenceforth particularly
reprehensible or suspicious in her demeanour towards her host; but
then I have the other guest to attend to, and I do not watch they
narrowly - for, to confess the truth, I fear to see anything
between they. I no long regard it as any concern of mine, and
if it be my duty to enlighten Lord Lowborough, it be a painful
duty, and I dread to be call to perform it.
but my fear be bring to an end in a manner I have not
anticipate. one evening, about a fortnight after the visitor'
arrival, I have retire into the library to snatch a few minute'
respite from forced cheerfulness and wearisome discourse, for after
so long a period of seclusion, dreary indeed as I have often find
it, I could not always bear to be do violence to my feeling,
and goad my power to talk, and smile and listen, and play the
attentive hostess, or even the cheerful friend: I have just
ensconce myself within the bow of the window, and be look out
upon the west, where the darken hill rise sharply define
against the clear amber light of evening, that gradually blend
and fade away into the pure, pale blue of the upper sky, where one
bright star be shin through, as if to promise - 'when that
die light be go, the world will not be leave in darkness, and
they who trust in God, whose mind be unbeclouded by the mist of
unbelief and sin, be never wholly comfortless,' - when I hear a
hurry step approach, and Lord Lowborough enter. this room
be still his favourite resort. he fling the door to with unusual
violence, and cast his hat aside regardless where it fall. what
could be the matter with he? his face be ghastly pale; his eye
be fix upon the ground; his tooth clench: his forehead
glistened with the dew of agony. it be plain he know his wrong
at last!
Unconscious of my presence, he begin to pace the room in a state of
fearful agitation, violently wring his hand and uttering low
groan or incoherent ejaculation. I make a movement to let he
know that he be not alone; but he be too preoccupied to notice
it. perhaps, while his back be towards I, I might cross the room
and slip away unobserved. I rise to make the attempt, but then he
perceive I. he start and stand still a moment; then wipe his
streaming forehead, and, advance towards I, with a kind of
unnatural composure, say in a deep, almost sepulchral tone, -
'Mrs. Huntingdon, I must leave you to-morrow.'
'to-morrow!' I repeat. 'I do not ask the cause.'
'you know it then, and you can be so calm!' say he, survey I
with profound astonishment, not unmingled with a kind of resentful
bitterness, as it appear to I.
'I have so long be aware of - ' I pause in time, and add, 'of
my husband's character, that nothing shock I.'
'but this - how long have you be aware of this?' demand he,
lay his clench hand on the table beside he, and look I
keenly and fixedly in the face.
I feel like a criminal.
'not long,' I answer.
'you know it!' cry he, with bitter vehemence - 'and you do not
tell I! you help to deceive I!'
'my lord, I do not help to deceive you.'
'then why do you not tell I?'
'because I know it would be painful to you. I hop she would
return to her duty, and then there would be no need to harrow your
feeling with such - '
'o god! how long have this be go on? how long have it be,
Mrs. Huntingdon? - tell I - I must know!' exclaim, with intense
and fearful eagerness.
'two year, I believe.'
'great heaven! and she have dupe I all this time!' he turn away
with a suppress groan of agony, and pace the room again in a
paroxysm of renew agitation. my heart smite I; but I would try
to console he, though I know not how to attempt it.
'she be a wicked woman,' I say. 'she have basely deceive and
betray you. she be as little worthy of your regret as she be of
your affection. let she injure you no far; abstract yourself
from she, and stand alone.'
'and you, Madam,' say he sternly, arrest himself, and turn
round upon I, 'you have injure I too by this ungenerous
concealment!'
there be a sudden revulsion in my feeling. something rise within
I, and urge I to resent this harsh return for my heartfelt
sympathy, and defend myself with answer severity. happily, I
do not yield to the impulse. I see his anguish as, suddenly
smite his forehead, he turn abruptly to the window, and,
look upward at the placid sky, murmur passionately, 'o God,
that I might die!' - and feel that to add one drop of bitterness to
that already overflow cup would be ungenerous indeed. and yet I
fear there be more coldness than gentleness in the quiet tone of
my reply:- 'I might offer many excuse that some would admit to be
valid, but I will not attempt to enumerate they - '
'I know they,' say he hastily: 'you would say that it be no
business of your: that I ought to have take care of myself; that
if my own blindness have lead I into this pit of hell, I have no
right to blame another for give I credit for a large amount of
sagacity than I possess - '
'I confess I be wrong,' continue I, without regard this bitter
interruption; 'but whether want of courage or mistaken kindness be
the cause of my error, I think you blame I too severely. I tell
Lady Lowborough two week ago, the very hour she come, that I
should certainly think it my duty to inform you if she continue to
deceive you: she give I full liberty to do so if I should see
anything reprehensible or suspicious in her conduct; I have see
nothing; and I trust she have alter her course.'
he continue gaze from the window while I speak, and do not
answer, but, sting by the recollection my word awaken, stamp
his foot upon the floor, grind his tooth, and corrugate his brow,
like one under the influence of acute physical pain.
'it be wrong, it be wrong!' he mutter at length. 'nothing can
excuse it; nothing can atone for it, - for nothing can recall those
year of cursed credulity; nothing obliterate they! - nothing,
nothing!' he repeat in a whisper, whose despair bitterness
preclude all resentment.
'when I put the case to myself, I own it be wrong,' I answer;
'but I can only now regret that I do not see it in this light
before, and that, as you say, nothing can recall the past.'
something in my voice or in the spirit of this answer seem to
alter his mood. turn towards I, and attentively survey my
face by the dim light, he say, in a milder tone than he have yet
employ, - 'you, too, have suffer, I suppose.'
'I suffer much, at first.'
'when be that?'
'two year ago; and two year hence you will be as calm as I be
now, and far, far happy, I trust, for you be a man, and free to
act as you please.'
something like a smile, but a very bitter one, cross his face for
a moment.
'you have not be happy, lately?' he say, with a kind of effort
to regain composure, and a determination to waive the further
discussion of his own calamity.
'happy?' I repeat, almost provoke at such a question. 'could I
be so, with such a husband?'
'I have notice a change in your appearance since the first year
of your marriage,' pursue he: 'I observe it to - to that
infernal demon,' he mutter between his tooth; 'and he say it be
your own sour temper that be eat away your bloom: it be
make you old and ugly before your time, and have already make his
fireside as comfortless as a convent cell. you smile, Mrs.
Huntingdon; nothing move you. I wish my nature be as calm as
your.'
'my nature be not originally calm,' say I. 'I have learn to
appear so by dint of hard lesson and many repeat effort.'
at this juncture Mr. Hattersley burst into the room.
'Hallo, Lowborough!' he begin - 'oh! I beg your pardon,' he
exclaim on see I. 'I donot know it be a TETE-e-tete.
cheer up, man,' he continue, give Lord Lowborough a thump on the
back, which cause the latter to recoil from he with look of
ineffable disgust and irritation. 'come, I want to speak with you
a bit.'
'speak, then.'
'but Ibe not sure it would be quite agreeable to the lady what I
have to say.'
'then it would not be agreeable to I,' say his lordship, turn
to leave the room.
'yes, it would,' cry the other, follow he into the hall. 'if
youhave the heart of a man, it would be the very ticket for you.
itbe just this, my lad,' he continue, rather lower his voice,
but not enough to prevent I from hear every word he say,
though the half-close door stand between we. 'I think yoube an
ill-use man - nay, now, donot flare up; I donot want to offend
you: itbe only my rough way of talk. I must speak right out,
you know, or else not at all; and Ibe come - stop now! let I
explain - Ibe come to offer you my service, for though Huntingdon
be my friend, hebe a devilish scamp, as we all know, and Iwill be
your friend for the nonce. I know what it be you want, to make
matter straight: itbe just to exchange a shot with he, and then
youwill feel yourself all right again; and if an accident happen -
why, thatwill be all right too, I daresay, to a desperate fellow
like you. come now, give I your hand, and donot look so black
upon it. name time and place, and Iwill manage the rest.'
'that,' answer the more low, deliberate voice of Lord Lowborough,
'be just the remedy my own heart, or the devil within it, suggest
- to meet he, and not to part without blood. whether I or he
should fall, or both, it would be an inexpressible relief to I, if
- '
'just so! well then, - '
'no!' exclaim his lordship, with deep, determined emphasis.
'though I hate he from my heart, and should rejoice at any
calamity that could befall he, Iwill leave he to God; and though I
abhor my own life, Iwill leave that, too, to he that give it.'
'but you see, in this case,' plead Hattersley -
'Iwill not hear you!' exclaim his companion, hastily turn away.
'not another word! Ihave enough to do against the fiend within I.'
'then yoube a white-livere fool, and I wash my hand of you,'
grumble the tempter, as he swing himself round and depart.
'right, right, Lord Lowborough,' cry I, dart out and clasp
his burn hand, as he be move away to the stair. 'I begin to
think the world be not worthy of you!' not understand this
sudden ebullition, he turn upon I with a stare of gloomy,
bewildered amazement, that make I ashamed of the impulse to which
I have yield; but soon a more humanise expression dawn upon his
countenance, and before I could withdraw my hand, he press it
kindly, while a gleam of genuine feeling flash from his eye as
he murmur, 'God help we both!'
'amen!' respond I; and we part.
I return to the drawing-room, where, doubtless, my presence would
be expect by most, desire by one or two. in the ante-room be
Mr. Hattersley, rail against Lord Lowborough's poltroonery
before a select audience, viz. Mr. Huntingdon, who be lounge
against the table, exult in his own treacherous villainy, and
laugh his victim to scorn, and Mr. Grimsby, stand by, quietly
rub his hand and chuckle with fiendish satisfaction.
in the drawing-room I find Lady Lowborough, evidently in no very
enviable state of mind, and struggle hard to conceal her
discomposure by an overstrained affectation of unusual cheerfulness
and vivacity, very uncalled-for under the circumstance, for she
have herself give the company to understand that her husband have
receive unpleasant intelligence from home, which necessitate his
immediate departure, and that he have suffer it so to bother his
mind that it have bring on a bilious headache, owe to which, and
the preparation he judge necessary to hasten his departure, she
believe they would not have the pleasure of see he to-night.
however, she assert, it be only a business concern, and so she
do not intend it should trouble she. she be just say this as
I enter, and she dart upon I such a glance of hardihood and
defiance as at once astonish and revolt I.
'but I be troubled,' continue she, 'and vex too, for I think it
my duty to accompany his lordship, and of course I be very sorry to
part with all my kind friend so unexpectedly and so soon.'
'and yet, Annabella,' say Esther, who be sit beside she, 'I
never see you in well spirit in my life.'
'precisely so, my love: because I wish to make the good of your
society, since it appear this be to be the last night I be to
enjoy it till heaven know when; and I wish to leave a good
impression on you all,' - she glance round, and see her aunt's
eye fix upon she, rather too scrutinizingly, as she probably
think, she start up and continue: 'to which end Iwill give you
a song - shall I, aunt? shall I, Mrs. Huntingdon? shall I lady
and gentleman all? very well. Iwill do my good to amuse you.'
she and Lord Lowborough occupy the apartment next to mine. I
know not how she pass the night, but I lay awake the great part
of it listen to his heavy step pace monotonously up and down
his dressing-room, which be near my chamber. once I hear he
pause and throw something out of the window with a passionate
ejaculation; and in the morning, after they be go, a keen-
blade clasp-knife be find on the grass-plot below; a razor,
likewise, be snap in two and thrust deep into the cinder of
the grate, but partially corrode by the decaying ember. so
strong have be the temptation to end his miserable life, so
determine his resolution to resist it.
my heart bleed for he as I lay listen to that ceaseless tread.
Hitherto I have think too much of myself, too little of he: now
I forget my own affliction, and think only of his; of the ardent
affection so miserably waste, the fond faith so cruelly betray,
the - no, I will not attempt to enumerate his wrong - but I hat
his wife and my husband more intensely than ever, and not for my
sake, but for his.
they depart early in the morning, before any one else be down,
except myself, and just as I be leave my room Lord Lowborough
be descend to take his place in the carriage, where his lady
be already ensconce; and Arthur (or Mr. Huntingdon, as I prefer
call he, for the other be my child's name) have the gratuitous
insolence to come out in his dressing-gown to bid his 'friend'
good-by.
'what, go already, Lowborough!' say he. 'well, good-morning.'
he smilingly offer his hand.
I think the other would have knock he down, have he not
instinctively start back before that bony fist quiver with
rage and clench till the knuckle gleam white and glisten
through the skin. look upon he with a countenance livid with
furious hate, Lord Lowborough mutter between his closed tooth a
deadly execration he would not have utter have he be calm enough
to choose his word, and depart.
'I call that an unchristian spirit now,' say the villain. 'but
Iwould never give up an old friend for the sake of a wife. you may
have mine if you like, and I call that handsome; I can do no more
than offer restitution, can I?'
but Lowborough have gain the bottom of the stair, and be now
cross the hall; and Mr. Huntingdon, lean over the banister,
call out, 'give my love to Annabella! and I wish you both a happy
journey,' and withdraw, laugh, to his chamber.
he subsequently express himself rather glad she be go. 'she
be so deuced imperious and exact,' say he. 'now I shall be my
own man again, and feel rather more at my ease.'
CHAPTER XXXIX
my great source of uneasiness, in this time of trial, be my
son, whom his father and his father's friend delight to
encourage in all the embryo vice a little child can show, and to
instruct in all the evil habit he could acquire - in a word, to
'make a man of he' be one of their staple amusement; and I need
say no more to justify my alarm on his account, and my
determination to deliver he at any hazard from the hand of such
instructor. I first attempt to keep he always with I, or in
the nursery, and give Rachel particular injunction never to let
he come down to dessert as long as these 'gentleman' stay; but
it be no use: these order be immediately countermand and
overrule by his father; he be not go to have the little fellow
mop to death between an old nurse and a cursed fool of a mother.
so the little fellow come down every evening in spite of his cross
mamma, and learn to tipple wine like papa, to swear like Mr.
Hattersley, and to have his own way like a man, and send mamma to
the devil when she try to prevent he. to see such thing do
with the roguish naivete of that pretty little child, and hear such
thing speak by that small infantile voice, be as peculiarly
piquant and irresistibly droll to they as it be inexpressibly
distressing and painful to I; and when he have set the table in a
roar he would look round delightedly upon they all, and add his
shrill laugh to theirs. but if that beam blue eye rest on I,
its light would vanish for a moment, and he would say, in some
concern, 'Mamma, why donot you laugh? make she laugh, papa - she
never will.'
hence be I oblige to stay among these human brute, watch an
opportunity to get my child away from they instead of leave they
immediately after the removal of the cloth, as I should always
otherwise have do. he be never willing to go, and I frequently
have to carry he away by force, for which he think I very cruel
and unjust; and sometimes his father would insist upon my letting
he remain; and then I would leave he to his kind friend, and
retire to indulge my bitterness and despair alone, or to rack my
brain for a remedy to this great evil.
but here again I must do Mr. Hargrave the justice to acknowledge
that I never see he laugh at the child's misdemeanours, nor hear
he utter a word of encouragement to his aspiration after manly
accomplishment. but when anything very extraordinary be say or
do by the infant profligate, I notice, at time, a peculiar
expression in his face that I could neither interpret nor define:
a slight twitching about the muscle of the mouth; a sudden flash
in the eye, as he dart a sudden glance at the child and then at
I: and then I could fancy there arise a gleam of hard, keen,
sombre satisfaction in his countenance at the look of impotent
wrath and anguish he be too certain to behold in mine. but on one
occasion, when Arthur have be behave particularly ill, and Mr.
Huntingdon and his guest have be particularly provoking and
insulting to I in their encouragement of he, and I particularly
anxious to get he out of the room, and on the very point of
demean myself by a burst of uncontrollable passion - Mr.
Hargrave suddenly rise from his seat with an aspect of stern
determination, lift the child from his father's knee, where he
be sit half-tipsy, cock his head and laugh at I, and
execrate I with word he little know the meaning of, hand he
out of the room, and, set he down in the hall, hold the door
open for I, gravely bow as I withdraw, and close it after I.
I hear high word exchange between he and his already half-
inebriate host as I depart, lead away my bewildered and
disconcert boy.
but this should not continue: my child must not be abandon to
this corruption: well far that he should live in poverty and
obscurity, with a fugitive mother, that in luxury and affluence
with such a father. these guest might not be with we long, but
they would return again: and he, the most injurious of the whole,
his child's bad enemy, would still remain. I could endure it for
myself, but for my son it must be bear no long: the world's
opinion and the feeling of my friend must be alike unheeded here,
at least - alike unable to deter I from my duty. but where should
I find an asylum, and how obtain subsistence for we both? oh, I
would take my precious charge at early dawn, take the coach to M-,
flee to the port of -, cross the Atlantic, and seek a quiet, humble
home in New England, where I would support myself and he by the
labour of my hand. the palette and the easel, my darling
playmate once, must be my sober toil-fellow now. but be I
sufficiently skilful as an artist to obtain my livelihood in a
strange land, without friend and without recommendation? no; I
must wait a little; I must labour hard to improve my talent, and to
produce something worth while as a speciman of my power, something
to speak favourably for I, whether as an actual painter or a
teacher. brilliant success, of course, I do not look for, but
some degree of security from positive failure be indispensable: I
must not take my son to starve. and then I must have money for the
journey, the passage, and some little to support we in our retreat
in case I should be unsuccessful at first: and not too little
either: for who could tell how long I might have to struggle with
the indifference or neglect of other, or my own inexperience or
inability to suit their taste?
what should I do then? apply to my brother and explain my
circumstance and my resolve to he? no, no: even if I tell he
all my grievance, which I should be very reluctant to do, he would
be certain to disapprove of the step: it would seem like madness
to he, as it would to my uncle and aunt, or to Milicent. no; I
must have patience and gather a hoard of my own. Rachel should be
my only confidante - I think I could persuade she into the
scheme; and she should help I, first, to find out a picture-dealer
in some distant town; then, through her mean, I would privately
sell what picture I have on hand that would do for such a purpose,
and some of those I should thereafter paint. besides this, I would
contrive to dispose of my jewel, not the family jewel, but the
few I bring with I from home, and those my uncle give I on my
marriage. a few month' arduous toil might well be bear by I
with such an end in view; and in the interim my son could not be
much more injured than he be already.
have form this resolution, I immediately set to work to
accomplish it, I might possibly have be induce to wax cool upon
it afterwards, or perhaps to keep weigh the pro and con in my
mind till the latter overbalance the former, and I be drive to
relinquish the project altogether, or delay the execution of it to
an indefinite period, have not something occur to confirm I in
that determination, to which I still adhere, which I still think I
do well to form, and shall do well to execute.
since Lord Lowborough's departure I have regard the library as
entirely my own, a secure retreat at all hour of the day. none of
our gentleman have the small pretension to a literary taste,
except Mr. Hargrave; and he, at present, be quite content with
the newspaper and periodical of the day. and if, by any chance,
he should look in here, I feel assured he would soon depart on
see I, for, instead of become less cool and distant towards
I, he have become decidedly more so since the departure of his
mother and sister, which be just what I wish. here, then, I
set up my easel, and here I work at my canvas from daylight till
dusk, with very little intermission, save when pure necessity, or
my duty to little Arthur, call I away: for I still think
proper to devote some portion of every day exclusively to his
instruction and amusement. but, contrary to my expectation, on the
third morning, while I be thus employ, Mr. Hargrave do look in,
and do not immediately withdraw on see I. he apologize for
his intrusion, and say he be only come for a book; but when he
have get it, he condescend to cast a glance over my picture.
be a man of taste, he have something to say on this subject as
well as another, and have modestly comment on it, without much
encouragement from I, he proceed to expatiate on the art in
general. receive no encouragement in that either, he drop it,
but do not depart.
'you donot give we much of your company, Mrs. Huntingdon,' observe
he, after a brief pause, during which I go on coolly mix and
temper my colour; 'and I cannot wonder at it, for you must be
heartily sick of we all. I myself be so thoroughly ashamed of my
companion, and so weary of their irrational conversation and
pursuit - now that there be no one to humanize they and keep they
in check, since you have justly abandon we to our own device -
that I think I shall presently withdraw from amongst they, probably
within this week; and I cannot suppose you will regret my
departure.'
he pause. I do not answer.
'probably,' he add, with a smile, 'your only regret on the
subject will be that I do not take all my companion along with I.
I flatter myself, at time, that though among they I be not of
they; but it be natural that you should be glad to get rid of I.
I may regret this, but I cannot blame you for it.'
'I shall not rejoice at your departure, for you can conduct
yourself like a gentleman,' say I, think it but right to make
some acknowledgment for his good behaviour; 'but I must confess I
shall rejoice to bid adieu. to the rest, inhospitable as it may
appear.'
'no one can blame you for such an avowal,' reply he gravely:
'not even the gentleman themselves, I imagine. Iwill just tell
you,' he continue, as if actuate by a sudden resolution, 'what
be say last night in the dining-room, after you leave we: perhaps
you will not mind it, as yoube so very philosophical on certain
point,' he add with a slight sneer. 'they be talk about
Lord Lowborough and his delectable lady, the cause of whose sudden
departure be no secret amongst they; and her character be so well
know to they all, that, nearly related to I as she be, I could
not attempt to defend it. curse I!' he mutter, par parenthese,
'if I donot have vengeance for this! if the villain must disgrace
the family, must he blazon it abroad to every low-breed knave of his
acquaintance? I beg your pardon, Mrs. Huntingdon. well, they be
talk of these thing, and some of they remark that, as she be
separate from her husband, he might see she again when he
please.'
'"thank you," say he; "Ihave have enough of she for the present:
Iwill not trouble to see she, unless she come to I."
'"then what do you mean to do, Huntingdon, when webe go?" say
Ralph Hattersley. "do you mean to turn from the error of your
way, and be a good husband, a good father, and so forth; as I do,
when I get shut of you and all these rollick devil you call
your friend? I think itbe time; and your wife be fifty time too
good for you, you know - "
'and he add some praise of you, which you would not thank I for
repeating, nor he for uttering; proclaim it aloud, as he do,
without delicacy or discrimination, in an audience where it seem
profanation to utter your name: himself utterly incapable of
understanding or appreciate your real excellence. Huntingdon,
meanwhile, sit quietly drink his wine, - or look smilingly
into his glass and offer no interruption or reply, till
Hattersley shout out, - "do you hear I, man?"
'"yes, go on," say he.
'"Nay, Ihave do," reply the other: "I only want to know if you
intend to take my advice."
'"what advice?"
'"to turn over a new leaf, you double-dye scoundrel," shout
Ralph, "and beg your wife's pardon, and be a good boy for the
future."
'"my wife! what wife? I have no wife," reply Huntingdon, look
innocently up from his glass, "or if I have, look you, gentleman:
I value she so highly that any one among you, that can fancy she,
may have she and welcome: you may, by Jove, and my blessing into
the bargain!"
'i - hem - someone ask if he really mean what he say; upon
which he solemnly swear he do, and no mistake. what do you think
of that, Mrs. Huntingdon?' ask Mr. Hargrave, after a short pause,
during which I have feel he be keenly examine my half-avert
face.
'I say,' reply I, calmly, 'that what he prize so lightly will
not be long in his possession.'
'you cannot mean that you will break your heart and die for the
detestable conduct of an infamous villain like that!'
'by no mean: my heart be too thoroughly dry to be break in a
hurry, and I mean to live as long as I can.'
'will you leave he then?'
'yes.'
'when: and how?' ask he, eagerly.
'when I be ready, and how I can manage it most effectually.'
'but your child?'
'my child go with I.'
'he will not allow it.'
'I shall not ask he.'
'ah, then, it be a secret flight you meditate! but with whom, Mrs.
Huntingdon?'
'with my son: and possibly, his nurse.'
'alone - and unprotected! but where can you go? what can you do?
he will follow you and bring you back.'
'I have lay my plan too well for that. let I once get clear of
Grassdale, and I shall consider myself safe.'
Mr. Hargrave advance one step towards I, look I in the face,
and draw in his breath to speak; but that look, that heighten
colour, that sudden sparkle of the eye, make my blood rise in
wrath: I abruptly turn away, and, snatch up my brush, begin
to dash away at my canvas with rather too much energy for the good
of the picture.
'Mrs. Huntingdon,' say he with bitter solemnity, 'you be cruel -
cruel to I - cruel to yourself.'
'Mr. Hargrave, remember your promise.'
'I must speak: my heart will burst if I donot! I have be silent
long enough, and you must hear I!' cry he, boldly intercept
my retreat to the door. 'you tell I you owe no allegiance to your
husband; he openly declare himself weary of you, and calmly give
you up to anybody that will take you; you be about to leave he;
no one will believe that you go alone; all the world will say, "she
have leave he at last, and who can wonder at it? few can blame she,
few still can pity he; but who be the companion of her flight?"
thus you will have no credit for your virtue (if you call it such):
even your good friend will not believe in it; because it be
monstrous, and not to be credit but by those who suffer, from the
effect of it, such cruel torment that they know it to be indeed
reality. but what can you do in the cold, rough world alone? you,
a young and inexperienced woman, delicately nurture, and utterly -
'
'in a word, you would advise I to stay where I be,' interrupted I.
'well, Iwill see about it.'
'by all mean, leave he!' cry he earnestly; 'but not alone!
Helen! let I protect you!'
'never! while heaven spar my reason,' reply I, snatch away
the hand he have presume to seize and press between his own. but
he be in for it now; he have fairly break the barrier: he be
completely rouse, and determine to hazard all for victory.
'I must not be deny!' exclaim he, vehemently; and seize both
my hand, he hold they very tight, but drop upon his knee, and
look up in my face with a half-implore, half-imperious gaze.
'you have no reason now: you be fly in the face of heaven's
decree. God have design I to be your comfort and protector - I
feel it, I know it as certainly as if a voice from heaven declare,
"ye twain shall be one flesh" - and you spurn I from you - '
'let I go, Mr. Hargrave!' say I, sternly. but he only tighten
his grasp.
'let I go!' I repeat, quiver with indignation.
his face be almost opposite the window as he kneel. with a slight
start, I see he glance towards it; and then a gleam of malicious
triumph light up his countenance. look over my shoulder, I behold
a shadow just retire round the corner.
'that be Grimsby,' say he deliberately. 'he will report what he
have see to Huntingdon and all the rest, with such embellishment
as he think proper. he have no love for you, Mrs. Huntingdon - no
reverence for your sex, no belief in virtue, no admiration for its
image. he will give such a version of this story as will leave no
doubt at all about your character, in the mind of those who hear
it. your fair fame be go; and nothing that I or you can say can
ever retrieve it. but give I the power to protect you, and show
I the villain that dare to insult!'
'no one have ever dare to insult I as you be do now!' say I,
at length release my hand, and recoil from he.
'I do not insult you,' cry he: 'I worship you. you be my
angel, my divinity! I lie my power at your foot, and you must and
shall accept they!' he exclaim, impetuously start to his foot.
'I will be your consoler and defender! and if your conscience
upbraid you for it, say I overcome you, and you could not choose
but yield!'
I never see a man go terribly excited. he precipitate himself
towards I. I snatch up my palette-knife and hold it against
he. this startle he: he stand and gaze at I in astonishment;
I daresay I look as fierce and resolute as he. I move to the
bell, and put my hand upon the cord. this tame he still more.
with a half-authoritative, half-deprecate wave of the hand, he
seek to deter I from ring.
'stand off, then!' say I; he step back. 'and listen to I. I
donot like you,' I continue, as deliberately and emphatically as I
could, to give the great efficacy to my word; 'and if I be
divorce from my husband, or if he be dead, I would not marry
you. there now! I hope yoube satisfied.'
his face grow blanch with anger.
'I be satisfied,' he reply, with bitter emphasis, 'that you be
the most cold-hearted, unnatural, ungrateful woman I ever yet
beheld!'
'ungrateful, sir?'
'ungrateful.'
'no, Mr. Hargrave, I be not. for all the good you ever do I, or
ever wish to do, I most sincerely thank you: for all the evil
you have do I, and all you would have do, I pray God to pardon
you, and make you of a well mind.' here the door be throw
open, and Messrs. Huntingdon and Hattersley appear without. the
latter remain in the hall, busy with his ramrod and his gun; the
former walk in, and stand with his back to the fire, survey
Mr. Hargrave and I, particularly the former, with a smile of
insupportable meaning, accompany as it be by the impudence of
his brazen brow, and the sly, malicious, twinkle of his eye.
'well, sir?' say Hargrave, interrogatively, and with the air of
one prepare to stand on the defensive.
'well, sir,' return his host.
'we want to know if you be at liberty to join we in a go at the
pheasant, Walter,' interpose Hattersley from without. 'come!
there shall be nothing shoot besides, except a puss or two; Iwill
vouch for that.'
Walter do not answer, but walk to the window to collect his
faculty. Arthur utter a low whistle, and follow he with his
eye. a slight flush of anger rise to Hargrave's cheek; but in a
moment he turn calmly round, and say carelessly:
'I come here to bid farewell to Mrs. Huntingdon, and tell she I
must go to-morrow.'
'Humph! yoube mighty sudden in your resolution. what take you
off so soon, may I ask?'
'business,' return he, repel the other's incredulous sneer
with a glance of scornful defiance.
'very good,' be the reply; and Hargrave walk away. thereupon
Mr. Huntingdon, gather his coat-lap under his arm, and set
his shoulder against the mantel-piece, turn to I, and,
address I in a low voice, scarcely above his breath, pour
forth a volley of the vilest and gross abuse it be possible for
the imagination to conceive or the tongue to utter. I do not
attempt to interrupt he; but my spirit kindle within I, and when
he have do, I reply, 'if your accusation be true, Mr.
Huntingdon, how dare you blame I?'
'shebe hit it, by Jove!' cry Hattersley, rear his gun against
the wall; and, step into the room, he take his precious friend
by the arm, and attempt to drag he away. 'come, my lad,' he
mutter; 'true or false, youhave no right to blame she, you know,
nor he either; after what you say last night. so come along.'
there be something imply here that I could not endure.
'dare you suspect I, Mr. Hattersley?' say I, almost beside myself
with fury.
'Nay, nay, I suspect nobody. itbe all right, itbe all right. so
come along, Huntingdon, you blackguard.'
'she cannot deny it!' cry the gentleman thus address, grin
in mingled rage and triumph. 'she cannot deny it if her life
depend on it!' and mutter some more abusive language, he
walk into the hall, and take up his hat and gun from the table.
'I scorn to justify myself to you!' say I. 'but you,' turn to
Hattersley, 'if you presume to have any doubt on the subject, ask
Mr. Hargrave.'
at this they simultaneously burst into a rude laugh that make my
whole frame tingle to the finger' end.
'where be he? Iwill ask he myself!' say I, advance towards
they.
suppress a new burst of merriment, Hattersley point to the
outer door. it be half open. his brother-in-law be stand on
the front without.
'Mr. Hargrave, will you please to step this way?' say I.
he turn and look at I in grave surprise.
'step this way, if you please!' I repeat, in so determined a
manner that he could not, or do not choose to resist its
authority. somewhat reluctantly he ascend the step and advance
a pace or two into the hall.
'and tell those gentleman,' I continue - 'these man, whether or
not I yield to your solicitation.'
'I donot understand you, Mrs. Huntingdon.'
'you do understand I, sir; and I charge you, upon your honour as a
gentleman (if you have any), to answer truly. do I, or do I
not?'
'no,' mutter he, turn away.
'speak up, sir; they cannot hear you. do I grant your request?
'you do not.'
'no, Iwill be swear she donot,' say Hattersley, 'or hewould never
look so black.'
'Ibe willing to grant you the satisfaction of a gentleman,
Huntingdon,' say Mr. Hargrave, calmly address his host, but
with a bitter sneer upon his countenance.
'go to the deuce!' reply the latter, with an impatient jerk of
the head. Hargrave withdraw with a look of cold disdain, say, -
'you know where to find I, should you feel disposed to send a
friend.'
muttered oath and curse be all the answer this intimation
obtain.
'now, Huntingdon, you see!' say Hattersley. 'clear as the day.'
'I donot care what he see,' say I, 'or what he imagine; but you,
Mr. Hattersley, when you hear my name belie and slander, will
you defend it?'
'I will.'
I instantly depart and shut myself into the library. what could
possess I to make such a request of such a man I cannot tell; but
drown man catch at straw: they have drive I desperate between
they; I hardly know what I say. there be no other to preserve my
name from be blacken and asperse among this nest of boon
companion, and through they, perhaps, into the world; and beside
my abandon wretch of a husband, the base, malignant Grimsby, and
the false villain Hargrave, this boorish ruffian, coarse and brutal
as he be, shine like a glow-worm in the dark, among its fellow
worm.
what a scene be this! could I ever have imagine that I should be
doom to bear such insult under my own roof - to hear such thing
speak in my presence; nay, speak to I and of I; and by those
who arrogate to themselves the name of gentleman? and could I
have imagine that I should have be able to endure it as calmly,
and to repel their insult as firmly and as boldly as I have do?
a hardness such as this be teach by rough experience and despair
alone.
such thought as these chase one another through my mind, as I
pace to and fro the room, and long - oh, how I long - to take
my child and leave they now, without an hour's delay! but it could
not be; there be work before I: hard work, that must be do.
'then let I do it,' say I, 'and lose not a moment in vain
repining and idle chafing against my fate, and those who
influence it.'
and conquer my agitation with a powerful effort, I immediately
resume my task, and labour hard all day.
Mr. Hargrave do depart on the morrow; and I have never see he
since. the other stay on for two or three week long; but I
keep aloof from they as much as possible, and still continue my
labour, and have continue it, with almost unabated ardour, to the
present day. I soon acquaint Rachel with my design, confide
all my motif and intention to her ear, and, much to my agreeable
surprise, find little difficulty in persuade she to enter into
my view. she be a sober, cautious woman, but she so hat she
master, and so love her mistress and her nursling, that after
several ejaculation, a few faint objection, and many tear and
lamentation that I should be bring to such a pass, she applaud
my resolution and consent to aid I with all her might: on one
condition only: that she might share my exile: otherwise, she be
utterly inexorable, regard it as perfect madness for I and
Arthur to go alone. with touching generosity, she modestly offer
to aid I with her little hoard of saving, hop I would 'excuse
she for the liberty, but really, if I would do she the favour to
accept it as a loan, she would be very happy.' of course I could
not think of such a thing; but now, thank heaven, I have gather a
little hoard of my own, and my preparation be so far advanced
that I be look forward to a speedy emancipation. only let the
stormy severity of this winter weather be somewhat abate, and
then, some morning, Mr. Huntingdon will come down to a solitary
breakfast-table, and perhaps be clamour through the house for
his invisible wife and child, when they be some fifty mile on
their way to the western world, or it may be more: for we shall
leave he hour before the dawn, and it be not probable he will
discover the loss of both until the day be far advanced.
I be fully alive to the evil that may and must result upon the
step I be about to take; but I never waver in my resolution,
because I never forget my son. it be only this morning, while I
pursue my usual employment, he be sit at my foot, quietly
play with the shred of canvas I have throw upon the carpet; but
his mind be otherwise occupy, for, in a while, he look up
wistfully in my face, and gravely ask, - 'Mamma, why be you
wicked?'
'who tell you I be wicked, love?'
'Rachel.'
'no, Arthur, Rachel never say so, I be certain.'
'well, then, it be papa,' reply he, thoughtfully. then, after a
reflective pause, he add, 'at least, Iwill tell you how it be I
get to know: when Ibe with papa, if I say mamma want I, or mamma
say Ibe not to do something that he tell I to do, he always
say, "Mamma be damn," and Rachel say itbe only wicked people
that be damned. so, mamma, thatbe why I think you must be wicked:
and I wish you wouldnot.'
'my dear child, I be not. those be bad word, and wicked people
often say they of other well than themselves. those word
cannot make people be damn, nor show that they deserve it. God
will judge we by our own thought and deed, not by what other say
about we. and when you hear such word speak, Arthur, remember
never to repeat they: it be wicked to say such thing of other,
not to have they say against you.'
'then itbe papa thatbe wicked,' say he, ruefully.
'Papa be wrong to say such thing, and you will be very wrong to
imitate he now that you know well.'
'what be imitate?'
'to do as he do.'
'do he know well?'
'perhaps he do; but that be nothing to you.'
'if he donot, you ought to tell he, mamma.'
'I have tell he.'
the little moralist pause and ponder. I try in vain to divert
his mind from the subject.
'Ibe sorry papa's wicked,' say he mournfully, at length, 'for I
donot want he to go to hell.' and so say he burst into tear.
I console he with the hope that perhaps his papa would alter and
become good before he die -; but be it not time to deliver he
from such a parent?
CHAPTER XL
January 10th, 1827. - while write the above, yesterday evening, I
sit in the drawing-room. Mr. Huntingdon be present, but, as I
think, asleep on the sofa behind I. he have rise, however,
unknown to I, and, actuate by some base spirit of curiosity, be
look over my shoulder for I know not how long; for when I have
lay aside my pen, and be about to close the book, he suddenly
place his hand upon it, and say, - 'with your leave, my dear,
Iwill have a look at this,' forcibly wrest it from I, and,
draw a chair to the table, composedly sit down to examine it:
turn back leaf after leaf to find an explanation of what he have
read. unluckily for I, he be more sober that night than he
usually be at such an hour.
of course I do not leave he to pursue this occupation in quiet:
I make several attempt to snatch the book from his hand, but he
hold it too firmly for that; I upbraid he in bitterness and
scorn for his mean and dishonourable conduct, but that have no
effect upon he; and, finally, I extinguish both the candle, but
he only wheel round to the fire, and raise a blaze sufficient
for his purpose, calmly continue the investigation. I have
serious thought of get a pitcher of water and extinguish
that light too; but it be evident his curiosity be too keenly
excited to be quench by that, and the more I manifest my
anxiety to baffle his scrutiny, the great would be his
determination to persist in it besides it be too late.
'it seem very interesting, love,' say he, lift his head and
turn to where I stand, wring my hand in silent rage and
anguish; 'but itbe rather long; Iwill look at it some other time;
and meanwhile Iwill trouble you for your key, my dear.'
'what key?'
'the key of your cabinet, desk, drawer, and whatever else you
possess,' say he, rise and hold out his hand.
'Ihave not get they,' I reply. the key of my desk, in fact, be
at that moment in the lock, and the other be attach to it.
'then you must send for they,' say he; 'and if that old devil,
Rachel, donot immediately deliver they up, she tramp bag and
baggage tomorrow.'
'she donot know where they be,' I answer, quietly place my
hand upon they, and take they from the desk, as I think,
unobserve. 'I know, but I shall not give they up without a
reason.'
'and I know, too,' say he, suddenly seize my closed hand and
rudely abstract they from it. he then take up one of the
candle and relighte it by thrust it into the fire.
'now, then,' sneer he, 'we must have a confiscation of property.
but, first, let we take a peep into the studio.'
and put the key into his pocket, he walk into the library.
I follow, whether with the dim idea of prevent mischief, or
only to know the bad, I can hardly tell. my painting material
be lay together on the corner table, ready for to-morrow's use,
and only cover with a cloth. he soon spy they out, and put
down the candle, deliberately proceed to cast they into the fire:
palette, paint, bladder, pencil, brush, varnish: I see they
all consume: the palette-knife snap in two, the oil and
turpentine send hiss and roar up the chimney. he then ring
the bell.
'Benson, take those thing away,' say he, point to the easel,
canvas, and stretcher; 'and tell the housemaid she may kindle the
fire with they: your mistress willnot want they any more.'
Benson pause aghast and look at I.
'take they away, Benson,' say I; and his master mutter an oath.
'and this and all, sir?' say the astonished servant, refer to
the half-finished picture.
'that and all,' reply the master; and the thing be clear
away.
Mr. Huntingdon then go up-stair. I do not attempt to follow
he, but remain seat in the arm-chair, speechless, tearless,
and almost motionless, till he return about half-an-hour after,
and walk up to I, hold the candle in my face and peer into my
eye with look and laughter too insulting to be bear. with a
sudden stroke of my hand I dash the candle to the floor.
'Hal-lo!' mutter he, start back; 'shebe the very devil for
spite. do ever any mortal see such eye? - they shine in the dark
like a cat's. oh, yoube a sweet one!' so say, he gather up
the candle and the candlestick. the former be break as well as
extinguish, he ring for another.
'Benson, your mistress have break the candle; bring another.'
'you expose yourself finely,' observe I, as the man depart.
'I donot say Iwould break it, do I?' return he. he then throw my
key into my lap, say, - 'there! youwill find nothing go but
your money, and the jewel, and a few little trifle I think it
advisable to take into my own possession, lest your mercantile
spirit should be tempt to turn they into gold. Ihave leave you a
few sovereign in your purse, which I expect to last you through
the month; at all event, when you want more you will be so good as
to give I an account of how thatbe spend. I shall put you upon a
small monthly allowance, in future, for your own private expense;
and you neednot trouble yourself any more about my concern; I
shall look out for a steward, my dear - I willnot expose you to the
temptation. and as for the household matter, Mrs. Greaves must be
very particular in keep her account; we must go upon an
entirely new plan - '
'what great discovery have you make now, Mr. Huntingdon? have I
attempt to defraud you?'
'not in money matter, exactly, it seem; but itbe good to keep out
of the way of temptation.'
here Benson enter with the candle, and there follow a brief
interval of silence; I sit still in my chair, and he stand
with his back to the fire, silently triumph in my despair.
'and so,' say he at length, 'you think to disgrace I, do you,
by run away and turn artist, and support yourself by the
labour of your hand, forsooth? and you think to rob I of my
son, too, and bring he up to be a dirty Yankee tradesman, or a
low, beggarly painter?'
'yes, to obviate his become such a gentleman as his father.'
'itbe well you couldnot keep your own secret - ha, ha! itbe well
these woman must be blab. if they havenot a friend to talk to,
they must whisper their secret to the fish, or write they on the
sand, or something; and itbe well, too, I benot over full to-
night, now I think of it, or I might have snooze away and never
dream of look what my sweet lady be about; or I might have
lack the sense or the power to carry my point like a man, as I
have do.'
leave he to his self-congratulation, I rise to secure my
manuscript, for I now remember it have be leave upon the drawing-
room table, and I determine, if possible, to save myself the
humiliation of see it in his hand again. I could not bear the
idea of his amuse himself over my secret thought and
recollection; though, to be sure, he would find little good of
himself therein indite, except in the former part; and oh, I would
soon burn it all than he should read what I have write when I
be such a fool as to love he!
'and by-the-by,' cry he, as I be leave the room, 'youwould well
tell that d-d old sneak of a nurse to keep out of my way for a day
or two; Iwould pay she her wage and send she packing to-morrow, but I
know shewould do more mischief out of the house than in it.'
and as I depart, he go on curse and abuse my faithful
friend and servant with epithet I will not defile this paper with
repeat. I go to she as soon as I have put away my book, and
tell she how our project be defeat. she be as much distressed
and horrify as I be - and more so than I be that night, for I
be partly stun by the blow, and partly excited and support
against it by the bitterness of my wrath. but in the morning, when
I wake without that cheering hope that have be my secret comfort
and support so long, and all this day, when I have wander about
restless and objectless, shun my husband, shrink even from
my child, know that I be unfit to be his teacher or companion,
hop nothing for his future life, and fervently wish he have
never be bear, - I feel the full extent of my calamity, and I
feel it now. I know that day after day such feeling will return
upon I. I be a slave - a prisoner - but that be nothing; if it
be myself alone I would not complain, but I be forbid to
rescue my son from ruin, and what be once my only consolation be
become the crown source of my despair.
have I no faith in God? I try to look to he and raise my heart to
heaven, but it will cleave to the dust. I can only say, 'he hath
hedge I about, that I cannot get out: he hath make my chain
heavy. he hath fill I with bitterness - he hath make I drunken
with wormwood.' I forget to add, 'but though he cause grief, yet
will he have compassion accord to the multitude of his mercy.
for he doth not afflict willingly nor grieve the child of man.'
I ought to think of this; and if there be nothing but sorrow for I
in this world, what be the long life of misery to a whole
eternity of peace? and for my little Arthur - have he no friend but
I? who be it say, 'it be not the will of your Father which be
in heaven that one of these little one should perish?'
CHAPTER XLI
March 20th. - have now get rid of Mr. Huntingdon for a season, my
spirit begin to revive. he leave I early in February; and the
moment he be go, I breathe again, and feel my vital energy
return; not with the hope of escape - he have take care to leave I
no visible chance of that - but with a determination to make the
good of exist circumstance. here be Arthur leave to I at
last; and rouse from my despondent apathy, I exert all my
power to eradicate the weed that have be foster in his infant
mind, and sow again the good seed they have render unproductive.
thank heaven, it be not a barren or a stony soil; if weed spring
fast there, so do well plant. his apprehension be more quick,
his heart more overflowing with affection than ever his father's
could have be, and it be no hopeless task to bend he to
obedience and win he to love and know his own true friend, as long
as there be no one to counteract my effort.
I have much trouble at first in break he of those evil habit
his father have teach he to acquire, but already that difficulty
be nearly vanquish now: bad language seldom defile his mouth,
and I have succeed in give he an absolute disgust for all
intoxicate liquor, which I hope not even his father or his
father's friend will be able to overcome. he be inordinately
fond of they for so young a creature, and, remember my
unfortunate father as well as his, I dread the consequence of
such a taste. but if I have stint he, in his usual quantity of
wine, or forbid he to taste it altogether, that would only have
increase his partiality for it, and make he regard it as a
great treat than ever. I therefore give he quite as much as his
father be accustom to allow he; as much, indeed, as he desire
to have - but into every glass I surreptitiously introduce a small
quantity of tartar-emetic, just enough to produce inevitable nausea
and depression without positive sickness. find such
disagreeable consequence invariably to result from this
indulgence, he soon grow weary of it, but the more he shrink from
the daily treat the more I press it upon he, till his reluctance
be strengthen to perfect abhorrence. when he be thoroughly
disgust with every kind of wine, I allow he, at his own
request, to try brandy-and-water, and then gin-and-water, for the
little toper be familiar with they all, and I be determined that
all should be equally hateful to he. this I have now effect;
and since he declare that the taste, the smell, the sight of any
one of they be sufficient to make he sick, I have give up tease
he about they, except now and then as object of terror in case
of misbehaviour. 'Arthur, if yoube not a good boy I shall give
you a glass of wine,' or 'now, Arthur, if you say that again you
shall have some brandy-and-water,' be as good as any other threat;
and once or twice, when he be sick, I have oblige the poor child
to swallow a little wine-and-water without the tartar-emetic, by
way of medicine; and this practice I intend to continue for some
time to come; not that I think it of any real service in a physical
sense, but because I be determined to enlist all the power of
association in my service; I wish this aversion to be so deeply
ground in his nature that nothing in after-life may be able to
overcome it.
thus, I flatter myself, I shall secure he from this one vice; and
for the rest, if on his father's return I find reason to apprehend
that my good lesson will be all destroy - if Mr. Huntingdon
commence again the game of teach the child to hate and despise
his mother, and emulate his father's wickedness - I will yet
deliver my son from his hand. I have devise another scheme that
might be resort to in such a case; and if I could but obtain my
brother's consent and assistance, I should not doubt of its
success. the old hall where he and I be bear, and where our
mother die, be not now inhabit, nor yet quite sink into decay,
as I believe. now, if I could persuade he to have one or two
room make habitable, and to let they to I as a stranger, I might
live there, with my child, under an assumed name, and still support
myself by my favourite art. he should lend I the money to begin
with, and I would pay he back, and live in lowly independence and
strict seclusion, for the house stand in a lonely place, and the
neighbourhood be thinly inhabit, and he himself should negotiate
the sale of my picture for I. I have arrange the whole plan in
my head: and all I want be to persuade Frederick to be of the same
mind as myself. he be come to see I soon, and then I will make
the proposal to he, have first enlighten he upon my
circumstance sufficiently to excuse the project.
already, I believe, he know much more of my situation than I have
tell he. I can tell this by the air of tender sadness pervade
his letter; and by the fact of his so seldom mention my
husband, and generally evince a kind of covert bitterness when he
do refer to he; as well as by the circumstance of his never
come to see I when Mr. Huntingdon be at home. but he have never
openly express any disapprobation of he or sympathy for I; he
have never ask any question, or say anything to invite my
confidence. have he do so, I should probably have have but few
concealment from he. perhaps he feel hurt at my reserve. he be
a strange being; I wish we know each other well. he use to
spend a month at Staningley every year, before I be marry; but,
since our father's death, I have only see he once, when he come
for a few day while Mr. Huntingdon be away. he shall stay many
day this time, and there shall be more candour and cordiality
between we than ever there be before, since our early childhood.
my heart cling to he more than ever; and my soul be sick of
solitude.
April 16th. - he be come and go. he would not stay above a
fortnight. the time pass quickly, but very, very happily, and it
have do I good. I must have a bad disposition, for my
misfortune have sour and embitter I exceedingly: I be
begin insensibly to cherish very unamiable feeling against my
fellow-mortal, the male part of they especially; but it be a
comfort to see there be at least one among they worthy to be
trust and esteemed; and doubtless there be more, though I have
never know they, unless I except poor Lord Lowborough, and he be
bad enough in his day. but what would Frederick have be, if he
have live in the world, and mingle from his childhood with such
man as these of my acquaintance? and what will Arthur be, with all
his natural sweetness of disposition, if I do not save he from
that world and those companion? I mention my fear to
Frederick, and introduce the subject of my plan of rescue on the
evening after his arrival, when I present my little son to his
uncle.
'he be like you, Frederick,' say I, 'in some of his mood: I
sometimes think he resemble you more than his father; and I be
glad of it.'
'you flatter I, Helen,' reply he, stroke the child's soft,
wavy lock.
'no, you will think it no compliment when I tell you I would rather
have he to resemble Benson than his father.'
he slightly elevate his eyebrow, but say nothing.
'do you know what sort of man Mr. Huntingdon be?' say I.
'I think I have an idea.'
'have you so clear an idea that you can hear, without surprise or
disapproval, that I meditate escape with that child to some
secret asylum, where we can live in peace, and never see he
again?'
'be it really so?'
'if you have not,' continue I, 'Iwill tell you something more about
he'; and I give a sketch of his general conduct, and a more
particular account of his behaviour with regard to his child, and
explain my apprehension on the latter's account, and my
determination to deliver he from his father's influence.
Frederick be exceedingly indignant against Mr. Huntingdon, and
very much grieve for I; but still he look upon my project as
wild and impracticable. he deem my fear for Arthur
disproportione to the circumstance, and oppose so many
objection to my plan, and devise so many milder method for
ameliorate my condition, that I be oblige to enter into further
detail to convince he that my husband be utterly incorrigible,
and that nothing could persuade he to give up his son, whatever
become of I, he be as fully determine the child should not
leave he, as I be not to leave the child; and that, in fact,
nothing would answer but this, unless I flee the country, as I have
intend before. to obviate that, he at length consent to have
one wing of the old hall put into a habitable condition, as a place
of refuge against a time of need; but hop I would not take
advantage of it unless circumstance should render it really
necessary, which I be ready enough to promise: for though, for my
own sake, such a hermitage appear like paradise itself, compare
with my present situation, yet for my friend' sake, for Milicent
and Esther, my sister in heart and affection, for the poor tenant
of Grassdale, and, above all, for my aunt, I will stay if I
possibly can.
July 29th. - Mrs. Hargrave and her daughter be come back from
London. Esther be full of her first season in town; but she be
still heart-whole and unengaged. her mother seek out an
excellent match for she, and even bring the gentleman to lay his
heart and fortune at her foot; but Esther have the audacity to
refuse the noble gift. he be a man of good family and large
possession, but the naughty girl maintain he be old as Adam,
ugly as sin, and hateful as - one who shall be nameless.
'but, indeed, I have a hard time of it,' say she: 'mamma be very
greatly disappointed at the failure of her darling project, and
very, very angry at my obstinate resistance to her will, and be so
still; but I cannot help it. and Walter, too, be so seriously
displeased at my perversity and absurd caprice, as he call it,
that I fear he will never forgive I - I do not think he could be
so unkind as he have lately show himself. but Milicent beg I
not to yield, and Ibe sure, Mrs. Huntingdon, if you have see the
man they want to palm upon I, you would have advise I not to
take he too.'
'I should have do so whether I have see he or not,' say I; 'it
be enough that you dislike he.'
'I know you would say so; though mamma affirm you would be quite
shocked at my undutiful conduct. you cannot imagine how she
lecture I: I be disobedient and ungrateful; I be thwart her
wish, wrong my brother, and make myself a burden on her
hand. I sometimes fear shewill overcome I after all. I have a
strong will, but so have she, and when she say such bitter thing,
it provoke I to such a pass that I feel inclined to do as she
bid I, and then break my heart and say, "there, mamma, itbe all
your fault!"'
'pray donot!' say I. 'obedience from such a motive would be
positive wickedness, and certain to bring the punishment it
deserve. stand firm, and your mamma will soon relinquish her
persecution; and the gentleman himself will cease to pester you
with his address if he find they steadily reject.'
'oh, no! mamma will weary all about she before she tire herself
with her exertion; and as for Mr. Oldfield, she have give he to
understand that I have refuse his offer, not from any dislike of
his person, but merely because I be giddy and young, and cannot at
present reconcile myself to the thought of marriage under any
circumstance: but by next season, she have no doubt, I shall have
more sense, and hop my girlish fancy will be wear away. so she
have bring I home, to school I into a proper sense of my duty,
against the time come round again. indeed, I believe she will not
put herself to the expense of take I up to London again, unless
I surrender: she cannot afford to take I to town for pleasure and
nonsense, she say, and it be not every rich gentleman that will
consent to take I without a fortune, whatever exalt idea I may
have of my own attraction.'
'well, Esther, I pity you; but still, I repeat, stand firm. you
might as well sell yourself to slavery at once, as marry a man you
dislike. if your mother and brother be unkind to you, you may
leave they, but remember you be bind to your husband for life.'
'but I cannot leave they unless I get marry, and I cannot get
married if nobody see I. I see one or two gentleman in London
that I might have like, but they be young son, and mamma
would not let I get to know they - one especially, who I believe
rather like I - but she throw every possible obstacle in the way
of our well acquaintance. benot it provoke?'
'I have no doubt you would feel it so, but it be possible that if
you marry he, you might have more reason to regret it hereafter
than if you marry Mr. Oldfield. when I tell you not to marry
without love, I do not advise you to marry for love alone: there
be many, many other thing to be consider. keep both heart and
hand in your own possession, till you see good reason to part with
they; and if such an occasion should never present itself, comfort
your mind with this reflection, that though in single life your
joy may not be very many, your sorrow, at least, will not be more
than you can bear. marriage may change your circumstance for the
well, but, in my private opinion, it be far more likely to
produce a contrary result.'
'so think Milicent; but allow I to say I think otherwise. if I
think myself doom to old-maidenhood, I should cease to value my
life. the thought of live on, year after year, at the Grove - a
hanger-on upon mamma and Walter, a mere cumberer of the ground (now
that I know in what light they would regard it), be perfectly
intolerable; I would rather run away with the butler.'
'your circumstance be peculiar, I allow; but have patience, love;
do nothing rashly. remember you be not yet nineteen, and many
year be yet to pass before any one can set you down as an old
maid: you cannot tell what Providence may have in store for you.
and meantime, remember you have a right to the protection and
support of your mother and brother, however they may seem to grudge
it.'
'you be so grave, Mrs. Huntingdon,' say Esther, after a pause.
'when Milicent utter the same discouraging sentiment concern
marriage, I ask if she be happy: she say she be; but I only
half believe she; and now I must put the same question to you.'
'it be a very impertinent question,' laugh I, 'from a young girl
to a married woman so many year her senior, and I shall not answer
it.'
'pardon I, dear madam,' say she, laughingly throw herself into
my arm, and kiss I with playful affection; but I feel a tear
on my neck, as she drop her head on my bosom and continue, with
an odd mixture of sadness and levity, timidity and audacity, - 'I
know you be not so happy as I mean to be, for you spend half your
life alone at Grassdale, while Mr. Huntingdon go about enjoy
himself where and how he please. I shall expect my husband to
have no pleasure but what he share with I; and if his great
pleasure of all be not the enjoyment of my company, why, it will be
the bad for he, thatbe all.'
'if such be your expectation of matrimony, Esther, you must,
indeed, be careful whom you marry - or rather, you must avoid it
altogether.'
CHAPTER XLII
September 1st. - no Mr. Huntingdon yet. perhaps he will stay among
his friend till Christmas; and then, next spring, he will be off
again. if he continue this plan, I shall be able to stay at
Grassdale well enough - that is, I shall be able to stay, and that
be enough; even an occasional bevy of friend at the shooting
season may be bear, if Arthur get so firmly attach to I, so
well establish in good sense and principle before they come that
I shall be able, by reason and affection, to keep he pure from
their contamination. vain hope, I fear! but still, till such a
time of trial come I will forbear to think of my quiet asylum in
the beloved old hall.
Mr. and Mrs. Hattersley have be stay at the Grove a fortnight:
and as Mr. Hargrave be still absent, and the weather be remarkably
fine, I never pass a day without see my two friend, Milicent
and Esther, either there or here. on one occasion, when Mr.
Hattersley have drive they over to Grassdale in the phaeton, with
little Helen and Ralph, and we be all enjoy ourselves in the
garden - I have a few minute' conversation with that gentleman,
while the lady be amuse themselves with the child.
'do you want to hear anything of your husband, Mrs. Huntingdon?'
say he.
'no, unless you can tell I when to expect he home.'
'I cannot. - you donot want he, do you?' say he, with a broad
grin.
'no.'
'well, I think yoube well without he, sure enough - for my
part, Ibe downright weary of he. I tell he Iwould leave he if he
donot mend his manner, and he wouldnot; so I leave he. you see,
Ibe a well man than you think I; and, whatbe more, I have
serious thought of wash my hand of he entirely, and the whole
set of them, and comport myself from this day forward with all
decency and sobriety, as a Christian and the father of a family
should do. what do you think of that?'
'it be a resolution you ought to have form long ago.'
'well, Ibe not thirty yet; it benot too late, be it?'
'no; it be never too late to reform, as long as you have the sense
to desire it, and the strength to execute your purpose.'
'well, to tell you the truth, Ihave think of it often and often
before; but hebe such devilish good company, be Huntingdon, after
all. you cannot imagine what a jovial good fellow he be when hebe
not fairly drunk, only just prim or half-seas-over. we all have
a bit of a liking for he at the bottom of our heart, though we
cannot respect he.'
'but should you wish yourself to be like he?'
'no, Iwould rather be like myself, bad as I be.'
'you cannot continue as bad as you be without get bad and
more brutalised every day, and therefore more like he.'
I could not help smile at the comical, half-angry, half-
confound look he put on at this rather unusual mode of address.
'never mind my plain speaking,' say I; 'it be from the good of
motif. but tell I, should you wish your son to be like Mr.
Huntingdon - or even like yourself?'
'hang it! no.'
'should you wish your daughter to despise you - or, at least, to
feel no vestige of respect for you, and no affection but what be
mingle with the bitter regret?'
'oh, no! I couldnot stand that.'
'and, finally, should you wish your wife to be ready to sink into
the earth when she hear you mention; and to loathe the very
sound of your voice, and shudder at your approach?'
'she never will; she like I all the same, whatever I do.'
'impossible, Mr. Hattersley! you mistake her quiet submission for
affection.'
'fire and fury - '
'now donot burst into a tempest at that. I donot mean to say she
do not love you - she do, I know, a great deal well than you
deserve; but I be quite sure, that if you behave well, she will
love you more, and if you behave bad, she will love you less and
less, till all be lose in fear, aversion, and bitterness of soul,
if not in secret hatred and contempt. but, drop the subject of
affection, should you wish to be the tyrant of her life - to take
away all the sunshine from her existence, and make she thoroughly
miserable?'
'of course not; and I donot, and Ibe not go to.'
'you have do more towards it than you suppose.'
'Pooh, pooh! shebe not the susceptible, anxious, worrite creature
you imagine: shebe a little meek, peaceable, affectionate body;
apt to be rather sulky at time, but quiet and cool in the main,
and ready to take thing as they come.'
'think of what she be five year ago, when you marry she, and
what she be now.'
'I know she be a little plump lassie then, with a pretty pink and
white face: now shebe a poor little bit of a creature, fade and
melt away like a snow-wreath. but hang it! - thatbe not my
fault.'
'what be the cause of it then? not year, for shebe only five-and-
twenty.'
'itbe her own delicate health, and confound it, madam! what would
you make of I? - and the child, to be sure, that worry she to
death between they.'
'no, Mr. Hattersley, the child give she more pleasure than pain:
they be fine, well-dispositione child - '
'I know they be - bless they!'
'then why lie the blame on they? - Iwill tell you what it be: itbe
silent fretting and constant anxiety on your account, mingle, I
suspect, with something of bodily fear on her own. when you behave
well, she can only rejoice with trembling; she have no security, no
confidence in your judgment or principle; but be continually
dread the close of such short-live felicity; when you behave
ill, her cause of terror and misery be more than any one can tell
but herself. in patient endurance of evil, she forget it be our
duty to admonish our neighbour of their transgression. since you
will mistake her silence for indifference, come with I, and Iwill
show you one or two of her letter - no breach of confidence, I
hope, since you be her other half.'
he follow I into the library. I seek out and put into his
hand two of Milicent's letter: one date from London, and
write during one of his wild season of reckless dissipation;
the other in the country, during a lucid interval. the former be
full of trouble and anguish; not accuse he, but deeply
regret his connection with his profligate companion, abuse
Mr. Grimsby and other, insinuate bitter thing against Mr.
Huntingdon, and most ingeniously throw the blame of her
husband's misconduct on to other man's shoulder. the latter be
full of hope and joy, yet with a trembling consciousness that this
happiness would not last; praise his goodness to the sky, but
with an evident, though but half-express wish, that it be base
on a surer foundation than the natural impulse of the heart, and a
half-prophetic dread of the fall of that house so found on the
sand, - which fall have shortly after take place, as Hattersley
must have be conscious while he read.
almost at the commencement of the first letter I have the unexpected
pleasure of see he blush; but he immediately turn his back to
I, and finish the perusal at the window. at the second, I see
he, once or twice, raise his hand, and hurriedly pass it across
his face. could it be to dash away a tear? when he have do,
there be an interval spend in clear his throat and star out
of the window, and then, after whistle a few bar of a favourite
air, he turn round, give I back the letter, and silently shake
I by the hand.
'Ihave be a cursed rascal, God know,' say he, as he give it a
hearty squeeze, 'but you see if I donot make amend for it - d-n I
if I donot!'
'donot curse yourself, Mr. Hattersley; if God have hear half your
invocation of that kind, you would have be in hell long before
now - and you cannot make amend for the past by do your duty
for the future, inasmuch as your duty be only what you owe to your
Maker, and you cannot do more than fulfil it: another must make
amend for your past delinquency. if you intend to reform,
invoke God's blessing, his mercy, and his aid; not his curse.'
'God help I, then - for Ibe sure I need it. where's Milicent?'
'shebe there, just come in with her sister.'
he step out at the glass door, and go to meet they. I
follow at a little distance. somewhat to his wife's
astonishment, he lift she off from the ground, and salute she
with a hearty kiss and a strong embrace; then place his two hand
on her shoulder, he give she, I suppose, a sketch of the great
thing he mean to do, for she suddenly throw her arm round he,
and burst into tear, exclaim, - 'do, do, Ralph - we shall be so
happy! how very, very good you be!'
'Nay, not I,' say he, turn her round, and push she towards
I. 'thank she; itbe her do.'
Milicent fly to thank I, overflow with gratitude. I
disclaim all title to it, tell she her husband be predispose
to amendment before I add my mite of exhortation and
encouragement, and that I have only do what she might, and ought
to have do herself.
'oh, no!' cry she; 'I couldnot have influence he, Ibe sure, by
anything that I could have say. I should only have bother he
by my clumsy effort at persuasion, if I have make the attempt.'
'you never try I, Milly,' say he.
shortly after they take their leave. they be now go on a visit
to Hattersley's father. after that they will repair to their
country home. I hope his good resolution will not fall through,
and poor Milicent will not be again disappointed. her last letter
be full of present bliss, and please anticipation for the
future; but no particular temptation have yet occur to put his
virtue to the test. henceforth, however, she will doubtless be
somewhat less timid and reserve, and he more kind and thoughtful.
- surely, then, her hope be not unfounded; and I have one bright
spot, at least, whereon to rest my thought.
CHAPTER XLIII
October 10th. - Mr. Huntingdon return about three week ago. his
appearance, his demeanour and conversation, and my feeling with
regard to he, I shall not trouble myself to describe. the day
after his arrival, however, he surprise I by the announcement of
an intention to procure a governess for little Arthur: I tell he
it be quite unnecessary, not to say ridiculous, at the present
season: I think I be fully competent to the task of teach
he myself - for some year to come, at least: the child's
education be the only pleasure and business of my life; and since
he have deprive I of every other occupation, he might surely leave
I that.
he say I be not fit to teach child, or to be with they: I have
already reduce the boy to little well than an automaton; I have
break his fine spirit with my rigid severity; and I should freeze
all the sunshine out of his heart, and make he as gloomy an
ascetic as myself, if I have the handling of he much long. and
poor Rachel, too, come in for her share of abuse, as usual; he
cannot endure Rachel, because he know she have a proper
appreciation of he.
I calmly defend our several qualification as nurse and
governess, and still resist the propose addition to our family;
but he cut I short by say it be no use bother about the
matter, for he have engage a governess already, and she be come
next week; so that all I have to do be to get thing ready for her
reception. this be a rather startling piece of intelligence. I
venture to inquire her name and address, by whom she have be
recommend, or how he have be lead to make choice of she.
'she be a very estimable, pious young person,' say he; 'you
neednot be afraid. her name be Myers, I believe; and she be
recommend to I by a respectable old dowager: a lady of high
repute in the religious world. I have not see she myself, and
therefore cannot give you a particular account of her person and
conversation, and so forth; but, if the old lady's eulogy be
correct, you will find she to possess all desirable qualification
for her position: an inordinate love of child among the rest.'
all this be gravely and quietly speak, but there be a laugh
demon in his half-avert eye that bode no good, I imagine.
however, I think of my asylum in -shire, and make no further
objection.
when Miss Myers arrive, I be not prepared to give she a very
cordial reception. her appearance be not particularly calculate
to produce a favourable impression at first sight, nor do she
manner and subsequent conduct, in any degree, remove the prejudice
I have already conceive against she. her attainment be limited,
her intellect noway above mediocrity. she have a fine voice, and
could sing like a nightingale, and accompany herself sufficiently
well on the piano; but these be her only accomplishment. there
be a look of guile and subtlety in her face, a sound of it in her
voice. she seem afraid of I, and would start if I suddenly
approach she. in her behaviour she be respectful and
complaisant, even to servility: she attempt to flatter and fawn
upon I at first, but I soon check that. her fondness for her
little pupil be overstrain, and I be oblige to remonstrate
with she on the subject of over-indulgence and injudicious praise;
but she could not gain his heart. her piety consist in an
occasional heaving of sigh, and uplifting of eye to the ceiling,
and the utterance of a few cannot phrase. she tell I she be a
clergyman's daughter, and have be leave an orphan from her
childhood, but have have the good fortune to obtain a situation in a
very pious family; and then she speak so gratefully of the kindness
she have experience from its different member, that I reproach
myself for my uncharitable thought and unfriendly conduct, and
relent for a time, but not for long: my cause of dislike be
too rational, my suspicion too well found for that; and I know
it be my duty to watch and scrutinize till those suspicion be
either satisfactorily remove or confirm.
I ask the name and residence of the kind and pious family. she
mention a common name, and an unknown and distant place of abode,
but tell I they be now on the continent, and their present
address be unknown to she. I never see she speak much to Mr.
Huntingdon; but he would frequently look into the school-room to
see how little Arthur get on with his new companion, when I be not
there. in the evening, she sit with we in the drawing-room, and
would sing and play to amuse he or we, as she pretend, and be
very attentive to his want, and watchful to anticipate they,
though she only talk to I; indeed, he be seldom in a condition
to be talk to. have she be other than she be, I should have
feel her presence a great relief to come between we thus, except,
indeed, that I should have be thoroughly ashamed for any decent
person to see he as he often be.
I do not mention my suspicion to Rachel; but she, have
sojourn for half a century in this land of sin and sorrow, have
learn to be suspicious herself. she tell I from the first she
be 'down of that new governess,' and I soon find she watch she
quite as narrowly as I do; and I be glad of it, for I long to
know the truth: the atmosphere of Grassdale seem to stifle I,
and I could only live by think of Wildfell Hall.
at last, one morning, she enter my chamber with such intelligence
that my resolution be take before she have cease to speak. while
she dress I I explain to she my intention and what assistance
I should require from she, and tell she which of my thing she be
to pack up, and what she be to leave behind for herself, as I have
no other mean of recompense she for this sudden dismissal after
her long and faithful service: a circumstance I most deeply
regret, but could not avoid.
'and what will you do, Rachel?' say I; 'will you go home, or seek
another place?'
'I have no home, ma'am, but with you,' she reply; 'and if I leave
you Iwill never go into place again as long as I live.'
'but I cannot afford to live like a lady now,' return I: 'I must
be my own maid and my child's nurse.'
'what signify!' reply she, in some excitement. 'youwill want
somebody to clean and wash, and cook, willnot you? I can do all
that; and never mind the wage: Ihave my bit o' saving yet, and
if you wouldnot take I I should have to find my own board and
lodge out of them somewhere, or else work among stranger: and
itbe what Ibe not use to: so you can please yourself, ma'am.'
her voice quaver as she speak, and the tear stand in her eye.
'I should like it above all thing, Rachel, and Iwould give you such
wage as I could afford: such as I should give to any servant-of-
all-work I might employ: but donot you see I should be drag
you down with I when you have do nothing to deserve it?'
'oh, fiddle!' ejaculate she.
'and, besides, my future way of living will be so widely different
to the past: so different to all you have be accustom to - '
'do you think, ma'am, I cannot bear what my missis can? surely Ibe
not so proud and so dainty as that come to; and my little master,
too, God bless he!'
'but Ibe young, Rachel; I sha'n't mind it; and Arthur be young too:
it will be nothing to he.'
'nor I either: Ibe not so old but what I can stand hard fare and
hard work, if itbe only to help and comfort they as Ihave love like
my own bairn: for all Ibe too old to bide the thought o' leave
them in trouble and danger, and go amongst stranger myself.'
'then you sha'n't, Rachel!' cry I, embrace my faithful friend.
'wewill all go together, and you shall see how the new life suit
you.'
'bless you, honey!' cry she, affectionately return my embrace.
'only let we get shut of this wicked house, and wewill do right
enough, youwill see.'
'so think I,' be my answer; and so that point be settle.
by that morning's post I despatch a few hasty line to Frederick,
beseech he to prepare my asylum for my immediate reception:
for I should probably come to claim it within a day after the
receipt of that note: and tell he, in few word, the cause of
my sudden resolution. I then write three letter of adieu: the
first to Esther Hargrave, in which I tell she that I find it
impossible to stay any long at Grassdale, or to leave my son
under his father's protection; and, as it be of the last
importance that our future abode should be unknown to he and his
acquaintance, I should disclose it to no one but my brother,
through the medium of whom I hop still to correspond with my
friend. I then give she his address, exhort she to write
frequently, reiterate some of my former admonition regard she
own concern, and bid she a fond farewell.
the second be to Milicent; much to the same effect, but a little
more confidential, as befit our long intimacy, and her great
experience and well acquaintance with my circumstance.
the third be to my aunt: a much more difficult and painful
undertaking, and therefore I have leave it to the last; but I must
give she some explanation of that extraordinary step I have take:
and that quickly, for she and my uncle would no doubt hear of it
within a day or two after my disappearance, as it be probable that
Mr. Huntingdon would speedily apply to they to know what be become
of I. at last, however, I tell she I be sensible of my error: I
do not complain of its punishment, and I be sorry to trouble my
friend with its consequence; but in duty to my son I must submit
no long; it be absolutely necessary that he should be deliver
from his father's corrupting influence. I should not disclose my
place of refuge even to she, in order that she and my uncle might
be able, with truth, to deny all knowledge concern it; but any
communication address to I under cover to my brother would be
certain to reach I. I hop she and my uncle would pardon the
step I have take, for if they know all, I be sure they would not
blame I; and I trust they would not afflict themselves on my
account, for if I could only reach my retreat in safety and keep it
unmoleste, I should be very happy, but for the thought of they;
and should be quite content to spend my life in obscurity,
devote myself to the training up of my child, and teach he to
avoid the error of both his parent.
these thing be do yesterday: I have give two whole day to
the preparation for our departure, that Frederick may have more
time to prepare the room, and Rachel to pack up the thing: for
the latter task must be do with the utmost caution and secrecy,
and there be no one but I to assist she. I can help to get the
article together, but I do not understand the art of stow they
into the box, so as to take up the small possible space; and
there be her own thing to do, as well as mine and Arthur's. I
can ill afford to leave anything behind, since I have no money,
except a few guineas in my purse; and besides, as Rachel observe,
whatever I leave would most likely become the property of Miss
Myers, and I should not relish that.
but what trouble I have have throughout these two day, struggle
to appear calm and collect, to meet he and she as usual, when I
be oblige to meet they, and force myself to leave my little
Arthur in her hand for hour together! but I trust these trial
be over now: I have lay he in my bed for well security, and
never more, I trust, shall his innocent lip be defile by their
contaminating kiss, or his young ear pollute by their word.
but shall we escape in safety? oh, that the morning be come, and
we be on our way at least! this evening, when I have give Rachel
all the assistance I could, and have nothing leave I but to wait,
and wish and tremble, I become so greatly agitated that I know not
what to do. I go down to dinner, but I could not force myself to
eat. Mr. Huntingdon remark the circumstance.
'whatbe to do with you now?' say he, when the removal of the
second course give he time to look about he.
'I be not well,' I reply: 'I think I must lie down a little; you
willnot miss I much?'
'not the least: if you leave your chair, itwill do just as well -
well, a trifle,' he mutter, as I leave the room, 'for I can
fancy somebody else fill it.'
'somebody else may fill it to-morrow,' I think, but do not say.
'there! Ihave see the last of you, I hope,' I mutter, as I
close the door upon he.
Rachel urge I to seek repose at once, to recruit my strength for
to-morrow's journey, as we must be go before the dawn; but in my
present state of nervous excitement that be entirely out of the
question. it be equally out of the question to sit, or wander
about my room, count the hour and the minute between I and
the appoint time of action, strain my ear and tremble at
every sound, lest someone should discover and betray we after all.
I take up a book and try to read: my eye wander over the
page, but it be impossible to bind my thought to their content.
why not have recourse to the old expedient, and add this last event
to my chronicle? I open its page once more, and write the above
account - with difficulty, at first, but gradually my mind become
more calm and steady. thus several hour have pass away: the
time be draw near; and now my eye feel heavy and my frame
exhaust. I will commend my cause to God, and then lie down and
gain an hour or two of sleep; and then! -
Little Arthur sleep soundly. all the house be still: there can
be no one watch. the box be all cord by Benson, and
quietly convey down the back stair after dusk, and send away in
a cart to the M- coach-office. the name upon the card be Mrs.
Graham, which appellation I mean henceforth to adopt. my mother's
maiden name be Graham, and therefore I fancy I have some claim to
it, and prefer it to any other, except my own, which I dare not
resume.
CHAPTER XLIV
October 24th. - thank heaven, I be free and safe at last. early we
rise, swiftly and quietly dress, slowly and stealthily descend
to the hall, where Benson stand ready with a light, to open the
door and fasten it after we. we be oblige to let one man into
our secret on account of the box, &c. all the servant be but
too well acquainted with their master's conduct, and either Benson
or John would have be willing to serve I; but as the former be
more staid and elderly, and a crony of Rachel's besides, I of
course direct she to make choice of he as her assistant and
confidant on the occasion, as far as necessity demand, I only
hope he may not be bring into trouble thereby, and only wish I
could reward he for the perilous service he be so ready to
undertake. I slip two guineas into his hand, by way of
remembrance, as he stand in the doorway, hold the candle to
light our departure, with a tear in his honest grey eye, and a host
of good wish depict on his solemn countenance. alas! I could
offer no more: I have barely sufficient remain for the probable
expense of the journey.
what tremble joy it be when the little wicket close behind we,
as we issue from the park! then, for one moment, I pause, to
inhale one draught of that cool, brace air, and venture one look
back upon the house. all be dark and still: no light glimmer
in the window, no wreath of smoke obscure the star that sparkle
above it in the frosty sky. as I bade farewell for ever to that
place, the scene of so much guilt and misery, I feel glad that I
have not leave it before, for now there be no doubt about the
propriety of such a step - no shadow of remorse for he I leave
behind. there be nothing to disturb my joy but the fear of
detection; and every step remove we far from the chance of
that.
we have leave Grassdale many mile behind we before the round red sun
arise to welcome our deliverance; and if any inhabitant of its
vicinity have chance to see we then, as we bowl along on the top
of the coach, I scarcely think they would have suspect our
identity. as I intend to be take for a widow, I think it
advisable to enter my new abode in mourning: I be, therefore,
attire in a plain black silk dress and mantle, a black veil (which
I keep carefully over my face for the first twenty or thirty mile
of the journey), and a black silk bonnet, which I have be
constrain to borrow of Rachel, for want of such an article
myself. it be not in the new fashion, of course; but none the
bad for that, under present circumstance. Arthur be clothe in
his plain clothe, and wrap in a coarse woollen shawl; and
Rachel be muffle in a grey cloak and hood that have see well
day, and give she more the appearance of an ordinary though decent
old woman, than of a lady's-maid.
oh, what delight it be to be thus seat aloft, rumble along the
broad, sunshiny road, with the fresh morning breeze in my face,
surround by an unknown country, all smile - cheerfully,
gloriously smile in the yellow lustre of those early beam; with
my darling child in my arm, almost as happy as myself, and my
faithful friend beside I: a prison and despair behind I,
recede far, far back at every clatter of the horse'
foot; and liberty and hope before! I could hardly refrain from
praise God aloud for my deliverance, or astonish my fellow-
passenger by some surprising outburst of hilarity.
but the journey be a very long one, and we be all weary enough
before the close of it. it be far into the night when we reach
the town of L-, and still we be seven mile from our journey's
end; and there be no more coaching, nor any conveyance to be have,
except a common cart, and that with the great difficulty, for
half the town be in bed. and a dreary ride we have of it, that
last stage of the journey, cold and weary as we be; sit on
our box, with nothing to cling to, nothing to lean against,
slowly drag and cruelly shake over the rough, hilly road. but
Arthur be asleep in Rachel's lap, and between we we manage pretty
well to shield he from the cold night air.
at last we begin to ascend a terribly steep and stony lane, which,
in spite of the darkness, Rachel say she remember well: she have
often walk there with I in her arm, and little think to come
again so many year after, under such circumstance as the present.
Arthur be now awaken by the jolting and the stoppage, we all
get out and walk. we have not far to go; but what if Frederick
should not have receive my letter? or if he should not have have
time to prepare the room for our reception, and we should find
they all dark, damp, and comfortless, destitute of food, fire, and
furniture, after all our toil?
at length the grim, dark pile appear before we. the lane
conduct we round by the back way. we enter the desolate court,
and in breathless anxiety survey the ruinous mass. be it all
blackness and desolation? no; one faint red glimmer cheer we
from a window where the lattice be in good repair. the door be
fasten, but after due knock and wait, and some parley
with a voice from an upper window, we be admit by an old woman
who have be commission to air and keep the house till our
arrival, into a tolerably snug little apartment, formerly the
scullery of the mansion, which Frederick have now fit up as a
kitchen. here she procure we a light, rouse the fire to a
cheerful blaze, and soon prepare a simple repast for our
refreshment; while we disencumber ourselves of our travelling-
gear, and take a hasty survey of our new abode. besides the
kitchen, there be two bedroom, a good-sized parlour, and another
small one, which I destine for my studio, all well air and
seemingly in good repair, but only partly furnish with a few old
article, chiefly of ponderous black oak, the veritable one that
have be there before, and which have be keep as antiquarian
relic in my brother's present residence, and now, in all haste,
transport back again.
the old woman bring my supper and Arthur's into the parlour, and
tell I, with all due formality, that 'the master desire his
compliment to Mrs. Graham, and he have prepare the room as well
as he could upon so short a notice; but he would do himself the
pleasure of call upon she to-morrow, to receive her further
command.'
I be glad to ascend the stern-look stone staircase, and lie
down in the gloomy, old-fashioned bed, beside my little Arthur. he
be asleep in a minute; but, weary as I be, my excited feeling
and restless cogitation keep I awake till dawn begin to struggle
with the darkness; but sleep be sweet and refreshing when it come,
and the waking be delightful beyond expression. it be little
Arthur that rouse I, with his gentle kiss. he be here, then,
safely clasp in my arm, and many league away from his unworthy
father! broad daylight illumine the apartment, for the sun be
high in heaven, though obscure by rolling mass of autumnal
vapour.
the scene, indeed, be not remarkably cheerful in itself, either
within or without. the large bare room, with its grim old
furniture, the narrow, latticed window, reveal the dull, grey
sky above and the desolate wilderness below, where the dark stone
wall and iron gate, the rank growth of grass and weed, and the
hardy evergreen of preternatural form, alone remain to tell
that there have be once a garden, - and the bleak and barren
field beyond might have strike I as gloomy enough at another
time; but now, each separate object seem to echo back my own
exhilarating sense of hope and freedom: indefinite dream of the
far past and bright anticipation of the future seem to greet I
at every turn. I should rejoice with more security, to be sure,
have the broad sea roll between my present and my former home;
but surely in this lonely spot I might remain unknown; and then I
have my brother here to cheer my solitude with his occasional
visit.
he come that morning; and I have have several interview with he
since; but he be oblige to be very cautious when and how he come;
not even his servant or his good friend must know of his visit
to Wildfell - except on such occasion as a landlord might be
expect to call upon a strange tenant - lest suspicion should be
excited against I, whether of the truth or of some slanderous
falsehood.
I have now be here nearly a fortnight, and, but for one
disturbing care, the haunt dread of discovery, I be comfortably
settle in my new home: Frederick have supply I with all
requisite furniture and painting material: Rachel have sell most
of my clothe for I, in a distant town, and procure I a wardrobe
more suitable to my present position: I have a second-hand piano,
and a tolerably well-stock bookcase in my parlour; and my other
room have assume quite a professional, business-like appearance
already. I be work hard to repay my brother for all his
expense on my account; not that there be the slight necessity
for anything of the kind, but it please I to do so: I shall have
so much more pleasure in my labour, my earning, my frugal fare,
and household economy, when I know that I be pay my way
honestly, and that what little I possess be legitimately all my
own; and that no one suffer for my folly - in a pecuniary way at
least. I shall make he take the last penny I owe he, if I can
possibly effect it without offend he too deeply. I have a few
picture already do, for I tell Rachel to pack up all I have; and
she execute her commission but too well - for among the rest, she
put up a portrait of Mr. Huntingdon that I have paint in the first
year of my marriage. it strike I with dismay, at the moment, when
I take it from the box and behold those eye fix upon I in their
mocking mirth, as if exult still in his power to control my
fate, and deride my effort to escape.
how widely different have be my feeling in paint that portrait
to what they now be in look upon it! how I have study and
toil to produce something, as I think, worthy of the original!
what mingle pleasure and dissatisfaction I have have in the result
of my labour! - pleasure for the likeness I have catch;
dissatisfaction, because I have not make it handsome enough. now, I
see no beauty in it - nothing pleasing in any part of its
expression; and yet it be far handsomer and far more agreeable -
far less repulsive I should rather say - than he be now: for these
six year have work almost as great a change upon himself as on
my feeling regard he. the frame, however, be handsome enough;
it will serve for another painting. the picture itself I have not
destroy, as I have first intend; I have put it aside; not, I
think, from any lurking tenderness for the memory of past
affection, nor yet to remind I of my former folly, but chiefly
that I may compare my son's feature and countenance with this, as
he grow up, and thus be enable to judge how much or how little he
resemble his father - if I may be allow to keep he with I
still, and never to behold that father's face again - a blessing I
hardly dare reckon upon.
it seem Mr. Huntingdon be make every exertion to discover the
place of my retreat. he have be in person to Staningley, seek
redress for his grievance - expect to hear of his victim, if
not to find they there - and have tell so many lie, and with such
unblushe coolness, that my uncle more than half believe he, and
strongly advocate my go back to he and be friend again.
but my aunt know well: she be too cool and cautious, and too
well acquainted with both my husband's character and my own to be
impose upon by any specious falsehood the former could invent.
but he do not want I back; he want my child; and give my
friend to understand that if I prefer live apart from he, he
will indulge the whim and let I do so unmolested, and even settle
a reasonable allowance on I, provide I will immediately deliver
up his son. but heaven help I! I be not go to sell my child
for gold, though it be to save both he and I from starve: it
would be well that he should die with I than that he should live
with his father.
Frederick show I a letter he have receive from that gentleman,
full of cool impudence such as would astonish any one who do not
know he, but such as, I be convince, none would know well how
to answer than my brother. he give I no account of his reply,
except to tell I that he have not acknowledge his acquaintance
with my place of refuge, but rather leave it to be infer that it
be quite unknown to he, by say it be useless to apply to he,
or any other of my relation, for information on the subject, as it
appear I have be drive to such extremity that I have conceal
my retreat even from my good friend; but that if he have know it,
or should at any time be make aware of it, most certainly Mr.
Huntingdon would be the last person to whom he should communicate
the intelligence; and that he need not trouble himself to bargain
for the child, for he (Frederick) fancy he know enough of his
sister to enable he to declare, that wherever she might be, or
however situate, no consideration would induce she to deliver he
up.
30th. - alas! my kind neighbour will not let I alone. by some
mean they have ferret I out, and I have have to sustain visit
from three different family, all more or less bent upon
discover who and what I be, whence I come, and why I have choose
such a home as this. their society be unnecessary to I, to say
the least, and their curiosity annoy and alarm I: if I gratify
it, it may lead to the ruin of my son, and if I be too mysterious
it will only excite their suspicion, invite conjecture, and rouse
they to great exertion - and perhaps be the mean of spread
my fame from parish to parish, till it reach the ear of some one
who will carry it to the Lord of Grassdale Manor.
I shall be expect to return their call, but if, upon inquiry, I
find that any of they live too far away for Arthur to accompany I,
they must expect in vain for a while, for I cannot bear to leave
he, unless it be to go to church, and I have not attempt that
yet: for - it may be foolish weakness, but I be under such
constant dread of his be snatch away, that I be never easy
when he be not by my side; and I fear these nervous terror would
so entirely disturb my devotion, that I should obtain no benefit
from the attendance. I mean, however, to make the experiment next
Sunday, and oblige myself to leave he in charge of Rachel for a
few hour. it will be a hard task, but surely no imprudence; and
the vicar have be to scold I for my neglect of the ordinance of
religion. I have no sufficient excuse to offer, and I promise, if
all be well, he should see I in my pew next Sunday; for I do not
wish to be set down as an infidel; and, besides, I know I should
derive great comfort and benefit from an occasional attendance at
public worship, if I could only have faith and fortitude to compose
my thought in conformity with the solemn occasion, and forbid they
to be for ever dwell on my absent child, and on the dreadful
possibility of find he go when I return; and surely God in
his mercy will preserve I from so severe a trial: for my child's
own sake, if not for mine, he will not suffer he to be tear away.
November 3rd. - I have make some further acquaintance with my
neighbour. the fine gentleman and beau of the parish and its
vicinity (in his own estimation, at least) be a young . . . .
* * * * *
here it end. the rest be tear away. how cruel, just when she
be go to mention I! for I could not doubt it be your humble
servant she be about to mention, though not very favourably, of
course. I could tell that, as well by those few word as by the
recollection of her whole aspect and demeanour towards I in the
commencement of our acquaintance. well! I could readily forgive
her prejudice against I, and her hard thought of our sex in
general, when I see to what brilliant specimen her experience have
be limit.
respect I, however, she have long since see her error, and
perhaps fall into another in the opposite extreme: for if, at
first, her opinion of I have be low than I deserve, I be
convince that now my desert be low than her opinion; and if
the former part of this continuation have be tear away to avoid
wound my feeling, perhaps the latter portion have be remove
for fear of minister too much to my self-conceit. at any rate,
I would have give much to have see it all - to have witness the
gradual change, and watch the progress of her esteem and
friendship for I, and whatever warm feel she might have; to
have see how much of love there be in her regard, and how it have
grow upon she in spite of her virtuous resolution and strenuous
exertion to - but no, I have no right to see it: all this be too
sacred for any eye but her own, and she have do well to keep it
from I.
CHAPTER XLV
Well, Halford, what do you think of all this? and while you read
it, do you ever picture to yourself what my feeling would
probably be during its perusal? most likely not; but I be not
go to descant upon they now: I will only make this
acknowledgment, little honourable as it may be to human nature, and
especially to myself, - that the former half of the narrative be,
to I, more painful than the latter, not that I be at all
insensible to Mrs. Huntingdon's wrong or unmove by her
suffering, but, I must confess, I feel a kind of selfish
gratification in watch her husband's gradual decline in her good
grace, and see how completely he extinguish all her affection
at last. the effect of the whole, however, in spite of all my
sympathy for she, and my fury against he, be to relieve my mind
of an intolerable burden, and fill my heart with joy, as if some
friend have rouse I from a dreadful nightmare.
it be now near eight o'clock in the morning, for my candle have
expire in the midst of my perusal, leave I no alternative but
to get another, at the expense of alarm the house, or to go to
bed, and wait the return of daylight. on my mother's account, I
choose the latter; but how willingly I seek my pillow, and how
much sleep it bring I, I leave you to imagine.
at the first appearance of dawn, I rise, and bring the manuscript
to the window, but it be impossible to read it yet. I devote
half an hour to dressing, and then return to it again. now, with
a little difficulty, I could manage; and with intense and eager
interest, I devour the remainder of its content. when it be
end, and my transient regret at its abrupt conclusion be over, I
open the window and put out my head to catch the cool breeze,
and imbibe deep draught of the pure morning air. a splendid
morning it be; the half-frozen dew lie thick on the grass, the
swallow be twitter round I, the rook caw, and cow
lowing in the distance; and early frost and summer sunshine mingle
their sweetness in the air. but I do not think of that: a
confusion of countless thought and varied emotion crowd upon I
while I gaze abstractedly on the lovely face of nature. soon,
however, this chaos of thought and passion clear away, give
place to two distinct emotion: joy unspeakable that my adore
Helen be all I wish to think she - that through the noisome
vapour of the world's aspersion and my own fancied conviction,
her character shine bright, and clear, and stainless as that sun I
could not bear to look on; and shame and deep remorse for my own
conduct.
immediately after breakfast I hurry over to Wildfell Hall.
Rachel have rise many degree in my estimation since yesterday. I
be ready to greet she quite as an old friend; but every kindly
impulse be check by the look of cold distrust she cast upon I
on open the door. the old virgin have constitute herself the
guardian of her lady's honour, I suppose, and doubtless she see in
I another Mr. Hargrave, only the more dangerous in be more
esteemed and trust by her mistress.
'missis cannot see any one to-day, sir - shebe poorly,' say she, in
answer to my inquiry for Mrs. Graham.
'but I must see she, Rachel,' say I, place my hand on the door
to prevent its being shut against I.
'indeed, sir, you cannot,' reply she, settle her countenance in
still more iron frigidity than before.
'be so good as to announce I.'
'itbe no manner of use, Mr. Markham; shebe poorly, I tell you.'
just in time to prevent I from commit the impropriety of
take the citadel by storm, and push forward unannounced, an
inner door open, and little Arthur appear with his frolicsome
playfellow, the dog. he seize my hand between both his, and
smilingly draw I forward.
'Mamma say yoube to come in, Mr. Markham,' say he, 'and I be to
go out and play with Rover.'
Rachel retire with a sigh, and I step into the parlour and shut
the door. there, before the fire-place, stand the tall, graceful
figure, waste with many sorrow. I cast the manuscript on the
table, and look in her face. anxious and pale, it be turn
towards I; her clear, dark eye be fix on mine with a gaze so
intensely earnest that they bind I like a spell.
'have you look it over?' she murmur. the spell be break.
'Ihave read it through,' say I, advance into the room, - 'and I
want to know if youwill forgive I - if you can forgive I?'
she do not answer, but her eye glisten, and a faint red mantle
on her lip and cheek. as I approach, she abruptly turn away,
and go to the window. it be not in anger, I be well assure,
but only to conceal or control her emotion. I therefore venture
to follow and stand beside she there, - but not to speak. she give
I her hand, without turn her head, and murmur in a voice she
strove in vain to steady, - 'can you forgive I?'
it might be deem a breach of trust, I think, to convey that
lily hand to my lip, so I only gently press it between my own,
and smilingly reply, - 'I hardly can. you should have tell I
this before. it show a want of confidence - '
'oh, no,' cry she, eagerly interrupt I; 'it be not that. it
be no want of confidence in you; but if I have tell you anything of
my history, I must have tell you all, in order to excuse my
conduct; and I might well shrink from such a disclosure, till
necessity oblige I to make it. but you forgive I? - I have do
very, very wrong, I know; but, as usual, I have reap the bitter
fruit of my own error, - and must reap they to the end.'
Bitter, indeed, be the tone of anguish, repress by resolute
firmness, in which this be speak. now, I raise her hand to my
lip, and fervently kiss it again and again; for tear prevent
any other reply. she suffer these wild caress without
resistance or resentment; then, suddenly turn from I, she pace
twice or thrice through the room. I know by the contraction of she
brow, the tight compression of her lip, and wringing of her hand,
that meantime a violent conflict between reason and passion be
silently pass within. at length she pause before the empty
fire-place, and turn to I, say calmly - if that might be
call calmness which be so evidently the result of a violent
effort, - 'now, Gilbert, you must leave I - not this moment, but
soon - and you must never come again.'
'never again, Helen? just when I love you more than ever.'
'for that very reason, if it be so, we should not meet again. I
think this interview be necessary - at least, I persuade myself
it be so - that we might severally ask and receive each other's
pardon for the past; but there can be no excuse for another. I
shall leave this place, as soon as I have mean to seek another
asylum; but our intercourse must end here.'
'end here!' echo I; and approach the high, carve chimney-
piece, I leant my hand against its heavy moulding, and drop my
forehead upon it in silent, sullen despondency.
'you must not come again,' continue she. there be a slight
tremor in her voice, but I think her whole manner be provokingly
compose, consider the dreadful sentence she pronounce. 'you
must know why I tell you so,' she resume; 'and you must see that
it be well to part at once: - if it be hard to say adieu for
ever, you ought to help I.' she pause. I do not answer. 'will
you promise not to come? - if you willnot, and if you do come here
again, you will drive I away before I know where to find another
place of refuge - or how to seek it.'
'Helen,' say I, turn impatiently towards she, 'I cannot discuss
the matter of eternal separation calmly and dispassionately as you
can do. it be no question of mere expedience with I; it be a
question of life and death!'
she be silent. her pale lip quiver, and her finger tremble
with agitation, as she nervously entwine they in the hair-chain to
which be append her small gold watch - the only thing of value
she have permit herself to keep. I have say an unjust and cruel
thing; but I must need follow it up with something bad.
'but, Helen!' I begin in a soft, low tone, not dare to raise my
eye to her face, 'that man be not your husband: in the sight of
heaven he have forfeit all claim to - ' she seize my arm with a
grasp of startling energy.
'Gilbert, donot!' she cry, in a tone that would have pierce a
heart of adamant. 'for God's sake, donot you attempt these
argument! no fiend could torture I like this!'
'I willnot, I willnot!' say I, gently lay my hand on her; almost
as much alarmed at her vehemence as ashamed of my own misconduct.
'instead of act like a true friend,' continue she, break
from I, and throw herself into the old arm-chair, 'and help
I with all your might - or rather take your own part in the
struggle of right against passion - you leave all the burden to I;
- and not satisfied with that, you do your utmost to fight against
I - when you know that! - ' she pause, and hide her face in her
handkerchief.
'forgive I, Helen!' plead I. 'I will never utter another word
on the subject. but may we not still meet as friend?'
'it will not do,' she reply, mournfully shake her head; and
then she raise her eye to mine, with a mildly reproachful look
that seem to say, 'you must know that as well as i.'
'then what must we do?' cry I, passionately. but immediately I
add in a quieter tone - 'Iwill do whatever you desire; only donot
say that this meeting be to be our last.'
'and why not? donot you know that every time we meet the thought
of the final parting will become more painful? donot you feel that
every interview make we dearer to each other than the last?'
the utterance of this last question be hurried and low, and the
downcast eye and burn blush too plainly show that she, at
least, have feel it. it be scarcely prudent to make such an
admission, or to add - as she presently do - 'I have power to bid
you go, now: another time it might be different,' - but I be not
base enough to attempt to take advantage of her candour.
'but we may write,' I timidly suggest. 'you will not deny I
that consolation?'
'we can hear of each other through my brother.'
'your brother!' a pang of remorse and shame shoot through I. she
have not hear of the injury he have sustain at my hand; and I have
not the courage to tell she. 'your brother will not help we,' I
say: 'he would have all communion between we to be entirely at an
end.'
'and he would be right, I suppose. as a friend of both, he would
wish we both well; and every friend would tell we it be our
interest, as well as our duty, to forget each other, though we
might not see it ourselves. but donot be afraid, Gilbert,' she
add, smile sadly at my manifest discomposure; 'there be little
chance of my forget you. but I do not mean that Frederick
should be the mean of transmit message between we - only that
each might know, through he, of the other's welfare; - and more
than this ought not to be: for you be young, Gilbert, and you
ought to marry - and will some time, though you may think it
impossible now: and though I hardly can say I wish you to forget
I, I know it be right that you should, both for your own
happiness, and that of your future wife; - and therefore I must and
will wish it,' she add resolutely.
'and you be young too, Helen,' I boldly reply; 'and when that
profligate scoundrel have run through his career, you will give your
hand to I - Iwill wait till then.'
but she would not leave I this support. independently of the
moral evil of base our hope upon the death of another, who, if
unfit for this world, be at least no less so for the next, and
whose amelioration would thus become our bane and his great
transgression our great benefit, - she maintain it to be
madness: many man of Mr. Huntingdon's habit have live to a ripe
though miserable old age. 'and if I,' say she, 'be young in
year, I be old in sorrow; but even if trouble should fail to kill
I before vice destroy he, think, if he reach but fifty year
or so, would you wait twenty or fifteen - in vague uncertainty and
suspense - through all the prime of youth and manhood - and marry
at last a woman fade and wear as I shall be - without ever have
see I from this day to that? - you would not,' she continue,
interrupt my earnest protestation of unfaile constancy, - 'or
if you would, you should not. trust I, Gilbert; in this matter I
know well than you. you think I cold and stony-hearted, and you
may, but - '
'I donot, Helen.'
'well, never mind: you might if you would: but I have not spend
my solitude in utter idleness, and I be not speak now from the
impulse of the moment, as you do. I have think of all these
matter again and again; I have argue these question with myself,
and ponder well our past, and present, and future career; and,
believe I, I have come to the right conclusion at last. trust my
word rather than your own feeling now, and in a few year you
will see that I be right - though at present I hardly can see it
myself,' she murmur with a sigh as she rest her head on her
hand. 'and donot argue against I any more: all you can say have
be already say by my own heart and refute by my reason. it be
hard enough to combat those suggestion as they be whisper
within I; in your mouth they be ten time bad, and if you know
how much they pain I you would cease at once, I know. if you know
my present feeling, you would even try to relieve they at the
expense of your own.'
'I will go - in a minute, if that can relieve you - and never
return!' say I, with bitter emphasis. 'but, if we may never meet,
and never hope to meet again, be it a crime to exchange our
thought by letter? may not kindre spirit meet, and mingle in
communion, whatever be the fate and circumstance of their earthly
tenement?'
'they may, they may!' cry she, with a momentary burst of glad
enthusiasm. 'I think of that too, Gilbert, but I fear to
mention it, because I fear you would not understand my view upon
the subject. I fear it even now - I fear any kind friend would
tell we we be both delude ourselves with the idea of keep up
a spiritual intercourse without hope or prospect of anything
far - without foster vain regret and hurtful aspiration,
and feed thought that should be sternly and pitilessly leave to
perish of inanition.'
'never mind our kind friend: if they can part our body, it be
enough; in God's name, let they not sunder our soul!' cry I, in
terror lest she should deem it her duty to deny we this last
remain consolation.
'but no letter can pass between we here,' say she, 'without
give fresh food for scandal; and when I depart, I have intend
that my new abode should be unknown to you as to the rest of the
world; not that I should doubt your word if you promise not to
visit I, but I think you would be more tranquil in your own mind
if you know you could not do it, and likely to find less difficulty
in abstract yourself from I if you could not picture my
situation to your mind. but listen,' say she, smilingly put
up her finger to check my impatient reply: 'in six month you
shall hear from Frederick precisely where I be; and if you still
retain your wish to write to I, and think you can maintain a
correspondence all think, all spirit - such as disembody soul
or unimpassioned friend, at least, might hold, - write, and I will
answer you.'
'six month!'
'yes, to give your present ardour time to cool, and try the truth
and constancy of your soul's love for mine. and now, enough have
be say between we. why cannot we part at once?' exclaim she,
almost wildly, after a moment's pause, as she suddenly rise from
her chair, with her hand resolutely clasp together. I think
it be my duty to go without delay; and I approach and half
extend my hand as if to take leave - she grasp it in silence.
but this thought of final separation be too intolerable: it
seem to squeeze the blood out of my heart; and my foot be glue
to the floor.
'and must we never meet again?' I murmur, in the anguish of my
soul.
'we shall meet in heaven. let we think of that,' say she in a
tone of desperate calmness; but her eye glitter wildly, and her
face be deadly pale.
'but not as we be now,' I could not help reply. 'it give I
little consolation to think I shall next behold you as a
disembody spirit, or an altered being, with a frame perfect and
glorious, but not like this! - and a heart, perhaps, entirely
estrange from I.'
'no, Gilbert, there be perfect love in heaven!'
'so perfect, I suppose, that it soar above distinction, and you
will have no close sympathy with I than with any one of the ten
thousand thousand angel and the innumerable multitude of happy
spirit round we.'
'whatever I be, you will be the same, and, therefore, cannot
possibly regret it; and whatever that change may be we know it must
be for the well.'
'but if I be to be so changed that I shall cease to adore you with
my whole heart and soul, and love you beyond every other creature,
I shall not be myself; and though, if ever I win heaven at all, I
must, I know, be infinitely well and happy than I be now, my
earthly nature cannot rejoice in the anticipation of such
beatitude, from which itself and its chief joy must be exclude.'
'be your love all earthly, then?'
'no, but I be suppose we shall have no more intimate communion
with each other than with the rest.'
'if so, it will be because we love they more, and not each other
less. increase of love bring increase of happiness, when it be
mutual, and pure as that will be.'
'but can you, Helen, contemplate with delight this prospect of
lose I in a sea of glory?'
'I own I cannot; but we know not that it will be so; - and I do
know that to regret the exchange of earthly pleasure for the joy
of heaven, be as if the grovel caterpillar should lament that
it must one day quit the nibble leaf to soar aloft and flutter
through the air, rove at will from flower to flower, sip
sweet honey from their cup, or bask in their sunny petal. if
these little creature know how great a change await they, no
doubt they would regret it; but would not all such sorrow be
misplace? and if that illustration will not move you, here be
another:- we be child now; we feel as child, and we
understand as child; and when we be tell that man and woman do
not play with toy, and that our companion will one day weary of
the trivial sport and occupation that interest they and we so
deeply now, we cannot help be sadden at the thought of such
an alteration, because we cannot conceive that as we grow up our
own mind will become so enlarged and elevate that we ourselves
shall then regard as trifle those object and pursuit we now so
fondly cherish, and that, though our companion will no long join
we in those childish pastime, they will drink with we at other
fountain of delight, and mingle their soul with our in high
aim and nobler occupation beyond our present comprehension, but
not less deeply relish or less truly good for that, while yet
both we and they remain essentially the same individual as before.
but, Gilbert, can you really derive no consolation from the thought
that we may meet together where there be no more pain and sorrow,
no more strive against sin, and struggle of the spirit against
the flesh; where both will behold the same glorious truth, and
drink exalted and supreme felicity from the same fountain of light
and goodness - that be whom both will worship with the same
intensity of holy ardour - and where pure and happy creature both
will love with the same divine affection? if you cannot, never
write to I!'
'Helen, I can! if faith would never fail.'
'now, then,' exclaim she, 'while this hope be strong within us -
'
'we will part,' I cry. 'you shall not have the pain of another
effort to dismiss I. I will go at once; but - '
I do not put my request in word: she understand it
instinctively, and this time she yield too - or rather, there be
nothing so deliberate as request or yield in the matter:
there be a sudden impulse that neither could resist. one moment I
stand and look into her face, the next I hold she to my heart,
and we seem to grow together in a close embrace from which no
physical or mental force could rend we. a whisper 'God bless
you!' and 'go - go!' be all she say; but while she speak she hold
I so fast that, without violence, I could not have obey she. at
length, however, by some heroic effort, we tear ourselves apart,
and I rush from the house.
I have a confused remembrance of see little Arthur run up
the garden-walk to meet I, and of bolt over the wall to avoid
he - and subsequently run down the steep field, clear the
stone fence and hedge as they come in my way, till I get
completely out of sight of the old hall and down to the bottom of
the hill; and then of long hour spend in bitter tear and
lamentation, and melancholy musing in the lonely valley, with the
eternal music in my ear, of the west wind rush through the
overshadow tree, and the brook babbling and gurgle along its
stony bed; my eye, for the most part, vacantly fix on the deep,
chequer shade restlessly play over the bright sunny grass at
my foot, where now and then a wither leaf or two would come
dance to share the revelry; but my heart be away up the hill in
that dark room where she be weep desolate and alone - she whom
I be not to comfort, not to see again, till year or suffering have
overcome we both, and tear our spirit from their perishing abode
of clay.
there be little business do that day, you may be sure. the farm
be abandon to the labourer, and the labourer be leave to
their own device. but one duty must be attend to; I have not
forget my assault upon Frederick Lawrence; and I must see he to
apologise for the unhappy deed. I would fain have put it off till
the morrow; but what if he should denounce I to his sister in the
meantime? no, no! I must ask his pardon to-day, and entreat he
to be lenient in his accusation, if the revelation must be make. I
defer it, however, till the evening, when my spirit be more
compose, and when - oh, wonderful perversity of human nature! -
some faint germ of indefinite hope be begin to rise in my
mind; not that I intend to cherish they, after all that have be
say on the subject, but there they must lie for a while, uncrushe
though not encourage, till I have learn to live without they.
arrive at Woodford, the young squire's abode, I find no little
difficulty in obtain admission to his presence. the servant
that open the door tell I his master be very ill, and seem to
think it doubtful whether he would be able to see I. I be not
go to be baulk, however. I wait calmly in the hall to be
announce, but inwardly determined to take no denial. the message
be such as I expect - a polite intimation that Mr. Lawrence
could see no one; he be feverish, and must not be disturb.
'I shall not disturb he long,' say I; 'but I must see he for a
moment: it be on business of importance that I wish to speak to
he.'
'Iwill tell he, sir,' say the man. and I advance far into
the hall and follow he nearly to the door of the apartment where
his master be - for it seem he be not in bed. the answer
return be that Mr. Lawrence hop I would be so good as to leave
a message or a note with the servant, as he could attend to no
business at present.
'he may as well see I as you,' say I; and, step past the
astonish footman, I boldly rap at the door, enter, and
close it behind I. the room be spacious and handsomely
furnish - very comfortably, too, for a bachelor. a clear, red
fire be burn in the polished grate: a superannuated greyhound,
give up to idleness and good living, lie bask before it on the
thick, soft rug, on one corner of which, beside the sofa, sit a
smart young springer, look wistfully up in its master's face -
perhaps ask permission to share his couch, or, it might be, only
solicit a caress from his hand or a kind word from his lip.
the invalid himself look very interesting as he lie recline
there, in his elegant dressing-gown, with a silk handkerchief bind
across his temple. his usually pale face be flushed and
feverish; his eye be half closed, until he become sensible of my
presence - and then he open they wide enough: one hand be
throw listlessly over the back of the sofa, and hold a small
volume, with which, apparently, he have be vainly attempt to
beguile the weary hour. he drop it, however, in his start of
indignant surprise as I advance into the room and stand before he
on the rug. he raise himself on his pillow, and gaze upon I
with equal degree of nervous horror, anger, and amazement depict
on his countenance.
'Mr. Markham, I scarcely expect this!' he say; and the blood
leave his cheek as he speak.
'I know you donot,' answer I; 'but be quiet a minute, and Iwill
tell you what I come for.' unthinkingly, I advance a step or two
nearer. he wince at my approach, with an expression of aversion
and instinctive physical fear anything but conciliatory to my
feeling. I step back, however.
'make your story a short one,' say he, put his hand on the
small silver bell that stand on the table beside he, 'or I shall
be oblige to call for assistance. I be in no state to bear your
brutality now, or your presence either.' and in truth the
moisture start from his pore and stand on his pale forehead like
dew.
such a reception be hardly calculate to diminish the difficulty
of my unenviable task. it must be perform however, in some
fashion; and so I plunge into it at once, and flounder through
it as I could.
'the truth be, Lawrence,' say I, 'I have not act quite correctly
towards you of late - especially on this last occasion; and Ibe
come to - in short, to express my regret for what have be do,
and to beg your pardon. if you donot choose to grant it,' I add
hastily, not like the aspect of his face, 'itbe no matter; only
Ihave do my duty - thatbe all.'
'itbe easily do,' reply he, with a faint smile border on a
sneer: 'to abuse your friend and knock he on the head without any
assignable cause, and then tell he the deed be not quite correct,
but itbe no matter whether he pardon it or not.'
'I forget to tell you that it be in consequence of a mistake,' -
muttered I. 'I should have make a very handsome apology, but you
provoke I so confoundedly with your -. well, I suppose itbe my
fault. the fact be, I donot know that you be Mrs. Graham's
brother, and I see and hear some thing respect your conduct
towards she which be calculate to awaken unpleasant suspicion,
that, allow I to say, a little candour and confidence on your part
might have remove; and, at last, I chance to overhear a part of a
conversation between you and she that make I think I have a right
to hate you.'
'and how come you to know that I be her brother?' ask he, in
some anxiety.
'she tell I herself. she tell I all. she know I might be
trust. but you neednot disturb yourself about that, Mr.
Lawrence, for Ihave see the last of she!'
'the last! be she go, then?'
'no; but she have bid adieu to I, and I have promise never to go
near that house again while she inhabit it.' I could have groan
aloud at the bitter thought awaken by this turn in the
discourse. but I only clench my hand and stamp my foot upon
the rug. my companion, however, be evidently relieve.
'you have do right,' he say, in a tone of unqualified
approbation, while his face brighten into almost a sunny
expression. 'and as for the mistake, I be sorry for both our sake
that it should have occur. perhaps you can forgive my want of
candour, and remember, as some partial mitigation of the offence,
how little encouragement to friendly confidence you have give I
of late.'
'yes, yes - I remember it all: nobody can blame I more than I
blame myself in my own heart; at any rate, nobody can regret more
sincerely than I do the result of my brutality, as you rightly term
it.'
'never mind that,' say he, faintly smile; 'let we forget all
unpleasant word on both side, as well as deed, and consign to
oblivion everything that we have cause to regret. have you any
objection to take my hand, or youwould rather not?' it tremble
through weakness as he hold it out, and drop before I have time
to catch it and give it a hearty squeeze, which he have not the
strength to return.
'how dry and burn your hand be, Lawrence,' say I. 'you be
really ill, and I have make you bad by all this talk.'
'oh, it be nothing; only a cold get by the rain.'
'my doing, too.'
'never mind that. but tell I, do you mention this affair to my
sister?'
'to confess the truth, I have not the courage to do so; but when you
tell she, will you just say that I deeply regret it, and - ?'
'oh, never fear! I shall say nothing against you, as long as you
keep your good resolution of remain aloof from she. she have not
hear of my illness, then, that you be aware of?'
'I think not.'
'Ibe glad of that, for I have be all this time torment myself
with the fear that somebody would tell she I be die, or
desperately ill, and she would be either distress herself on
account of her inability to hear from I or do I any good, or
perhaps commit the madness of come to see I. I must
contrive to let she know something about it, if I can,' continue
he, reflectively, 'or she will be hear some such story. many
would be glad to tell she such news, just to see how she would take
it; and then she might expose herself to fresh scandal.'
'I wish I have tell she,' say I. 'if it be not for my promise, I
would tell she now.'
'by no mean! I be not dream of that; - but if I be to write
a short note, now, not mention you, Markham, but just give a
slight account of my illness, by way of excuse for my not come to
see she, and to put she on her guard against any exaggerated
report she may hear, - and address it in a disguised hand - would
you do I the favour to slip it into the post-office as you pass?
for I dare not trust any of the servant in such a case.'
most willingly I consent, and immediately bring he his desk.
there be little need to disguise his hand, for the poor fellow
seem to have considerable difficulty in write at all, so as to
be legible. when the note be do, I think it time to retire,
and take leave, after ask if there be anything in the world I
could do for he, little or great, in the way of alleviate his
suffering, and repair the injury I have do.
'no,' say he; 'you have already do much towards it; you have
do more for I than the most skilful physician could do: for you
have relieve my mind of two great burden - anxiety on my sister's
account, and deep regret upon your own: for I do believe these two
source of torment have have more effect in work I up into a
fever than anything else; and I be persuade I shall soon recover
now. there be one more thing you can do for I, and that be, come
and see I now and then - for you see I be very lonely here, and I
promise your entrance shall not be dispute again.'
I engage to do so, and depart with a cordial pressure of the
hand. I post the letter on my way home, most manfully resist
the temptation of drop in a word from myself at the same time.
CHAPTER XLVI
I feel strongly tempt, at time, to enlighten my mother and
sister on the real character and circumstance of the persecute
tenant of Wildfell Hall, and at first I greatly regret have
omit to ask that lady's permission to do so; but, on due
reflection, I consider that if it be know to they, it could
not long remain a secret to the Millwards and Wilsons, and such be
my present appreciation of Eliza Millward's disposition, that, if
once she get a clue to the story, I should fear she would soon find
mean to enlighten Mr. Huntingdon upon the place of his wife's
retreat. I would therefore wait patiently till these weary six
month be over, and then, when the fugitive have find another
home, and I be permit to write to she, I would beg to be
allow to clear her name from these vile calumny: at present I
must content myself with simply assert that I know they to be
false, and would prove it some day, to the shame of those who
slander she. I donot think anybody believe I, but everybody
soon learn to avoid insinuate a word against she, or even
mention her name in my presence. they think I be so madly
infatuate by the seduction of that unhappy lady that I be
determined to support she in the very face of reason; and meantime
I grow insupportably morose and misanthropical from the idea that
every one I meet be harbour unworthy thought of the suppose
Mrs. Graham, and would express they if he dare. my poor mother
be quite distressed about I; but I couldnot help it - at least I
think I could not, though sometimes I feel a pang of remorse for
my undutiful conduct to she, and make an effort to amend, attend
with some partial success; and indeed I be generally more
humanise in my demeanour to she than to any one else, Mr. Lawrence
except. Rose and Fergus usually shun my presence; and it be
well they do, for I be not fit company for they, nor they for I,
under the present circumstance.
Mrs. Huntingdon do not leave Wildfell Hall till above two month
after our farewell interview. during that time she never appear
at church, and I never go near the house: I only know she be
still there by her brother's brief answer to my many and varied
inquiry respect she. I be a very constant and attentive
visitor to he throughout the whole period of his illness and
convalescence; not only from the interest I take in his recovery,
and my desire to cheer he up and make the utmost possible amend
for my former 'brutality,' but from my grow attachment to
himself, and the increase pleasure I find in his society -
partly from his increase cordiality to I, but chiefly on account
of his close connection, both in blood and in affection, with my
adore Helen. I love he for it well than I like to express:
and I take a secret delight in press those slender white
finger, so marvellously like her own, consider he be not a
woman, and in watch the pass change in his fair, pale
feature, and observe the intonation of his voice, detect
resemblance which I wonder have never strike I before. he
provoke I at time, indeed, by his evident reluctance to talk to
I about his sister, though I do not question the friendliness of
his motif in wish to discourage my remembrance of she.
his recovery be not quite so rapid as he have expect it to be; he
be not able to mount his pony till a fortnight after the date of
our reconciliation; and the first use he make of his return
strength be to ride over by night to Wildfell Hall, to see his
sister. it be a hazardous enterprise both for he and for she,
but he think it necessary to consult with she on the subject of
her project departure, if not to calm her apprehension
respect his health, and the bad result be a slight relapse of
his illness, for no one know of the visit but the inmate of the
old Hall, except myself; and I believe it have not be his
intention to mention it to I, for when I come to see he the next
day, and observe he be not so well as he ought to have be, he
merely say he have catch cold by be out too late in the
evening.
'youwill never be able to see your sister, if you donot take care of
yourself,' say I, a little provoke at the circumstance on her
account, instead of commiserate he.
'Ihave see she already,' say he, quietly.
'youhave see she!' cry I, in astonishment.
'yes.' and then he tell I what consideration have impel he to
make the venture, and with what precaution he have make it.
'and how be she?' I eagerly ask.
'as usual,' be the brief though sad reply.
'as usual - that be, far from happy and far from strong.'
'she be not positively ill,' return he; 'and she will recover she
spirit in a while, I have no doubt - but so many trial have be
almost too much for she. how threaten those cloud look,'
continue he, turn towards the window. 'we shall have thunder-
shower before night, I imagine, and they be just in the midst of
stack my corn. have you get yours all in yet?'
'no. and, Lawrence, do she - do your sister mention I?'
'she ask if I have see you lately.'
'and what else do she say?'
'I cannot tell you all she say,' reply he, with a slight smile;
'for we talk a good deal, though my stay be but short; but our
conversation be chiefly on the subject of her intended departure,
which I beg she to delay till I be well able to assist she in
her search after another home.'
'but do she say no more about I?'
'she do not say much about you, Markham. I should not have
encourage she to do so, have she be incline; but happily she be
not: she only ask a few question concern you, and seem
satisfied with my brief answer, wherein she show herself wiser
than her friend; and I may tell you, too, that she seem to be far
more anxious lest you should think too much of she, than lest you
should forget she.'
'she be right.'
'but I fear your anxiety be quite the other way respect she.'
'no, it be not: I wish she to be happy; but I donot wish she to
forget I altogether. she know it be impossible that I should
forget she; and she be right to wish I not to remember she too
well. I should not desire she to regret I too deeply; but I can
scarcely imagine she will make herself very unhappy about I,
because I know I be not worthy of it, except in my appreciation of
she.'
'you be neither of you worthy of a broken heart, - nor of all the
sigh, and tear, and sorrowful thought that have be, and I fear
will be, waste upon you both; but, at present, each have a more
exalt opinion of the other than, I fear, he or she deserve; and
my sister's feeling be naturally full as keen as your, and I
believe more constant; but she have the good sense and fortitude to
strive against they in this particular; and I trust she will not
rest till she have entirely wean her thought - ' he hesitate.
'from I,' say I.
'and I wish you would make the like exertion,' continue he.
'do she tell you that that be her intention?'
'no; the question be not broach between we: there be no
necessity for it, for I have no doubt that such be her
determination.'
'to forget I?'
'yes, Markham! why not?'
'oh, well!' be my only audible reply; but I internally answer, -
'no, Lawrence, yoube wrong there: she be not determined to forget
I. it would be wrong to forget one so deeply and fondly devote
to she, who can so thoroughly appreciate her excellency, and
sympathise with all her thought, as I can do, and it would be
wrong in I to forget so excellent and divine a piece of God's
creation as she, when I have once so truly love and know she.'
but I say no more to he on that subject. I instantly start a
new topic of conversation, and soon take leave of my companion,
with a feeling of less cordiality towards he than usual. perhaps
I have no right to be annoy at he, but I be so nevertheless.
in little more than a week after this I meet he return from a
visit to the wilson'; and I now resolve to do he a good turn,
though at the expense of his feeling, and perhaps at the risk of
incur that displeasure which be so commonly the reward of those
who give disagreeable information, or tender their advice unasked.
in this, believe I, I be actuate by no motif of revenge for
the occasional annoyance I have lately sustain from he, - nor
yet by any feeling of malevolent enmity towards Miss Wilson, but
purely by the fact that I could not endure that such a woman should
be Mrs. Huntingdon's sister, and that, as well for his own sake as
for her, I could not bear to think of his be deceive into a
union with one so unworthy of he, and so utterly unfit to be
the partner of his quiet home, and the companion of his life. he
have have uncomfortable suspicion on that head himself, I imagine;
but such be his inexperience, and such be the lady's power of
attraction, and her skill in bring they to bear upon his young
imagination, that they have not disturb he long; and I believe
the only effectual cause of the vacillate indecision that have
preserve he hitherto from make an actual declaration of love,
be the consideration of her connection, and especially of her
mother, whom he could not abide. have they live at a distance, he
might have surmount the objection, but within two or three mile
of Woodford it be really no light matter.
'youhave be to call on the Wilsons, Lawrence,' say I, as I walk
beside his pony.
'yes,' reply he, slightly avert his face: 'I think it but
civil to take the first opportunity of return their kind
attention, since they have be so very particular and constant in
their inquiry throughout the whole course of my illness.'
'itbe all Miss Wilson's do.'
'and if it be,' return he, with a very perceptible blush, 'be
that any reason why I should not make a suitable acknowledgment?'
'it be a reason why you should not make the acknowledgment she
look for.'
'let we drop that subject if you please,' say he, in evident
displeasure.
'no, Lawrence, with your leave wewill continue it a while long;
and Iwill tell you something, now webe about it, which you may
believe or not as you choose - only please to remember that it be
not my custom to speak falsely, and that in this case I can have no
motive for misrepresent the truth - '
'well, Markham, what now?'
'Miss Wilson hat your sister. it may be natural enough that, in
her ignorance of the relationship, she should feel some degree of
enmity against she, but no good or amiable woman would be capable
of evince that bitter, cold-blooded, design malice towards a
fancy rival that I have observe in she.'
'Markham!'
'yes - and it be my belief that Eliza Millward and she, if not the
very originator of the slanderous report that have be
propagate, be designedly the encourager and chief disseminator
of they. she be not desirous to mix up your name in the matter,
of course, but her delight be, and still be, to blacken your
sister's character to the utmost of her power, without risk too
greatly the exposure of her own malevolence!'
'I cannot believe it,' interrupt my companion, his face burn
with indignation.
'well, as I cannot prove it, I must content myself with assert
that it be so to the good of my belief; but as you would not
willingly marry Miss Wilson if it be so, you will do well to be
cautious, till you have prove it to be otherwise.'
'I never tell you, Markham, that I intend to marry Miss Wilson,'
say he, proudly.
'no, but whether you do or not, she intend to marry you.'
'do she tell you so?'
'no, but - '
'then you have no right to make such an assertion respect she.'
he slightly quicken his pony's pace, but I lay my hand on its
mane, determine he should not leave I yet.
'wait a moment, Lawrence, and let I explain myself; and donot be
so very - I donot know what to call it - inaccessible as you be. -
I know what you think of Jane Wilson; and I believe I know how far
you be mistaken in your opinion: you think she be singularly
charming, elegant, sensible, and refine: you be not aware that
she be selfish, cold-hearted, ambitious, artful, shallow-minded - '
'enough, Markham - enough!'
'no; let I finish:- you donot know that, if you marry she, your
home would be rayless and comfortless; and it would break your
heart at last to find yourself united to one so wholly incapable of
share your taste, feeling, and idea - so utterly destitute of
sensibility, good feeling, and true nobility of soul.'
'have you do?' ask my companion quietly.
'yes; - I know you hate I for my impertinence, but I donot care if
it only conduce to preserve you from that fatal mistake.'
'well!' return he, with a rather wintry smile - 'Ibe glad you
have overcome or forget your own affliction so far as to be
able to study so deeply the affair of other, and trouble your
head so unnecessarily about the fancied or possible calamity of
their future life.'
we part - somewhat coldly again: but still we do not cease to
be friend; and my well-mean warning, though it might have be
more judiciously deliver, as well as more thankfully receive,
be not wholly unproductive of the desire effect: his visit to
the Wilsons be not repeat, and though, in our subsequent
interview, he never mention her name to I, nor I to he, - I
have reason to believe he ponder my word in his mind, eagerly
though covertly seek information respect the fair lady from
other quarter, secretly compare my character of she with what he
have himself observe and what he hear from other, and finally
come to the conclusion that, all thing consider, she have much
well remain Miss Wilson of Ryecote Farm than be transmute into
Mrs. Lawrence of Woodford Hall. I believe, too, that he soon
learn to contemplate with secret amazement his former
predilection, and to congratulate himself on the lucky escape he
have make; but he never confess it to I, or hint one word of
acknowledgment for the part I have have in his deliverance, but this
be not surprising to any one that know he as I do.
as for Jane Wilson, she, of course, be disappoint and embitter
by the sudden cold neglect and ultimate desertion of her former
admirer. have I do wrong to blight her cherished hope? I think
not; and certainly my conscience have never accuse I, from that
day to this, of any evil design in the matter.
CHAPTER XLVII
one morning, about the beginning of November, while I be indite
some business letter, shortly after breakfast, Eliza Millward come
to call upon my sister. Rose have neither the discrimination nor
the virulence to regard the little demon as I do, and they still
preserve their former intimacy. at the moment of her arrival,
however, there be no one in the room but Fergus and myself, my
mother and sister be both of they absent, 'on household care
intent'; but I be not go to lay myself out for her amusement,
whoever else might so incline: I merely honour she with a
careless salutation and a few word of course, and then go on
with my writing, leave my brother to be more polite if he choose.
but she want to tease I.
'what a pleasure it be to find you at home, Mr. Markham!' say she,
with a disingenuously malicious smile. 'I so seldom see you now,
for you never come to the vicarage. papa, be quite offended, I can
tell you,' she add playfully, look into my face with an
impertinent laugh, as she seat herself, half beside and half
before my desk, off the corner of the table.
'I have have a good deal to do of late,' say I, without look up
from my letter.
'have you, indeed! somebody say you have be strangely neglect
your business these last few month.'
'somebody say wrong, for, these last two month especially, I have
be particularly plod and diligent.'
'ah! well, therebe nothing like active employment, I suppose, to
console the afflict; - and, excuse I, Mr. Markham, but you look
so very far from well, and have be, by all account, so moody and
thoughtful of late, - I could almost think you have some secret
care preying on your spirit. formerly,' say she timidly, 'I
could have venture to ask you what it be, and what I could do to
comfort you: I dare not do it now.'
'yoube very kind, Miss Eliza. when I think you can do anything to
comfort I, Iwill make bold to tell you.'
'pray do! - I suppose I maynot guess what it be that trouble you?'
'therebe no necessity, for Iwill tell you plainly. the thing that
trouble I the most at present be a young lady sit at my
elbow, and prevent I from finish my letter, and, thereafter,
repair to my daily business.'
before she could reply to this ungallant speech, Rose enter the
room; and Miss Eliza rise to greet she, they both seat
themselves near the fire, where that idle lad Fergus be stand,
lean his shoulder against the corner of the chimney-piece, with
his leg cross and his hand in his breech-pocket.
'now, Rose, Iwill tell you a piece of news - I hope you have not
hear it before: for good, bad, or indifferent, one always like
to be the first to tell. itbe about that sad Mrs. Graham - '
'hush-sh-sh!' whisper Fergus, in a tone of solemn import. '"we
never mention she; her name be never hear."' and glance up, I
catch he with his eye askance on I, and his finger point to
his forehead; then, wink at the young lady with a doleful shake
of the head, be whisper - 'a monomania - but donot mention it -
all right but that.'
'I should be sorry to injure any one's feeling,' return she,
speak below her breath. 'another time, perhaps.'
'speak out, Miss Eliza!' say I, not deign to notice the other's
buffoonery: 'you neednot fear to say anything in my presence.'
'well,' answer she, 'perhaps you know already that Mrs. Graham's
husband be not really dead, and that she have run away from he?' I
start, and feel my face glow; but I bent it over my letter, and
go on fold it up as she proceed. 'but perhaps you do not
know that she be now go back to he again, and that a perfect
reconciliation have take place between they? only think,' she
continue, turn to the confounded Rose, 'what a fool the man
must be!'
'and who give you this piece of intelligence, Miss Eliza?' say I,
interrupt my sister's exclamation.
'I have it from a very authentic source.'
'from whom, may I ask?'
'from one of the servant at Woodford.'
'oh! I be not aware that you be on such intimate term with Mr.
Lawrence's household.'
'it be not from the man himself that I hear it, but he tell it in
confidence to our maid Sarah, and Sarah tell it to I.'
'in confidence, I suppose? and you tell it in confidence to we?
but I can tell you that it be but a lame story after all, and
scarcely one-half of it true.'
while I speak I complete the sealing and direction of my letter,
with a somewhat unsteady hand, in spite of all my effort to retain
composure, and in spite of my firm conviction that the story be a
lame one - that the suppose Mrs. Graham, most certainly, have not
voluntarily go back to her husband, or dream of a
reconciliation. most likely she be go away, and the tale-
bear servant, not know what be become of she, have
conjecture that such be the case, and our fair visitor have
detail it as a certainty, delight with such an opportunity of
torment I. but it be possible - barely possible - that some
one might have betray she, and she have be take away by force.
determine to know the bad, I hastily pocket my two letter,
and mutter something about be too late for the post, leave the
room, rush into the yard, and vociferously call for my horse.
no one be there, I drag he out of the stable myself,
strap the saddle on to his back and the bridle on to his head,
mount, and speedily gallop away to Woodford. I find its owner
pensively stroll in the ground.
'be your sister go?' be my first word as I grasp his hand,
instead of the usual inquiry after his health.
'yes, shebe go,' be his answer, so calmly speak that my terror
be at once remove.
'I suppose I maynot know where she be?' say I, as I dismount,
and relinquish my horse to the gardener, who, be the only
servant within call, have be summon by his master, from his
employment of rake up the dead leaf on the lawn, to take he to
the stable.
my companion gravely take my arm, and lead I away to the
garden, thus answer my question, - 'she be at Grassdale Manor, in
-shire.'
'where?' cry I, with a convulsive start.
'at Grassdale Manor.'
'how be it?' I gasp. 'who betray she?'
'she go of her own accord.'
'Impossible, Lawrence! she could not be so frantic!' exclaim I,
vehemently grasp his arm, as if to force he to unsay those
hateful word.
'she do,' persist he in the same grave, collect manner as
before; 'and not without reason,' he continue, gently disengage
himself from my grasp. 'Mr. Huntingdon be ill.'
'and so she go to nurse he?'
'yes.'
'Fool!' I could not help exclaim, and Lawrence look up with a
rather reproachful glance. 'be he die, then?'
'I think not, Markham.'
'and how many more nurse have he? how many lady be there
besides to take care of he?'
'none; he be alone, or she would not have go.'
'oh, confound it! this be intolerable!'
'what be? that he should be alone?'
I attempt no reply, for I be not sure that this circumstance do
not partly conduce to my distraction. I therefore continue to
pace the walk in silent anguish, with my hand press to my
forehead; then suddenly pause and turn to my companion, I
impatiently exclaim, 'why do she take this infatuated step?
what fiend persuade she to it?'
'nothing persuade she but her own sense of duty.'
'Humbug!'
'I be half inclined to say so myself, Markham, at first. I assure
you it be not by my advice that she go, for I det that man as
fervently as you can do, - except, indeed, that his reformation
would give I much great pleasure than his death; but all I do
be to inform she of the circumstance of his illness (the
consequence of a fall from his horse in hunting), and to tell she
that that unhappy person, Miss Myers, have leave he some time ago.'
'it be ill do! now, when he find the convenience of her
presence, he will make all manner of lie speech and false, fair
promise for the future, and she will believe he, and then she
condition will be ten time bad and ten time more irremediable
than before.'
'there do not appear to be much ground for such apprehension at
present,' say he, produce a letter from his pocket. 'from the
account I receive this morning, I should say - '
it be her writing! by an irresistible impulse I hold out my hand,
and the word, 'let I see it,' involuntarily pass my lip. he
be evidently reluctant to grant the request, but while he
hesitate I snatch it from his hand. recollect myself,
however, the minute after, I offer to restore it.
'here, take it,' say I, 'if you donot want I to read it.'
'no,' reply he, 'you may read it if you like.'
I read it, and so may you.
Grassdale, Nov. 4th.
Dear Frederick, - I know you will be anxious to hear from I, and I
will tell you all I can. Mr. Huntingdon be very ill, but not
die, or in any immediate danger; and he be rather well at
present than he be when I come. I find the house in sad
confusion: Mrs. Greaves, Benson, every decent servant have leave,
and those that be come to supply their place be a negligent,
disorderly set, to say no bad - I must change they again, if I
stay. a professional nurse, a grim, hard old woman, have be hire
to attend the wretched invalid. he suffer much, and have no
fortitude to bear he through. the immediate injury he sustain
from the accident, however, be not very severe, and would, as the
doctor say, have be but trifle to a man of temperate habit,
but with he it be very different. on the night of my arrival,
when I first enter his room, he be lie in a kind of half
delirium. he do not notice I till I speak, and then he mistake
I for another.
'be it you, Alice, come again?' he murmur. 'what do you leave
I for?'
'it be I, Arthur - it be Helen, your wife,' I reply.
'my wife!' say he, with a start. 'for heaven's sake, donot
mention she - I have none. Devil take she,' he cry, a moment
after, 'and you, too! what do you do it for?'
I say no more; but observe that he keep gaze towards the foot
of the bed, I go and sit there, place the light so as to shine
full upon I, for I think he might be die, and I want he to
know I. for a long time he lie silently look upon I, first
with a vacant stare, then with a fix gaze of strange grow
intensity. at last he startle I by suddenly raise himself on
his elbow and demand in a horrified whisper, with his eye still
fix upon I, 'who be it?'
'it be Helen Huntingdon,' say I, quietly rise at the same time,
and remove to a less conspicuous position.
'I must be go mad,' cry he, 'or something - delirious,
perhaps; but leave I, whoever you be. I cannot bear that white
face, and those eye. for God's sake go, and send I somebody else
that donot look like that!'
I go at once, and send the hire nurse; but next morning I
venture to enter his chamber again, and, take the nurse's place
by his bedside, I watch he and wait on he for several hour,
show myself as little as possible, and only speak when
necessary, and then not above my breath. at first he address I
as the nurse, but, on my crossing the room to draw up the window-
blind, in obedience to his direction, he say, 'no, it benot
nurse; itbe Alice. stay with I, do! that old hag will be the
death of I.'
'I mean to stay with you,' say i. and after that he would call I
Alice, or some other name almost equally repugnant to my feeling.
I force myself to endure it for a while, fear a contradiction
might disturb he too much; but when, have ask for a glass of
water, while I hold it to his lip, he murmur, 'thank, dearest!'
I could not help distinctly observe, 'you would not say so if you
know I,' intend to follow that up with another declaration of
my identity; but he merely mutter an incoherent reply, so I
drop it again, till some time after, when, as I be bath his
forehead and temple with vinegar and water to relieve the heat and
pain in his head, he observe, after look earnestly upon I for
some minute, 'I have such strange fancy - I cannot get rid of
they, and they willnot let I rest; and the most singular and
pertinacious of they all be your face and voice - they seem just
like her. I could swear at this moment that she be by my side.'
'she be,' say I.
'that seem comfortable,' continue he, without notice my word;
'and while you do it, the other fancy fade away - but this only
strengthen. - go on - go on, till it vanish, too. I cannot stand
such a mania as this; it would kill I!'
'it never will vanish,' say I, distinctly, 'for it be the truth!'
'the truth!' he cry, start, as if an asp have sting he. 'you
donot mean to say that you be really she?'
'I do; but you neednot shrink away from I, as if I be your
great enemy: I be come to take care of you, and do what none of
they would do.'
'for God's sake, donot torment I now!' cry he in pitiable
agitation; and then he begin to mutter bitter curse against I, or
the evil fortune that have bring I there; while I put down the
sponge and basin, and resume my seat at the bed-side.
'where be they?' say he: 'have they all leave I - servant and
all?'
'there be servant within call if you want they; but you have
well lie down now and be quiet: none of they could or would
attend you as carefully as I shall do.'
'I cannot understand it at all,' say he, in bewildered perplexity.
'be it a dream that - ' and he cover his eye with his hand, as
if try to unravel the mystery.
'no, Arthur, it be not a dream, that your conduct be such as to
oblige I to leave you; but I hear that you be ill and alone,
and I be come back to nurse you. you need not fear to trust I
tell I all your want, and I will try to satisfy they. there be
no one else to care for you; and I shall not upbraid you now.'
'oh! I see,' say he, with a bitter smile; 'itbe an act of
christian charity, whereby you hope to gain a high seat in heaven
for yourself, and scoop a deep pit in hell for I.'
'no; I come to offer you that comfort and assistance your situation
require; and if I could benefit your soul as well as your body,
and awaken some sense of contrition and - '
'oh, yes; if you could overwhelm I with remorse and confusion of
face, nowbe the time. what have you do with my son?'
'he be well, and you may see he some time, if you will compose
yourself, but not now.'
'where be he?'
'he be safe.'
'be he here?'
'wherever he be, you will not see he till you have promise to
leave he entirely under my care and protection, and to let I take
he away whenever and wherever I please, if I should hereafter
judge it necessary to remove he again. but we will talk of that
to-morrow: you must be quiet now.'
'no, let I see he now, I promise, if it must be so.'
'no - '
'I swear it, as God be in heaven! now, then, let I see he.'
'but I cannot trust your oath and promise: I must have a write
agreement, and you must sign it in presence of a witness: but not
to-day - to-morrow.'
'no, to-day; now,' persist he: and he be in such a state of
feverish excitement, and so bent upon the immediate gratification
of his wish, that I think it well to grant it at once, as I see
he would not rest till I do. but I be determine my son's
interest should not be forget; and have clearly write out
the promise I wish Mr. Huntingdon to give upon a slip of paper, I
deliberately read it over to he, and make he sign it in the
presence of Rachel. he beg I would not insist upon this: it
be a useless exposure of my want of faith in his word to the
servant. I tell he I be sorry, but since he have forfeit my
confidence, he must take the consequence. he next plead
inability to hold the pen. 'then we must wait until you can hold
it,' say I. upon which he say he would try; but then he could
not see to write. I place my finger where the signature be to
be, and tell he he might write his name in the dark, if he only
know where to put it. but he have not power to form the letter.
'in that case, you must be too ill to see the child,' say I; and
find I inexorable, he at length manage to ratify the
agreement; and I bade Rachel send the boy.
all this may strike you as harsh, but I feel I must not lose my
present advantage, and my son's future welfare should not be
sacrifice to any mistaken tenderness for this man's feeling.
Little Arthur have not forget his father, but thirteen month of
absence, during which he have seldom be permit to hear a word
about he, or hardly to whisper his name, have render he somewhat
shy; and when he be usher into the darken room where the sick
man lay, so altered from his former self, with fiercely flushed
face and wildly-gleam eye - he instinctively clung to I, and
stand look on his father with a countenance expressive of far
more awe than pleasure.
'come here, Arthur,' say the latter, extend his hand towards
he. the child go, and timidly touch that burn hand, but
almost start in alarm, when his father suddenly clutch his arm
and draw he near to his side.
'do you know I?' ask Mr. Huntingdon, intently peruse his
feature.
'yes.'
'who be I?'
'papa.'
'be you glad to see I?'
'yes.'
'yoube not!' reply the disappointed parent, relax his hold,
and dart a vindictive glance at I.
Arthur, thus release, creep back to I and put his hand in mine.
his father swear I have make the child hate he, and abuse and
curse I bitterly. the instant he begin I send our son out of the
room; and when he pause to breathe, I calmly assure he that he
be entirely mistaken; I have never once attempt to prejudice his
child against he.
'I do indeed desire he to forget you,' I say, 'and especially to
forget the lesson you teach he; and for that cause, and to
lessen the danger of discovery, I own I have generally discourage
his inclination to talk about you; but no one can blame I for
that, I think.'
the invalid only reply by groan aloud, and roll his head on
a pillow in a paroxysm of impatience.
'I be in hell, already!' cry he. 'this curse thirst be burn
my heart to ash! will nobody -?'
before he could finish the sentence I have pour out a glass of
some acidulate, cool drink that be on the table, and bring
it to he. he drink it greedily, but mutter, as I take away the
glass, - 'I suppose yoube heap coal of fire on my head, you
think?'
not notice this speech, I ask if there be anything else I
could do for he.
'yes; Iwill give you another opportunity of show your Christian
magnanimity,' sneer he: 'set my pillow straight, and these
confound bed-clothe.' I do so. 'there: now get I another
glass of that slop.' I comply. 'this be delightful, benot it?'
say he with a malicious grin, as I hold it to his lip; 'you never
hop for such a glorious opportunity?'
'now, shall I stay with you?' say I, as I replace the glass on
the table: 'or will you be more quiet if I go and send the nurse?'
'oh, yes, yoube wondrous gentle and obliging! but youhave drive
I mad with it all!' respond he, with an impatient toss.
'Iwill leave you, then,' say I; and I withdraw, and do not trouble
he with my presence again that day, except for a minute or two at
a time, just to see how he be and what he want.
next morning the doctor order he to be bleed; and after that he
be more subdued and tranquil. I pass half the day in his room
at different interval. my presence do not appear to agitate or
irritate he as before, and he accept my service quietly,
without any bitter remark: indeed, he scarcely speak at all,
except to make know his want, and hardly then. but on the
morrow, that be to say, in proportion as he recover from the
state of exhaustion and stupefaction, his ill-nature appear to
revive.
'oh, this sweet revenge!' cry he, when I have be do all I
could to make he comfortable and to remedy the carelessness of his
nurse. 'and you can enjoy it with such a quiet conscience too,
because itbe all in the way of duty.'
'it be well for I that I be do my duty,' say I, with a
bitterness I could not repress, 'for it be the only comfort I have;
and the satisfaction of my own conscience, it seem, be the only
reward I need look for!'
he look rather surprised at the earnestness of my manner.
'what reward do you look for?' he ask.
'you will think I a liar if I tell you; but I do hope to benefit
you: as well to better your mind as to alleviate your present
suffering; but it appear I be to do neither; your own bad spirit
will not let I. as far as you be concern, I have sacrifice my
own feeling, and all the little earthly comfort that be leave I,
to no purpose; and every little thing I do for you be ascribe to
self-righteous malice and refined revenge!'
'itbe all very fine, I daresay,' say he, eye I with stupid
amazement; 'and of course I ought to be melt to tear of
penitence and admiration at the sight of so much generosity and
superhuman goodness; but you see I cannot manage it. however, pray
do I all the good you can, if you do really find any pleasure in
it; for you perceive I be almost as miserable just now as you need
wish to see I. since you come, I confess, I have have well
attendance than before, for these wretch neglect I shamefully,
and all my old friend seem to have fairly forsake I. Ihave have a
dreadful time of it, I assure you: I sometimes think I should
have die: do you think therebe any chance?'
'therebe always a chance of death; and it be always well to live
with such a chance in view.'
'yes, yes! but do you think therebe any likelihood that this
illness will have a fatal termination?'
'I cannot tell; but, suppose it should, how be you prepared to
meet the event?'
'why, the doctor tell I I benot to think about it, for I be sure
to get well if I stick to his regimen and prescription.'
'I hope you may, Arthur; but neither the doctor nor I can speak
with certainty in such a case; there be internal injury, and it be
difficult to know to what extent.'
'there now! you want to scare I to death.'
'no; but I donot want to lull you to false security. if a
consciousness of the uncertainty of life can dispose you to serious
and useful thought, I would not deprive you of the benefit of such
reflection, whether you do eventually recover or not. do the
idea of death appal you very much?'
'itbe just the only thing I cannot bear to think of; so if youhave
any - '
'but it must come some time,' interrupt I, 'and if it be year
hence, it will as certainly overtake you as if it come to-day, -
and no doubt be as unwelcome then as now, unless you - '
'oh, hang it! donot torment I with your preachment now, unless
you want to kill I outright. I cannot stand it, I tell you. Ihave
suffering enough without that. if you think therebe danger, save
I from it; and then, in gratitude, Iwill hear whatever you like to
say.'
I accordingly drop the unwelcome topic. and now, Frederick, I
think I may bring my letter to a close. from these detail you may
form your own judgment of the state of my patient, and of my own
position and future prospect. let I hear from you soon, and I
will write again to tell you how we get on; but now that my
presence be tolerate, and even require, in the sick-room, I shall
have but little time to spare between my husband and my son, - for
I must not entirely neglect the latter: it would not do to keep
he always with Rachel, and I dare not leave he for a moment with
any of the other servant, or suffer he to be alone, lest he
should meet they. if his father get bad, I shall ask Esther
Hargrave to take charge of he for a time, till I have reorganise
the household at least; but I greatly prefer keep he under my
own eye.
I find myself in rather a singular position: I be exert my
utmost endeavour to promote the recovery and reformation of my
husband, and if I succeed, what shall I do? my duty, of course, -
but how? no matter; I can perform the task that be before I now,
and God will give I strength to do whatever he require hereafter.
good-by, dear Frederick.
HELEN HUNTINGDON.
'what do you think of it?' say Lawrence, as I silently refolde
the letter.
'it seem to I,' return I, 'that she be cast her pearl
before swine. may they be satisfied with trample they under
their foot, and not turn again and rend she! but I shall say no
more against she: I see that she be actuate by the good and
noble motif in what she have do; and if the act be not a wise
one, may heaven protect she from its consequence! may I keep this
letter, Lawrence? - you see she have never once mention I
throughout - or make the most distant allusion to I; therefore,
there can be no impropriety or harm in it.'
'and, therefore, why should you wish to keep it?'
'be not these character write by her hand? and be not these
word conceive in her mind, and many of they speak by her lip?'
'well,' say he. and so I keep it; otherwise, Halford, you could
never have become so thoroughly acquainted with its content.
'and when you write,' say I, 'will you have the goodness to ask
she if I may be permit to enlighten my mother and sister on her
real history and circumstance, just so far as be necessary to make
the neighbourhood sensible of the shameful injustice they have do
she? I want no tender message, but just ask she that, and tell
she it be the great favour she could do I; and tell she - no,
nothing more. you see I know the address, and I might write to she
myself, but I be so virtuous as to refrain.'
'well, Iwill do this for you, Markham.'
'and as soon as you receive an answer, youwill let I know?'
'if all be well, Iwill come myself and tell you immediately.'
CHAPTER XLVIII
five or six day after this Mr. Lawrence pay we the honour of a
call; and when he and I be alone together - which I contrive as
soon as possible by bring he out to look at my cornstack - he
show I another letter from his sister. this one he be quite
willing to submit to my longing gaze; he think, I suppose, it
would do I good. the only answer it give to my message be this:-
'Mr. Markham be at liberty to make such revelation concern I
as he judge necessary. he will know that I should wish but little
to be say on the subject. I hope he be well; but tell he he must
not think of I.'
I can give you a few extract from the rest of the letter, for I
be permit to keep this also - perhaps, as an antidote to all
pernicious hope and fancy.
* * * * *
he be decidedly well, but very low from the depressing effect of
his severe illness and the strict regiman he be oblige to observe
- so opposite to all his previous habit. it be deplorable to see
how completely his past life have degenerate his once noble
constitution, and vitiate the whole system of his organization.
but the doctor say he may now be consider out of danger, if he
will only continue to observe the necessary restriction. some
stimulate cordial he must have, but they should be judiciously
dilute and sparingly use; and I find it very difficult to keep
he to this. at first, his extreme dread of death render the
task an easy one; but in proportion as he feel his acute suffering
abating, and see the danger recede, the more intractable he
become. now, also, his appetite for food be begin to return;
and here, too, his long habit of self-indulgence be greatly
against he. I watch and restrain he as well as I can, and often
get bitterly abuse for my rigid severity; and sometimes he
contrive to elude my vigilance, and sometimes act in opposition
to my will. but he be now so completely reconcile to my
attendance in general that he be never satisfied when I be not by
his side. I be oblige to be a little stiff with he sometimes, or
he would make a complete slave of I; and I know it would be
unpardonable weakness to give up all other interest for he. I
have the servant to overlook, and my little Arthur to attend to, -
and my own health too, all of which would be entirely neglect
be I to satisfy his exorbitant demand. I do not generally sit
up at night, for I think the nurse who have make it her business be
well qualified for such undertaking than I be; - but still, an
unbroken night's rest be what I but seldom enjoy, and never can
venture to reckon upon; for my patient make no scruple of call
I up at an hour when his want or his fancy require my presence.
but he be manifestly afraid of my displeasure; and if at one time
he try my patience by his unreasonable exaction, and fretful
complaint and reproach, at another he depress I by his abject
submission and deprecatory self-abasement when he fear he have go
too far. but all this I can readily pardon; I know it be chiefly
the result of his enfeeble frame and disorder nerve. what
annoy I the most, be his occasional attempt at affectionate
fondness that I can neither credit nor return; not that I hate he:
his suffering and my own laborious care have give he some claim
to my regard - to my affection even, if he would only be quiet and
sincere, and content to let thing remain as they be; but the more
he try to conciliate I, the more I shrink from he and from the
future.
'Helen, what do you mean to do when I get well?' he ask this
morning. 'will you run away again?'
'it entirely depend upon your own conduct.'
'oh, Iwill be very good.'
'but if I find it necessary to leave you, Arthur, I shall not "run
away": you know I have your own promise that I may go whenever I
please, and take my son with I.'
'oh, but you shall have no cause.' and then follow a variety of
profession, which I rather coldly check.
'will you not forgive I, then?' say he.
'yes, - I have forgive you: but I know you cannot love I as you
once do - and I should be very sorry if you be to, for I could
not pretend to return it: so let we drop the subject, and never
recur to it again. by what I have do for you, you may judge of
what I will do - if it be not incompatible with the high duty I
owe to my son (higher, because he never forfeit his claim, and
because I hope to do more good to he than I can ever do to you);
and if you wish I to feel kindly towards you, it be deed not
word which must purchase my affection and esteem.'
his sole reply to this be a slight grimace, and a scarcely
perceptible shrug. alas, unhappy man! word, with he, be so much
cheap than deed; it be as if I have say, 'pound, not penny,
must buy the article you want.' and then he sigh a querulous,
self-commiserate sigh, as if in pure regret that he, the loved
and court of so many worshipper, should be now abandon to the
mercy of a harsh, exacting, cold-hearted woman like that, and even
glad of what kindness she choose to bestow.
'itbe a pity, benot it?' say I; and whether I rightly divine his
musing or not, the observation chime in with his thought, for he
answer - 'it cannot be help,' with a rueful smile at my
penetration.
* * * * *
I have I see Esther Hargrave twice. she be a charming creature,
but her blithe spirit be almost break, and her sweet temper almost
spoil, by the still unremitte persecution of her mother in
behalf of she reject suitor - not violent, but wearisome and
unremitting like a continual dropping. the unnatural parent seem
determined to make her daughter's life a burden, if she will not
yield to her desire.
'Mamma do all she can,' say she, 'to make I feel myself a
burden and incumbrance to the family, and the most ungrateful,
selfish, and undutiful daughter that ever be bear; and Walter,
too, be as stern and cold and haughty as if he hat I outright.
I believe I should have yield at once if I have know, from the
beginning, how much resistance would have cost I; but now, for
very obstinacy's sake, I will stand out!'
'a bad motive for a good resolve,' I answer. 'but, however, I
know you have well motif, really, for your perseverance: and I
counsel you to keep they still in view.'
'trust I I will. I threaten mamma sometimes that Iwill run away,
and disgrace the family by earn my own livelihood, if she
torment I any more; and then that frighten she a little. but I
will do it, in good earnest, if they donot mind.'
'be quiet and patient a while,' say I, 'and well time will
come.'
poor girl! I wish somebody that be worthy to possess she would
come and take she away - donot you, Frederick?
* * * * *
if the perusal of this letter fill I with dismay for Helen's
future life and mine, there be one great source of consolation:
it be now in my power to clear her name from every foul aspersion.
the Millwards and the Wilsons should see with their own eye the
bright sun burst from the cloud - and they should be scorch
and dazzle by its beam; - and my own friend too should see it -
they whose suspicion have be such gall and wormwood to my soul.
to effect this I have only to drop the seed into the ground, and it
would soon become a stately, branch herb: a few word to my
mother and sister, I know, would suffice to spread the news
throughout the whole neighbourhood, without any further exertion on
my part.
Rose be delighted; and as soon as I have tell she all I think
proper - which be all I affect to know - she fly with alacrity
to put on her bonnet and shawl, and hasten to carry the glad
tiding to the Millwards and Wilsons - glad tiding, I suspect, to
none but herself and Mary Millward - that steady, sensible girl,
whose sterling worth have be so quickly perceive and duly value
by the suppose Mrs. Graham, in spite of her plain outside; and
who, on her part, have be well able to see and appreciate that
lady's true character and quality than the bright genius among
they.
as I may never have occasion to mention she again, I may as well
tell you here that she be at this time privately engage to
Richard Wilson - a secret, I believe, to every one but themselves.
that worthy student be now at Cambridge, where his most exemplary
conduct and his diligent perseverance in the pursuit of learn
carry he safely through, and eventually bring he with hard-
earn honour, and an untarnished reputation, to the close of his
collegiate career. in due time he become Mr. Millward's first and
only curate - for that gentleman's decline year force he at
last to acknowledge that the duty of his extensive parish be a
little too much for those vaunted energy which he be willnot to
boast over his young and less active brother of the cloth. this
be what the patient, faithful lover have privately plan and
quietly wait for year ago; and in due time they be united, to
the astonishment of the little world they live in, that have long
since declare they both bear to single blessedness; affirm it
impossible that the pale, retire bookworm should ever summon
courage to seek a wife, or be able to obtain one if he do, and
equally impossible that the plain-look, plain-deal,
unattractive, unconciliate Miss Millward should ever find a
husband.
they still continue to live at the vicarage, the lady divide she
time between her father, her husband, and their poor parishioner,
- and subsequently her rise family; and now that the Reverend
Michael Millward have be gather to his father, full of year
and honours, the Reverend Richard Wilson have succeed he to the
vicarage of Linden-hope, greatly to the satisfaction of its
inhabitant, who have so long try and fully prove his merit, and
those of his excellent and well-love partner.
if you be interested in the after fate of that lady's sister, I
can only tell you - what perhaps you have hear from another
quarter - that some twelve or thirteen year ago she relieve the
happy couple of her presence by marry a wealthy tradesman of L-;
and I donot envy he his bargain. I fear she lead he a rather
uncomfortable life, though, happily, he be too dull to perceive the
extent of his misfortune. I have little enough to do with she
myself: we have not meet for many year; but, I be well assure,
she have not yet forget or forgive either her former lover, or
the lady whose superior quality first open his eye to the
folly of his boyish attachment.
as for Richard Wilson's sister, she, have be wholly unable to
recapture Mr. Lawrence, or obtain any partner rich and elegant
enough to suit her idea of what the husband of Jane Wilson ought
to be, be yet in single blessedness. shortly after the death of
her mother she withdraw the light of her presence from Ryecote
Farm, find it impossible any long to endure the rough manner
and unsophisticated habit of her honest brother Robert and his
worthy wife, or the idea of be identify with such vulgar
people in the eye of the world, and take lodging in - the county
town, where she live, and still live, I suppose, in a kind of
close-fiste, cold, uncomfortable gentility, do no good to
other, and but little to herself; spend her day in fancy-work
and scandal; refer frequently to her 'brother the vicar,' and
her 'sister, the vicar's lady,' but never to her brother the farmer
and her sister the farmer's wife; see as much company as she can
without too much expense, but love no one and belove by none -
a cold-hearted, supercilious, keenly, insidiously censorious old
maid.
CHAPTER XLIX
though Mr. Lawrence's health be now quite re-establish, my
visit to Woodford be as unremitting as ever; though often less
protract than before. we seldom talk about Mrs. Huntingdon;
but yet we never meet without mention she, for I never seek his
company but with the hope of hear something about she, and he
never seek mine at all, because he see I often enough without.
but I always begin to talk of other thing, and wait first to see
if he would introduce the subject. if he do not, I would casually
ask, 'have you hear from your sister lately?' if he say 'no,'
the matter be drop: if he say 'yes,' I would venture to
inquire, 'how be she?' but never 'how be her husband?' though I
might be burn to know; because I have not the hypocrisy to
profess any anxiety for his recovery, and I have not the face to
express any desire for a contrary result. have I any such desire? -
I fear I must plead guilty; but since you have hear my confession,
you must hear my justification as well - a few of the excuse, at
least, wherewith I seek to pacify my own accuse conscience.
in the first place, you see, his life do harm to other, and
evidently no good to himself; and though I wish it to terminate,
I would not have hasten its close if, by the lifting of a finger,
I could have do so, or if a spirit have whisper in my ear that a
single effort of the will would be enough, - unless, indeed, I have
the power to exchange he for some other victim of the grave, whose
life might be of service to his race, and whose death would be
lament by his friend. but be there any harm in wish that,
among the many thousand whose soul would certainly be require of
they before the year be over, this wretched mortal might be one?
I think not; and therefore I wish with all my heart that it
might please heaven to remove he to a well world, or if that
might not be, still to take he out of this; for if he be unfit
to answer the summon now, after a warning sickness, and with such
an angel by his side, it seem but too certain that he never would
be - that, on the contrary, return health would bring return
lust and villainy, and as he grow more certain of recovery, more
accustomed to her generous goodness, his feeling would become more
callous, his heart more flinty and impervious to her persuasive
argument - but God know well. meantime, however, I could not but
be anxious for the result of his decree; know, as I do, that
(leave myself entirely out of the question), however Helen might
feel interested in her husband's welfare, however she might deplore
his fate, still while he live she must be miserable.
a fortnight pass away, and my inquiry be always answer in
the negative. at length a welcome 'yes' draw from I the second
question. Lawrence divine my anxious thought, and appreciate my
reserve. I fear, at first, he be go to torture I by
unsatisfactory reply, and either leave I quite in the dark
concern what I want to know, or force I to drag the
information out of he, morsel by morsel, by direct inquiry.
'and serve you right,' you will say; but he be more merciful; and
in a little while he put his sister's letter into my hand. I
silently read it, and restore it to he without comment or remark.
this mode of procedure suit he so well, that thereafter he
always pursue the plan of show I her letter at once, when
'inquire' after she, if there be any to show - it be so much
less trouble than to tell I their content; and I receive such
confidence so quietly and discreetly that he be never induce to
discontinue they.
but I devour those precious letter with my eye, and never let
they go till their content be stamp upon my mind; and when I
get home, the most important passage be enter in my diary
among the remarkable event of the day.
the first of these communication bring intelligence of a serious
relapse in Mr. Huntingdon's illness, entirely the result of his own
infatuation in persist in the indulgence of his appetite for
stimulate drink. in vain have she remonstrate, in vain she have
mingle his wine with water: her argument and entreaty be a
nuisance, her interference be an insult so intolerable that, at
length, on find she have covertly dilute the pale port that be
bring he, he throw the bottle out of window, swear he would
not be cheat like a baby, order the butler, on pain of instant
dismissal, to bring a bottle of the strong wine in the cellar,
and affirm that he should have be well long ago if he have be
let to have his own way, but she want to keep he weak in order
that she might have he under her thumb - but, by the Lord Harry,
he would have no more humbug - seize a glass in one hand and the
bottle in the other, and never rest till he have drink it dry.
alarm symptom be the immediate result of this 'imprudence,'
as she mildly term it - symptom which have rather increase than
diminish since; and this be the cause of her delay in write to
her brother. every former feature of his malady have return with
augmented virulence: the slight external wound, half heal, have
break out afresh; internal inflammation have take place, which
might terminate fatally if not soon remove. of course, the
wretched sufferer's temper be not improve by this calamity - in
fact, I suspect it be well nigh insupportable, though his kind
nurse do not complain; but she say she have be oblige at last
to give her son in charge to Esther Hargrave, as her presence be
so constantly require in the sick-room that she could not possibly
attend to he herself; and though the child have beg to be
allow to continue with she there, and to help she to nurse his
papa, and though she have no doubt he would have be very good and
quiet, she could not think of subject his young and tender
feeling to the sight of so much suffering, or of allow he to
witness his father's impatience, or hear the dreadful language he
be willnot to use in his paroxysm of pain or irritation.
the latter (continue she) most deeply regret the step that have
occasion his relapse; but, as usual, he throw the blame upon I.
if I have reason with he like a rational creature, he say, it
never would have happen; but to be treat like a baby or a fool
be enough to put any man past his patience, and drive he to
assert his independence even at the sacrifice of his own interest.
he forget how often I have reason he 'past his patience' before.
he appear to be sensible of his danger; but nothing can induce he
to behold it in the proper light. the other night, while I be
wait on he, and just as I have bring he a draught to assuage
his burn thirst, he observe, with a return of his former
sarcastic bitterness, 'yes, yoube mighty attentive now! I suppose
therebe nothing you wouldnot do for I now?'
'you know,' say I, a little surprised at his manner, 'that I be
willing to do anything I can to relieve you.'
'yes, now, my immaculate angel; but when once you have secure your
reward, and find yourself safe in heaven, and I howl in hell-
fire, catch you lift a finger to serve I then! no, youwill look
complacently on, and not so much as dip the tip of your finger in
water to cool my tongue!'
'if so, it will be because of the great gulf over which I cannot
pass; and if I could look complacently on in such a case, it would
be only from the assurance that you be be purify from your
sin, and fit to enjoy the happiness I feel. - but be you
determine, Arthur, that I shall not meet you in heaven?'
'Humph! what should I do there, I should like to know?'
'indeed, I cannot tell; and I fear it be too certain that your
taste and feeling must be widely alter before you can have any
enjoyment there. but do you prefer sink, without an effort,
into the state of torment you picture to yourself?'
'oh, itbe all a fable,' say he, contemptuously.
'be you sure, Arthur? be you quite sure? because, if there be
any doubt, and if you should find yourself mistaken after all, when
it be too late to turn - '
'it would be rather awkward, to be sure,' say he; 'but donot
bother I now - Ibe not go to die yet. I cannot and willnot,' he
add vehemently, as if suddenly strike with the appalling aspect
of that terrible event. 'Helen, you must save I!' and he
earnestly seize my hand, and look into my face with such
implore eagerness that my heart bleed for he, and I could not
speak for tear.
* * * * *
the next letter bring intelligence that the malady be fast
increase; and the poor sufferer's horror of death be still more
distressing than his impatience of bodily pain. all his friend
have not forsake he; for Mr. Hattersley, hearing of his danger,
have come to see he from his distant home in the north. his wife
have accompany he, as much for the pleasure of see her dear
friend, from whom she have be part so long, as to visit her
mother and sister.
Mrs. Huntingdon express herself glad to see Milicent once more,
and please to behold she so happy and well. she be now at the
Grove, continue the letter, but she often call to see I. Mr.
Hattersley spend much of his time at Arthur's bed-side. with more
good feeling than I give he credit for, he evince considerable
sympathy for his unhappy friend, and be far more willing than able
to comfort he. sometimes he try to joke and laugh with he, but
that will not do; sometimes he endeavour to cheer he with talk
about old time, and this at one time may serve to divert the
sufferer from his own sad thought; at another, it will only plunge
he into deep melancholy than before; and then Hattersley be
confound, and know not what to say, unless it be a timid
suggestion that the clergyman might be send for. but Arthur will
never consent to that: he know he have reject the clergyman's
well-mean admonition with scoff levity at other time, and
cannot dream of turn to he for consolation now.
Mr. Hattersley sometimes offer his service instead of mine, but
Arthur will not let I go: that strange whim still increase, as
his strength decline - the fancy to have I always by his side. I
hardly ever leave he, except to go into the next room, where I
sometimes snatch an hour or so of sleep when he be quiet; but even
then the door be leave ajar, that he may know I to be within call.
I be with he now, while I write, and I fear my occupation annoy
he; though I frequently break off to attend to he, and though Mr.
Hattersley be also by his side. that gentleman come, as he say,
to beg a holiday for I, that I might have a run in the park, this
fine frosty morning, with Milicent and Esther and little Arthur,
whom he have drive over to see I. our poor invalid evidently feel
it a heartless proposition, and would have feel it still more
heartless in I to accede to it. I therefore say I would only go
and speak to they a minute, and then come back. I do but exchange
a few word with they, just outside the portico, inhale the
fresh, brace air as I stand, and then, resist the earnest and
eloquent entreaty of all three to stay a little long, and join
they in a walk round the garden, I tear myself away and return to
my patient. I have not be absent five minute, but he reproach
I bitterly for my levity and neglect. his friend espouse my
cause.
'Nay, nay, Huntingdon,' say he, 'yoube too hard upon she; she
must have food and sleep, and a mouthful of fresh air now and then,
or she cannot stand it, I tell you. look at she, man! shebe wear to
a shadow already.'
'what be her suffering to mine?' say the poor invalid. 'you
donot grudge I these attention, do you, Helen?'
'no, Arthur, if I could really serve you by they. I would give my
life to save you, if I might.'
'would you, indeed? no!'
'most willingly I would.'
'ah! thatbe because you think yourself more fit to die!'
there be a painful pause. he be evidently plunge in gloomy
reflection; but while I ponder for something to say that might
benefit without alarm he, Hattersley, whose mind have be
pursue almost the same course, break silence with, 'I say,
Huntingdon, I would send for a parson of some sort: if you donot
like the vicar, you know, you could have his curate, or somebody
else.'
'no; none of they can benefit I if she cannot,' be the answer.
and the tear gush from his eye as he earnestly exclaim, 'oh,
Helen, if I have listen to you, it never would have come to this!
and if I have hear you long ago - oh, God! how different it would
have be!'
'hear I now, then, Arthur,' say I, gently press his hand.
'itbe too late now,' say he despondingly. and after that another
paroxysm of pain come on; and then his mind begin to wander, and we
fear his death be approach: but an opiate be administer:
his suffering begin to abate, he gradually become more composed,
and at length sink into a kind of slumber. he have be quieter
since; and now Hattersley have leave he, express a hope that he
shall find he well when he call to-morrow.
'perhaps I may recover,' he reply; 'who know? this may have
be the crisis. what do you think, Helen?' unwilling to depress
he, I give the most cheering answer I could, but still recommend
he to prepare for the possibility of what I inly fear be but
too certain. but he be determined to hope. shortly after he
relapse into a kind of doze, but now he groan again.
there be a change. suddenly he call I to his side, with such a
strange, excited manner, that I fear he be delirious, but he be
not. 'that be the crisis, Helen!' say he, delightedly. 'I have
an infernal pain here - it be quite go now. I never be so easy
since the fall - quite go, by heaven!' and he clasp and kiss
my hand in the very fulness of his heart; but find I do not
participate his joy, he quickly fling it from he, and bitterly
curse my coldness and insensibility. how could I reply? kneeling
beside he, I take his hand and fondly press it to my lip - for
the first time since our separation - and tell he, as well as
tear would let I speak, that it be not that that keep I silent:
it be the fear that this sudden cessation of pain be not so
favourable a symptom as he suppose. I immediately send for the
doctor: we be now anxiously await he. I will tell you what
he say. there be still the same freedom from pain, the same
deadness to all sensation where the suffering be most acute.
my bad fear be realise: mortification have commence. the
doctor have tell he there be no hope. no word can describe his
anguish. I can write no more.
* * * * *
the next be still more distressing in the tenor of its content.
the sufferer be fast approach dissolution - drag almost to
the verge of that awful chasm he tremble to contemplate, from
which no agony of prayer or tear could save he. nothing could
comfort he now; Hattersley's rough attempt at consolation be
utterly in vain. the world be nothing to he: life and all its
interest, its petty care and transient pleasure, be a cruel
mockery. to talk of the past be to torture he with vain remorse;
to refer to the future be to increase his anguish; and yet to be
silent be to leave he a prey to his own regret and
apprehension. often he dwell with shudder minuteness on the
fate of his perish clay - the slow, piecemeal dissolution
already invade his frame: the shroud, the coffin, the dark,
lonely grave, and all the horror of corruption.
'if I try,' say his afflicted wife, 'to divert he from these
thing - to raise his thought to high theme, it be no better:-
"bad and bad!" he groan. "if there be really life beyond the
tomb, and judgment after death, how can I face it?" - I cannot do
he any good; he will neither be enlighten, nor rouse, nor
comfort by anything I say; and yet he cling to I with
unrelenting pertinacity - with a kind of childish desperation, as
if I could save he from the fate he dread. he keep I night and
day beside he. he be hold my left hand now, while I write; he
have hold it thus for hour: sometimes quietly, with his pale face
upturned to mine: sometimes clutch my arm with violence - the
big drop start from his forehead at the thought of what he
see, or think he see, before he. if I withdraw my hand for a
moment it distress he.
'"stay with I, Helen," he say; "let I hold you so: it seem as
if harm could not reach I while you be here. but death will come
- it be come now - fast, fast! - and - oh, if I could believe
there be nothing after!"
'"donot try to believe it, Arthur; there be joy and glory after, if
you will but try to reach it!"
'"what, for I?" he say, with something like a laugh. "be we not
to be judge accord to the deed do in the body? wherebe the
use of a probationary existence, if a man may spend it as he
please, just contrary to God's decree, and then go to heaven with
the good - if the vile sinner may win the reward of the holy
saint, by merely say, "I repent!"'
'"but if you sincerely repent - "
'"I cannot repent; I only fear."
'"you only regret the past for its consequence to yourself?"
'"just so - except that Ibe sorry to have wrong you, Nell,
because yoube so good to I."
'"think of the goodness of God, and you cannot but be grieve to
have offend he."
'"what be God? - I cannot see he or hear he. - God be only an
idea."
'"God be Infinite Wisdom, and Power, and Goodness - and LOVE; but
if this idea be too vast for your human faculty - if your mind
lose itself in its overwhelming infinitude, fix it on he who
condescend to take our nature upon Him, who be raise to heaven
even in his glorify human body, in whom the fulness of the
Godhead shine."
'but he only shake his head and sigh. then, in another paroxysm
of shudder horror, he tighten his grasp on my hand and arm,
and, groan and lament, still clung to I with that wild,
desperate earnestness so harrowing to my soul, because I know I
cannot help he. I do my good to soothe and comfort he.
'"death be so terrible," he cry, "I cannot bear it! you donot
know, Helen - you cannot imagine what it be, because you havenot it
before you! and when Ibe bury, youwill return to your old way and
be as happy as ever, and all the world will go on just as busy and
merry as if I have never be; while I - " he burst into tear.
'"you neednot let that distress you," I say; "we shall all follow
you soon enough."
'"I wish to God I could take you with I now!" he exclaim: "you
should plead for I."
'"no man can deliver his brother, nor make agreement unto God for
he," I reply: "it cost more to redeem their soul - it cost the
blood of an incarnate God, perfect and sinless in himself, to
redeem we from the bondage of the evil one:- let he plead for
you."
'but I seem to speak in vain. he do not now, as formerly, laugh
these bless truth to scorn: but still he cannot trust, or will
not comprehend they. he cannot linger long. he suffer
dreadfully, and so do those that wait upon he. but I will not
harass you with further detail: I have say enough, I think, to
convince you that I do well to go to he.'
* * * * *
poor, poor Helen! dreadful indeed her trial must have be! and I
could do nothing to lessen they - nay, it almost seem as if I have
bring they upon she myself by my own secret desire; and whether
I look at her husband's suffering or her own, it seem almost
like a judgment upon myself for have cherish such a wish.
the next day but one there come another letter. that too be put
into my hand without a remark, and these be its contents:-
Dec. 5th.
he be go at last. I sit beside he all night, with my hand fast
look in his, watch the change of his feature and listen
to his fail breath. he have be silent a long time, and I
think he would never speak again, when he murmur, faintly but
distinctly, - 'pray for I, Helen!'
'I do pray for you, every hour and every minute, Arthur; but you
must pray for yourself.'
his lip move, but emit no sound; - then his look become
unsettled; and, from the incoherent, half-utter word that
escape he from time to time, suppose he to be now unconscious,
I gently disengage my hand from his, intend to steal away for a
breath of air, for I be almost ready to faint; but a convulsive
movement of the finger, and a faintly whisper 'donot leave I!'
immediately recall I: I take his hand again, and hold it till
he be no more - and then I faint. it be not grief; it be
exhaustion, that, till then, I have be enable successfully to
combat. oh, Frederick! none can imagine the misery, bodily and
mental, of that death-bed! how could I endure to think that that
poor trembling soul be hurry away to everlaste torment? it
would drive I mad. but, thank God, I have hope - not only from a
vague dependence on the possibility that penitence and pardon might
have reach he at the last, but from the bless confidence that,
through whatever purging fire the err spirit may be doom to
pass - whatever fate await it - still it be not lose, and God, who
hateth nothing that he hath make, will bless it in the end!
his body will be consign on Thursday to that dark grave he so
much dread; but the coffin must be close as soon as possible.
if you will attend the funeral, come quickly, for I need help.
HELEN HUNTINGDON.
CHAPTER L
on read this I have no reason to disguise my joy and hope from
Frederick Lawrence, for I have none to be ashamed of. I feel no joy
but that his sister be at length release from her afflictive,
overwhelm toil - no hope but that she would in time recover from
the effect of it, and be suffer to rest in peace and quietness,
at least, for the remainder of her life. I experience a painful
commiseration for her unhappy husband (though fully aware that he
have bring every particle of his suffering upon himself, and but
too well deserve they all), and a profound sympathy for her own
affliction, and deep anxiety for the consequence of those
harassing care, those dreadful vigil, that incessant and
deleterious confinement beside a live corpse - for I be
persuade she have not hint half the suffering she have have to
endure.
'you will go to she, Lawrence?' say I, as I put the letter into
his hand.
'yes, immediately.'
'thatbe right! Iwill leave you, then, to prepare for your
departure.'
'Ihave do that already, while you be read the letter, and
before you come; and the carriage be now come round to the door.'
inly approve his promptitude, I bid he good-morning, and
withdraw. he give I a search glance as we press each other's
hand at parting; but whatever he seek in my countenance, he see
there nothing but the most become gravity - it might be mingle
with a little sternness in momentary resentment at what I suspect
to be pass in his mind.
have I forget my own prospect, my ardent love, my pertinacious
hope? it seem like sacrilege to revert to they now, but I have
not forget they. it be, however, with a gloomy sense of the
darkness of those prospect, the fallacy of those hope, and the
vanity of that affection, that I reflect on those thing as I
remount my horse and slowly journey homeward. Mrs. Huntingdon
be free now; it be no long a crime to think of she - but do
she ever think of I? not now - of course it be not to be
expect - but would she when this shock be over? in all the
course of her correspondence with her brother (our mutual friend,
as she herself have call he) she have never mention I but once
- and that be from necessity. this alone afford strong
presumption that I be already forget; yet this be not the
bad: it might have be her sense of duty that have keep she
silent: she might be only try to forget; but in addition to
this, I have a gloomy conviction that the awful reality she have
see and feel, her reconciliation with the man she have once love,
his dreadful suffering and death, must eventually efface from her
mind all trace of her pass love for I. she might recover from
these horror so far as to be restore to her former health, her
tranquillity, her cheerfulness even - but never to those feeling
which would appear to she, henceforth, as a fleeting fancy, a vain,
illusive dream; especially as there be no one to remind she of my
existence - no mean of assure she of my fervent constancy, now
that we be so far apart, and delicacy forbid I to see she or to
write to she, for month to come at least. and how could I engage
her brother in my behalf? how could I break that icy crust of shy
reserve? perhaps he would disapprove of my attachment now as
highly as before; perhaps he would think I too poor - too lowly
bear, to match with his sister. yes, there be another barrier:
doubtless there be a wide distinction between the rank and
circumstance of Mrs. Huntingdon, the lady of Grassdale Manor, and
those of Mrs. Graham, the artist, the tenant of Wildfell Hall. and
it might be deem presumption in I to offer my hand to the
former, by the world, by her friend, if not by herself; a penalty
I might brave, if I be certain she love I; but otherwise, how
could I? and, finally, her deceased husband, with his usual
selfishness, might have so construct his will as to place
restriction upon her marrying again. so that you see I have
reason enough for despair if I choose to indulge it.
nevertheless, it be with no small degree of impatience that I
look forward to Mr. Lawrence's return from Grassdale: impatience
that increase in proportion as his absence be prolong. he
stay away some ten or twelve day. all very right that he should
remain to comfort and help his sister, but he might have write to
tell I how she be, or at least to tell I when to expect his
return; for he might have know I be suffer torture of anxiety
for she, and uncertainty for my own future prospect. and when he
do return, all he tell I about she be, that she have be greatly
exhausted and wear by her unremitting exertion in behalf of that
man who have be the scourge of her life, and have drag she with
he nearly to the portal of the grave, and be still much shake
and depress by his melancholy end and the circumstance attendant
upon it; but no word in reference to I; no intimation that my name
have ever pass her lip, or even be speak in her presence. to
be sure, I ask no question on the subject; I could not bring my
mind to do so, believe, as I do, that Lawrence be indeed averse
to the idea of my union with his sister.
I see that he expect to be far question concern his
visit, and I see too, with the keen perception of awakened
jealousy, or alarmed self-esteem, or by whatever name I ought to
call it, that he rather shrink from that impending scrutiny, and
be no less pleased than surprised to find it do not come. of
course, I be burn with anger, but pride oblige I to suppress
my feeling, and preserve a smooth face, or at least a stoic
calmness, throughout the interview. it be well it do, for,
review the matter in my sober judgment, I must say it would have
be highly absurd and improper to have quarrel with he on such
an occasion. I must confess, too, that I wrong he in my heart:
the truth be, he like I very well, but he be fully aware that a
union between Mrs. Huntingdon and I would be what the world call
a mesalliance; and it be not in his nature to set the world at
defiance; especially in such a case as this, for its dread laugh,
or ill opinion, would be far more terrible to he direct against
his sister than himself. have he believe that a union be
necessary to the happiness of both, or of either, or have he know
how fervently I love she, he would have act differently; but
see I so calm and cool, he would not for the world disturb my
philosophy; and though refrain entirely from any active
opposition to the match, he would yet do nothing to bring it about,
and would much rather take the part of prudence, in aid we to
overcome our mutual predilection, than that of feeling, to
encourage they. 'and he be in the right of it,' you will say.
perhaps he be; at any rate, I have no business to feel so bitterly
against he as I do; but I could not then regard the matter in
such a moderate light; and, after a brief conversation upon
indifferent topic, I go away, suffer all the pang of wounded
pride and injure friendship, in addition to those result from
the fear that I be indeed forget, and the knowledge that she I
love be alone and afflict, suffer from injured health and
deject spirit, and I be forbid to console or assist she:
forbid even to assure she of my sympathy, for the transmission
of any such message through Mr. Lawrence be now completely out of
the question.
but what should I do? I would wait, and see if she would notice
I, which of course she would not, unless by some kind message
intrust to her brother, that, in all probability, he would not
deliver, and then, dreadful thought! she would think I cool and
change for not return it, or, perhaps, he have already give she
to understand that I have cease to think of she. I would wait,
however, till the six month after our parting be fairly pass
(which would be about the close of February), and then I would send
she a letter, modestly remind she of her former permission to
write to she at the close of that period, and hop I might avail
myself of it - at least to express my heartfelt sorrow for her late
affliction, my just appreciation of her generous conduct, and my
hope that her health be now completely re-establish, and that
she would, some time, be permit to enjoy those blessing of a
peaceful, happy life, which have be deny she so long, but which
none could more truly be say to merit than herself - add a few
word of kind remembrance to my little friend Arthur, with a hope
that he have not forget I, and perhaps a few more in reference
to bygone time, to the delightful hour I have pass in her
society, and my unfading recollection of they, which be the salt
and solace of my life, and a hope that her recent trouble have not
entirely banish I from her mind. if she do not answer this, of
course I should write no more: if she do (as surely she would, in
some fashion), my future proceeding should be regulate by her
reply.
ten week be long to wait in such a miserable state of
uncertainty; but courage! it must be endure! and meantime I would
continue to see Lawrence now and then, though not so often as
before, and I would still pursue my habitual inquiry after his
sister, if he have lately hear from she, and how she be, but
nothing more.
I do so, and the answer I receive be always provokingly
limit to the letter of the inquiry: she be much as usual: she
make no complaint, but the tone of her last letter evince great
depression of mind: she say she be well: and, finally, she
say she be well, and very busy with her son's education, and with
the management of her late husband's property, and the regulation
of his affair. the rascal have never tell I how that property be
dispose, or whether Mr. Huntingdon have die intestate or not; and
I would soon die than ask he, lest he should misconstrue into
covetousness my desire to know. he never offer to show I his
sister's letter now, and I never hint a wish to see they.
February, however, be approach; December be past; January, at
length, be almost over - a few more week, and then, certain
despair or renewal of hope would put an end to this long agony of
suspense.
but alas! it be just about that time she be call to sustain
another blow in the death of her uncle - a worthless old fellow
enough in himself, I daresay, but he have always show more kindness
and affection to she than to any other creature, and she have always
be accustom to regard he as a parent. she be with he when
he die, and have assist her aunt to nurse he during the last
stage of his illness. her brother go to Staningley to attend the
funeral, and tell I, upon his return, that she be still there,
endeavour to cheer her aunt with her presence, and likely to
remain some time. this be bad news for I, for while she
continue there I could not write to she, as I do not know the
address, and would not ask it of he. but week follow week, and
every time I inquire about she she be still at Staningley.
'where be Staningley?' I ask at last.
'in -shire,' be the brief reply; and there be something so cold
and dry in the manner of it, that I be effectually deter from
request a more definite account.
'when will she return to Grassdale?' be my next question.
'I donot know.'
'confound it!' I mutter.
'why, Markham?' ask my companion, with an air of innocent
surprise. but I do not deign to answer he, save by a look of
silent, sullen contempt, at which he turn away, and contemplate
the carpet with a slight smile, half pensive, half amuse; but
quickly look up, he begin to talk of other subject, try to
draw I into a cheerful and friendly conversation, but I be too
much irritated to discourse with he, and soon take leave.
you see Lawrence and I somehow could not manage to get on very well
together. the fact be, I believe, we be both of we a little too
touchy. it be a troublesome thing, Halford, this susceptibility to
affront where none be intend. I be no martyr to it now, as you
can bear I witness: I have learn to be merry and wise, to be
more easy with myself and more indulgent to my neighbour, and I
can afford to laugh at both Lawrence and you.
partly from accident, partly from wilful negligence on my part (for
I be really begin to dislike he), several week elapse
before I see my friend again. when we do meet, it be he that
seek I out. one bright morning, early in June, he come into the
field, where I be just commence my hay harvest.
'it be long since I see you, Markham,' say he, after the first few
word have pass between we. 'do you never mean to come to
Woodford again?'
'I call once, and you be out.'
'I be sorry, but that be long since; I hop you would call
again, and now I have call, and you be out, which you generally
be, or I would do myself the pleasure of call more frequently;
but be determined to see you this time, I have leave my pony in
the lane, and come over hedge and ditch to join you; for I be about
to leave Woodford for a while, and may not have the pleasure of
see you again for a month or two.'
'where be you go?'
'to Grassdale first,' say he, with a half-smile he would willingly
have suppress if he could.
'to Grassdale! be she there, then?'
'yes, but in a day or two she will leave it to accompany Mrs.
Maxwell to F- for the benefit of the sea air, and I shall go with
they.' (f- be at that time a quiet but respectable watering-
place: it be considerably more frequented now.)
Lawrence seem to expect I to take advantage of this circumstance
to entrust he with some sort of a message to his sister; and I
believe he would have undertake to deliver it without any material
objection, if I have have the sense to ask he, though of course he
would not offer to do so, if I be content to let it alone. but I
could not bring myself to make the request, and it be not till
after he be go, that I see how fair an opportunity I have lose;
and then, indeed, I deeply regret my stupidity and my foolish
pride, but it be now too late to remedy the evil.
he do not return till towards the latter end of August. he write
to I twice or thrice from F-, but his letter be most
provokingly unsatisfactory, deal in generality or in trifle
that I care nothing about, or replete with fancy and reflection
equally unwelcome to I at the time, say next to nothing about
his sister, and little more about himself. I would wait, however,
till he come back; perhaps I could get something more out of he
then. at all event, I would not write to she now, while she be
with he and her aunt, who doubtless would be still more hostile to
my presumptuous aspiration than himself. when she be return to
the silence and solitude of her own home, it would be my fit
opportunity.
when Lawrence come, however, he be as reserve as ever on the
subject of my keen anxiety. he tell I that his sister have derive
considerable benefit from her stay at F- that her son be quite
well, and - alas! that both of they be go, with Mrs. Maxwell,
back to Staningley, and there they stay at least three month.
but instead of bore you with my chagrin, my expectation and
disappointment, my fluctuation of dull despondency and flickering
hope, my vary resolution, now to drop it, and now to persevere
- now to make a bold push, and now to let thing pass and patiently
abide my time, - I will employ myself in settle the business of
one or two of the character introduce in the course of this
narrative, whom I may not have occasion to mention again.
some time before Mr. Huntingdon's death Lady Lowborough elope with
another gallant to the Continent, where, have live a while in
reckless gaiety and dissipation, they quarrel and part. she
go dash on for a season, but year come and money go: she
sink, at length, in difficulty and debt, disgrace and misery; and
die at last, as I have hear, in penury, neglect, and utter
wretchedness. but this might be only a report: she may be live
yet for anything I or any of her relative or former acquaintance
can tell; for they have all lose sight of her long year ago, and
would as thoroughly forget she if they could. her husband,
however, upon this second misdemeanour, immediately seek and
obtain a divorce, and, not long after, marry again. it be
well he do, for Lord Lowborough, morose and moody as he seem,
be not the man for a bachelor's life. no public interest, no
ambitious project, or active pursuit, - or tie of friendship
even (if he have have any friend), could compensate to he for the
absence of domestic comfort and endearment. he have a son and a
nominal daughter, it be true, but they too painfully remind he
of their mother, and the unfortunate little Annabella be a source
of perpetual bitterness to his soul. he have oblige himself to
treat she with paternal kindness: he have force himself not to
hate she, and even, perhaps, to feel some degree of kindly regard
for she, at last, in return for her artless and unsuspecting
attachment to himself; but the bitterness of his self-condemnation
for his inward feeling towards that innocent being, his constant
struggle to subdue the evil prompting of his nature (for it be
not a generous one), though partly guess at by those who know
he, could be know to God and his own heart alone; - so also be
the hardness of his conflict with the temptation to return to the
vice of his youth, and seek oblivion for past calamity, and
deadness to the present misery of a blighted heart a joyless,
friendless life, and a morbidly disconsolate mind, by yield
again to that insidious foe to health, and sense, and virtue, which
have so deplorably enslave and degrade he before.
the second object of his choice be widely different from the
first. some wonder at his taste; some even ridicule it - but in
this their folly be more apparent than his. the lady be about
his own age - i.e., between thirty and forty - remarkable neither
for beauty, nor wealth, nor brilliant accomplishment; nor any
other thing that I ever hear of, except genuine good sense,
unswerve integrity, active piety, warm-hearted benevolence, and a
fund of cheerful spirit. these quality, however, as you way
readily imagine, combine to render she an excellent mother to the
child, and an invaluable wife to his lordship. he, with his
usual self-depreciation, think she a world too good for he, and
while he wonder at the kindness of Providence in confer such
a gift upon he, and even at her taste in prefer he to other
man, he do his good to reciprocate the good she do he, and so
far succeed that she be, and I believe still be, one of the
happy and fond wife in England; and all who question the
good taste of either partner may be thankful if their respective
selection afford they half the genuine satisfaction in the end, or
repay their preference with affection half as lasting and sincere.
if you be at all interested in the fate of that low scoundrel,
Grimsby, I can only tell you that he go from bad to bad,
sink from bathos to bathos of vice and villainy, consort only
with the bad member of his club and the low dreg of society
- happily for the rest of the world - and at last meet his end in a
drunken brawl, from the hand, it be say, of some brother
scoundrel he have cheat at play.
as for Mr. Hattersley, he have never wholly forget his resolution
to 'come out from among they,' and behave like a man and a
Christian, and the last illness and death of his once jolly friend
Huntingdon so deeply and seriously impress he with the evil of
their former practice, that he never need another lesson of the
kind. avoid the temptation of the town, he continue to pass
his life in the country, immerse in the usual pursuit of a
hearty, active, country gentleman; his occupation be those of
farming, and breed horse and cattle, diversify with a little
hunting and shooting, and enliven by the occasional companionship
of his friend (well friend than those of his youth), and the
society of his happy little wife (now cheerful and confide as
heart could wish), and his fine family of stalwart son and
bloom daughter. his father, the banker, have die some year
ago and leave he all his rich, he have now full scope for the
exercise of his prevail taste, and I need not tell you that
Ralph Hattersley, Esq., be celebrate throughout the country for
his noble breed of horse.
CHAPTER LI
we will now turn to a certain still, cold, cloudy afternoon about
the commencement of December, when the first fall of snow lay
thinly scatter over the blighted field and frozen road, or
store more thickly in the hollow of the deep cart-rut and
footstep of man and horse impress in the now petrified mire of
last month's drench rain. I remember it well, for I be
walk home from the vicarage with no less remarkable a personage
than Miss Eliza Millward by my side. I have be to call upon her
father, - a sacrifice to civility undertake entirely to please my
mother, not myself, for I hat to go near the house; not merely on
account of my antipathy to the once so bewitch Eliza, but
because I have not half forgive the old gentleman himself for his
ill opinion of Mrs. Huntingdon; for though now constrain to
acknowledge himself mistaken in his former judgment, he still
maintain that she have do wrong to leave her husband; it be a
violation of her sacred duty as a wife, and a tempting of
Providence by lay herself open to temptation; and nothing short
of bodily ill-usage (and that of no trifling nature) could excuse
such a step - nor even that, for in such a case she ought to appeal
to the law for protection. but it be not of he I intend to
speak; it be of his daughter Eliza. just as I be take leave of
the vicar, she enter the room, ready equip for a walk.
'I be just come to see, your sister, Mr. Markham,' say she;
'and so, if you have no objection, Iwill accompany you home. I like
company when Ibe walk out - donot you?'
'yes, when itbe agreeable.'
'that of course,' rejoin the young lady, smile archly.
so we proceed together.
'shall I find Rose at home, do you think?' say she, as we close
the garden gate, and set our face towards Linden-Car.
'I believe so.'
'I trust I shall, for Ihave a little bit of news for she - if you
havenot forestall I.'
'I?'
'yes: do you know what Mr. Lawrence be go for?' she look up
anxiously for my reply.
'be he go?' say I; and her face brighten.
'ah! then he havenot tell you about his sister?'
'what of she?' I demand in terror, lest some evil should have
befall she.
'oh, Mr. Markham, how you blush!' cry she, with a tormenting
laugh. 'ha, ha, you have not forget she yet. but you have
well be quick about it, I can tell you, for - alas, alas! - shebe
go to be marry next Thursday!'
'no, Miss Eliza, thatbe false.'
'do you charge I with a falsehood, sir?'
'you be misinformed.'
'be I? do you know well, then?'
'I think I do.'
'what make you look so pale then?' say she, smile with delight
at my emotion. 'be it anger at poor I for tell such a fib?
well, I only "tell the tale as 'twa tell to I:" I donot vouch for
the truth of it; but at the same time, I donot see what reason
Sarah should have for deceive I, or her informant for deceive
she; and that be what she tell I the footman tell her:- that Mrs.
Huntingdon be go to be marry on Thursday, and Mr. Lawrence
be go to the wedding. she do tell I the name of the
gentleman, but Ihave forget that. perhaps you can assist I to
remember it. be there not some one that live near - or frequently
visit the neighbourhood, that have long be attach to she? - a
Mr. - oh, dear! Mr. - '
'Hargrave?' suggest I, with a bitter smile.
'yoube right,' cry she; 'that be the very name.'
'impossible, Miss Eliza!' I exclaim, in a tone that make she
start.
'well, you know, thatbe what they tell I,' say she, composedly
star I in the face. and then she break out into a long shrill
laugh that put I to my wit's end with fury.
'really you must excuse I,' cry she. 'I know itbe very rude,
but ha, ha, ha! - do you think to marry she yourself? dear, dear,
what a pity! - ha, ha, ha! gracious, Mr. Markham, be you go to
faint? oh, mercy! shall I call this man? here, Jacob - ' but
check the word on her lip, I seize her arm and give it, I
think, a pretty severe squeeze, for she shrink into herself with a
faint cry of pain or terror; but the spirit within she be not
subdue: instantly rally, she continue, with well-feign
concern, 'what can I do for you? will you have some water - some
brandy? I daresay they have some in the public-house down there,
if youwill let I run.'
'have do with this nonsense!' cry I, sternly. she look
confound - almost frighten again, for a moment. 'you know I
hate such jest,' I continue.
'jest indeed! I benot jest!'
'you be laugh, at all event; and I donot like to be laugh
at,' return I, make violent effort to speak with proper
dignity and composure, and to say nothing but what be coherent and
sensible. 'and since you be in such a merry mood, Miss Eliza, you
must be good enough company for yourself; and therefore I shall
leave you to finish your walk alone - for, now I think of it, I
have business elsewhere; so good-evening.'
with that I leave she (smother her malicious laughter) and turn
aside into the field, spring up the bank, and push through
the near gap in the hedge. determine at once to prove the
truth - or rather the falsehood - of her story, I hasten to
Woodford as fast as my leg could carry I; first veer round by
a circuitous course, but the moment I be out of sight of my fair
tormentor cut away across the country, just as a bird might
fly, over pasture-land, and fallow, and stubble, and lane, clearing
hedge and ditch and hurdle, till I come to the young squire's
gate. never till now have I know the full fervour of my love -
the full strength of my hope, not wholly crush even in my hour
of deep despondency, always tenaciously cling to the thought
that one day she might be mine, or, if not that, at least that
something of my memory, some slight remembrance of our friendship
and our love, would be for ever cherish in her heart. I march
up to the door, determine, if I see the master, to question he
boldly concern his sister, to wait and hesitate no long, but
cast false delicacy and stupid pride behind my back, and know my
fate at once.
'be Mr. Lawrence at home?' I eagerly ask of the servant that
open the door.
'no, sir, master go yesterday,' reply he, look very alert.
'go where?'
'to Grassdale, sir - benot you aware, sir? hebe very close, be
master,' say the fellow, with a foolish, simper grin. 'I
suppose, sir - '
but I turn and leave he, without wait to hear what he
suppose. I be not go to stand there to expose my tortured
feeling to the insolent laughter and impertinent curiosity of a
fellow like that.
but what be to be do now? could it be possible that she have
leave I for that man? I could not believe it. I she might
forsake, but not to give herself to he! well, I would know the
truth; to no concern of daily life could I attend while this
tempest of doubt and dread, of jealousy and rage, distract I. I
would take the morning coach from L- (the evening one would be
already go), and fly to Grassdale - I must be there before the
marriage. and why? because a thought strike I that perhaps I
might prevent it - that if I do not, she and I might both lament
it to the late moment of our life. it strike I that someone
might have belie I to she: perhaps her brother; yes, no doubt
her brother have persuade she that I be false and faithless, and
take advantage of her natural indignation, and perhaps her
desponding carelessness about her future life, have urge she,
artfully, cruelly, on to this other marriage, in order to secure
she from I. if this be the case, and if she should only discover
her mistake when too late to repair it - to what a life of misery
and vain regret might she be doom as well as I; and what remorse
for I to think my foolish scruple have induce it all! oh, I must
see she - she must know my truth even if I tell it at the church
door! I might pass for a madman or an impertinent fool - even she
might be offend at such an interruption, or at least might tell
I it be now too late. but if I could save she, if she might be
mine! - it be too rapturous a thought!
wing by this hope, and goad by these fear, I hurry homeward
to prepare for my departure on the morrow. I tell my mother that
urgent business which admit no delay, but which I could not then
explain, call I away.
my deep anxiety and serious preoccupation could not be conceal
from her maternal eye; and I have much ado to calm her
apprehension of some disastrous mystery.
that night there come a heavy fall of snow, which so retard the
progress of the coach on the following day that I be almost
drive to distraction. I travel all night, of course, for this
be Wednesday: to-morrow morning, doubtless, the marriage would
take place. but the night be long and dark: the snow heavily
clog the wheel and ball the horse' foot; the animal be
consumedly lazy; the coachman most execrably cautious; the
passenger confoundedly apathetic in their supine indifference to
the rate of our progression. instead of assist I to bully the
several coachman and urge they forward, they merely star and
grin at my impatience: one fellow even venture to rally I
upon it - but I silence he with a look that quell he for the
rest of the journey; and when, at the last stage, I would have
take the rein into my own hand, they all with one accord oppose
it.
it be broad daylight when we enter M- and draw up at the 'Rose
and Crown.' I alight and call aloud for a post-chaise to
Grassdale. there be none to be have: the only one in the town be
under repair. 'a gig, then - a fly - car - anything - only be
quick!' there be a gig, but not a horse to spare. I send into
the town to seek one: but they be such an intolerable time about
it that I could wait no long - I think my own foot could carry
I soon; and bid they send the conveyance after I, if it
be ready within an hour, I set off as fast as I could walk. the
distance be little more than six mile, but the road be strange,
and I have to keep stop to inquire my way; halloo to carter
and clodhopper, and frequently invade the cottage, for there
be few abroad that winter's morning; sometimes knock up the
lazy people from their bed, for where so little work be to be
do, perhaps so little food and fire to be have, they care not to
curtail their slumber. I have no time to think of they, however;
ache with weariness and desperation, I hurry on. the gig do
not overtake I: and it be well I have not wait for it;
vexatious rather, that I have be fool enough to wait so long.
at length, however, I enter the neighbourhood of Grassdale. I
approach the little rural church - but lo! there stand a train of
carriage before it; it need not the white favour bedeck the
servant and horse, nor the merry voice of the village idler
assemble to witness the show, to apprise I that there be a
wedding within. I run in among they, demand, with breathless
eagerness, have the ceremony long commence? they only gap and
star. in my desperation, I push past they, and be about to
enter the churchyard gate, when a group of ragged urchin, that have
be hang like bee to the window, suddenly drop off and make
a rush for the porch, vociferate in the uncouth dialect of their
country something which signify, 'itbe over - theybe come
out!'
if Eliza Millward have see I then she might indeed have be
delighted. I grasp the gate-post for support, and stand intently
gaze towards the door to take my last look on my soul's delight,
my first on that detest mortal who have tear she from my heart,
and doom she, I be certain, to a life of misery and hollow, vain
repining - for what happiness could she enjoy with he? I do not
wish to shock she with my presence now, but I have not power to move
away. forth come the bride and bridegroom. he I see not; I have
eye for none but she. a long veil shroud half her graceful
form, but do not hide it; I could see that while she carry she
head erect, her eye be bent upon the ground, and her face and
neck be suffuse with a crimson blush; but every feature be
radiant with smile, and gleam through the misty whiteness of
her veil be cluster of golden ringlet! oh, heaven! it be not
my Helen! the first glimpse make I start - but my eye be
darken with exhaustion and despair. dare I trust they? 'yes -
it be not she! it be a young, slighter, rosy beauty - lovely
indeed, but with far less dignity and depth of soul - without that
indefinable grace, that keenly spiritual yet gentle charm, that
ineffable power to attract and subjugate the heart - my heart at
least. I look at the bridegroom - it be Frederick Lawrence! I
wipe away the cold drop that be trickle down my forehead, and
step back as he approach; but, his eye fall upon I, and he
know I, alter as my appearance must have be.
'be that you, Markham?' say he, startle and confound at the
apparition - perhaps, too, at the wildness of my look.
'yes, Lawrence; be that you?' I muster the presence of mind to
reply.
he smile and colour, as if half-proud and half-ashamed of his
identity; and if he have reason to be proud of the sweet lady on his
arm, he have no less cause to be ashamed of have conceal his
good fortune so long.
'allow I to introduce you to my bride,' say he, endeavour to
hide his embarrassment by an assumption of careless gaiety.
'Esther, this be Mr. Markham; my friend Markham, Mrs. Lawrence,
late Miss Hargrave.'
I bow to the bride, and vehemently wring the bridegroom's hand.
'why do you not tell I of this?' I say, reproachfully,
pretend a resentment I do not feel (for in truth I be almost
wild with joy to find myself so happily mistaken, and overflow
with affection to he for this and for the base injustice I feel
that I have do he in my mind - he might have wrong I, but not
to that extent; and as I have hat he like a demon for the last
forty hour, the reaction from such a feeling be so great that I
could pardon all offence for the moment - and love he in spite of
they too).
'I do tell you,' say he, with an air of guilty confusion; 'you
receive my letter?'
'what letter?'
'the one announce my intended marriage.'
'I never receive the most distant hint of such an intention.'
'it must have cross you on your way then - it should have reach
you yesterday morning - it be rather late, I acknowledge. but
what bring you here, then, if you receive no information?'
it be now my turn to be confound; but the young lady, who have
be busily pat the snow with her foot during our short sotto-
voce colloquy, very opportunely come to my assistance by pinch
her companion's arm and whisper a suggestion that his friend
should be invite to step into the carriage and go with they; it
be scarcely agreeable to stand there among so many gazer, and
keep their friend wait into the bargain.
'and so cold as it be too!' say he, glance with dismay at her
slight drapery, and immediately hand she into the carriage.
'Markham, will you come? we be go to Paris, but we can drop
you anywhere between this and Dover.'
'no, thank you. good-by - I neednot wish you a pleasant journey;
but I shall expect a very handsome apology, some time, mind, and
score of letter, before we meet again.'
he shake my hand, and hasten to take his place beside his lady.
this be no time or place for explanation or discourse: we have
already stand long enough to excite the wonder of the village
sight-seer, and perhaps the wrath of the attendant bridal party;
though, of course, all this pass in a much short time than I
have take to relate, or even than you will take to read it. I
stand beside the carriage, and, the window be down, I see my
happy friend fondly encircle his companion's waist with his arm,
while she rest her glow cheek on his shoulder, look the
very impersonation of love, trust bliss. in the interval
between the footman's close the door and take his place behind
she raise her smile brown eye to his face, observe,
playfully, - 'I fear you must think I very insensible, Frederick:
I know it be the custom for lady to cry on these occasion, but I
couldnot squeeze a tear for my life.'
he only answer with a kiss, and press she still close to his
bosom.
'but what be this?' he murmur. 'why, Esther, yoube cry now!'
'oh, itbe nothing - itbe only too much happiness - and the wish,'
sob she, 'that our dear Helen be as happy as ourselves.'
'bless you for that wish!' I inwardly respond, as the carriage
roll away - 'and heaven grant it be not wholly vain!'
I think a cloud have suddenly darken her husband's face as she
speak. what do he think? could he grudge such happiness to his
dear sister and his friend as he now feel himself? at such a
moment it be impossible. the contrast between her fate and his
must darken his bliss for a time. perhaps, too, he think of I:
perhaps he regret the part he have have in prevent our union,
by omit to help we, if not by actually plot against we. I
exonerate he from that charge now, and deeply lament my former
ungenerous suspicion; but he have wrong we, still - I hop, I
trust that he have. he have not attempt to cheek the course of
our love by actually dam up the stream in their passage, but
he have passively watch the two current wander through life's
arid wilderness, decline to clear away the obstruction that
divide they, and secretly hop that both would lose themselves
in the sand before they could be join in one. and meantime he
have be quietly proceed with his own affair; perhaps, his
heart and head have be so full of his fair lady that he have have
but little think to spare for other. doubtless he have make his
first acquaintance with her - his first intimate acquaintance at
least - during his three month' sojourn at F-, for I now
recollect that he have once casually let fall an intimation that
his aunt and sister have a young friend stay with they at the
time, and this account for at least one-half his silence about
all transaction there. now, too, I see a reason for many little
thing that have slightly puzzle I before; among the rest, for
sundry departure from Woodford, and absence more or less
prolong, for which he never satisfactorily account, and
concern which he hat to be question on his return. well
might the servant say his master be 'very close.' but why this
strange reserve to I? partly, from that remarkable idiosyncrasy
to which I have before allude; partly, perhaps, from tenderness to
my feeling, or fear to disturb my philosophy by touch upon the
infectious theme of love.
CHAPTER LII
the tardy gig have overtake I at last. I enter it, and bade the
man who bring it drive to Grassdale Manor - I be too busy with
my own thought to care to drive it myself. I would see Mrs.
Huntingdon - there could be no impropriety in that now that her
husband have be dead above a year - and by her indifference or her
joy at my unexpected arrival I could soon tell whether her heart
be truly mine. but my companion, a loquacious, forward fellow,
be not dispose to leave I to the indulgence of my private
cogitation.
'there they go!' say he, as the carriage file away before we.
'therewill be brave doing on yonder to-day, as what come to-morra.
- know anything of that family, sir? or yoube a stranger in these
part?'
'I know they by report.'
'Humph! therebe the good of them go, anyhow. and I suppose the
old missis be agoe to leave after this stir's get overed, and
take herself off, somewhere, to live on her bit of a jointure; and
the young 'un - at least the new 'un (shebe none so very young) -
be come down to live at the Grove.'
'be Mr. Hargrave marry, then?'
'ay, sir, a few month since. he should a be wed afore, to a
widow lady, but they couldnot agree over the money: shehave a rare
long purse, and Mr. Hargrave want it all to hisself; but she
wouldnot let it go, and so then they fall out. this one benot
quite as rich, nor as handsome either, but she havenot be marry
before. shebe very plain, they say, and get on to forty or
past, and so, you know, if she donot jump at this hopportunity,
she think shewould never get a well. I guess she think such a
handsome young husband be worth all 'at ever she have, and he might
take it and welcome, but I lie shewill rue her bargain afore long.
they say she begin already to see 'at he benot not altogether that
nice, generous, perlite, delightful gentleman 'at she think he
afore marriage - he begin a be careless and masterful already.
ay, and shewill find he hard and careless nor she think on.'
'you seem to be well acquainted with he,' I observe.
'I be, sir; Ihave know he since he be quite a young gentleman;
and a proud 'un he be, and a wilful. I be servant yonder for
several year; but I couldnot stand their niggardly way - she get
ever long and bad, do missis, with her nipping and screwing,
and watch and grudging; so I think Iwould find another place.'
'be we not near the house?' say I, interrupt he.
'yes, sir; yond's the park.'
my heart sink within I to behold that stately mansion in the midst
of its expansive ground. the park as beautiful now, in its wintry
garb, as it could be in its summer glory: the majestic sweep, the
undulating swell and fall, display to full advantage in that robe
of dazzle purity, stainless and printless - save one long,
wind track leave by the troop deer - the stately timber-tree
with their heavy-laden branch gleam white against the dull,
grey sky; the deep, encircle wood; the broad expanse of water
sleep in frozen quiet; and the weep ash and willow droop
their snow-clothe bough above it - all present a picture, strike
indeed, and pleasing to an unencumbered mind, but by no mean
encouraging to I. there be one comfort, however, - all this be
entail upon little Arthur, and could not under any circumstance,
strictly speak, be his mother's. but how be she situate?
overcome with a sudden effort my repugnance to mention her name
to my garrulous companion, I ask he if he know whether her late
husband have leave a will, and how the property have be dispose of.
oh, yes, he know all about it; and I be quickly inform that to
she have be leave the full control and management of the estate
during her son's minority, besides the absolute, unconditional
possession of her own fortune (but I know that her father have not
give she much), and the small additional sum that have be settle
upon she before marriage.
before the close of the explanation we draw up at the park-gates.
now for the trial. if I should find she within - but alas! she
might be still at Staningley: her brother have give I no
intimation to the contrary. I inquire at the porter's lodge if
Mrs. Huntingdon be at home. no, she be with her aunt in -shire,
but be expect to return before Christmas. she usually spend
most of her time at Staningley, only come to Grassdale
occasionally, when the management of affair, or the interest of
her tenant and dependent, require her presence.
'near what town be Staningley situate?' I ask. the requisite
information be soon obtain. 'now then, my man, give I the
rein, and wewill return to M-. I must have some breakfast at the
"Rose and Crown," and then away to Staningley by the first coach
for -.'
at M- I have time before the coach start to replenish my force
with a hearty breakfast, and to obtain the refreshment of my usual
morning's ablution, and the amelioration of some slight change in
my toilet, and also to despatch a short note to my mother
(excellent son that I be), to assure she that I be still in
existence, and to excuse my non-appearance at the expect time.
it be a long journey to Staningley for those slow-travel day,
but I do not deny myself needful refreshment on the road, nor even
a night's rest at a wayside inn, choose rather to brook a little
delay than to present myself worn, wild, and weather-beat before
my mistress and her aunt, who would be astonish enough to see I
without that. next morning, therefore, I not only fortify myself
with as substantial a breakfast as my excited feeling would allow
I to swallow, but I bestow a little more than usual time and
care upon my toilet; and, furnish with a change of linen from my
small carpet-bag, well-brush clothe, well-polish boot, and
neat new glove, I mount 'the lightning,' and resume my journey.
I have nearly two stage yet before I, but the coach, I be
inform, pass through the neighbourhood of Staningley, and
have desire to be set down as near the Hall as possible, I have
nothing to do but to sit with fold arm and speculate upon the
come hour.
it be a clear, frosty morning. the very fact of sit exalt
aloft, survey the snowy landscape and sweet sunny sky, inhale
the pure, brace air, and crunch away over the crisp frozen
snow, be exhilarate enough in itself; but add to this the idea
of to what goal I be hasten, and whom I expect to meet, and
you may have some faint conception of my frame of mind at the time
- only a faint one, though: for my heart swell with unspeakable
delight, and my spirit rise almost to madness, in spite of my
prudent endeavour to bind they down to a reasonable platitude by
thinking of the undeniable difference between Helen's rank and
mine; of all that she have pass through since our parting; of she
long, unbroken silence; and, above all, of her cool, cautious aunt,
whose counsel she would doubtless be careful not to slight again.
these consideration make my heart flutter with anxiety, and my
chest heave with impatience to get the crisis over; but they could
not dim her image in my mind, or mar the vivid recollection of what
have be say and feel between we, or destroy the keen anticipation
of what be to be: in fact, I could not realise their terror now.
towards the close of the journey, however, a couple of my fellow-
passenger kindly come to my assistance, and bring I low enough.
'fine land this,' say one of they, point with his umbrella to
the wide field on the right, conspicuous for their compact
hedgerow, deep, well-cut ditch, and fine timber-tree, grow
sometimes on the border, sometimes in the midst of the enclosure:
'very fine land, if you see it in the summer or spring.'
'ay,' respond the other, a gruff elderly man, with a drab
greatcoat button up to the chin, and a cotton umbrella between
his knee. 'itbe old Maxwell's, I suppose.'
'it be his, sir; but hebe dead now, yoube aware, and have leave it
all to his niece.'
'all?'
'every rood of it, and the mansion-house and all! every hatom of
his worldly good, except just a trifle, by way of remembrance, to
his nephew down in -shire, and an annuity to his wife.'
'itbe strange, sir!'
'it be, sir; and she benot his own niece neither. but he have no
near relation of his own - none but a nephew hehave quarrel with;
and he always have a partiality for this one. and then his wife
advise he to it, they say: shewould bring most of the property,
and it be her wish that this lady should have it.'
'Humph! shewill be a fine catch for somebody.'
'she will so. shebe a widow, but quite young yet, and uncommon
handsome: a fortune of her own, besides, and only one child, and
shebe nurse a fine estate for he in -. therewill be lot to
speak for she! 'fraid therebe no chance for uz' - (facetiously
jog I with his elbow, as well as his companion) - 'ha, ha, ha!
no offence, sir, I hope?' - (to I). 'Ahem! I should think shewill
marry none but a nobleman myself. look ye, sir,' resume he,
turn to his other neighbour, and point past I with his
umbrella, 'thatbe the Hall: grand park, you see, and all they
wood - plenty of timber there, and lot of game. Hallo! what
now?'
this exclamation be occasion by the sudden stoppage of the coach
at the park-gates.
'Gen'leman for Staningley Hall?' cry the coachman and I rise and
throw my carpet-bag on to the ground, preparatory to drop
myself down after it.
'Sickly, sir?' ask my talkative neighbour, star I in the
face. I daresay it be white enough.
'no. here, coachman!'
'Thank'ee, sir. - all right!'
the coachman pocket his fee and drive away, leave I, not
walk up the park, but pace to and fro before its gate, with
fold arm, and eye fix upon the ground, an overwhelming force
of image, thought, impression crowd on my mind, and nothing
tangibly distinct but this: my love have be cherish in vain -
my hope be go for ever; I must tear myself away at once, and
banish or suppress all thought of she, like the remembrance of a
wild, mad dream. gladly would I have linger round the place for
hour, in the hope of catch at least one distant glimpse of she
before I go, but it must not be - I must not suffer she to see
I; for what could have bring I hither but the hope of revive
her attachment, with a view hereafter to obtain her hand? and
could I bear that she should think I capable of such a thing? - of
presume upon the acquaintance - the love, if you will -
accidentally contract, or rather force upon she against she
will, when she be an unknown fugitive, toil for her own
support, apparently without fortune, family, or connection; to
come upon she now, when she be reinstate in her proper sphere,
and claim a share in her prosperity, which, have it never fail
she, would most certainly have keep she unknown to I for ever?
and this, too, when we have part sixteen month ago, and she have
expressly forbid I to hope for a re-union in this world, and
never send I a line or a message from that day to this. no! the
very idea be intolerable.
and even if she should have a linger affection for I still,
ought I to disturb her peace by awaken those feeling? to
subject she to the struggle of conflict duty and inclination -
to whichsoever side the latter might allure, or the former
imperatively call she - whether she should deem it her duty to risk
the slight and censure of the world, the sorrow and displeasure
of those she love, for a romantic idea of truth and constancy to
I, or to sacrifice her individual wish to the feeling of her
friend and her own sense of prudence and the fitness of thing?
no - and I would not! I would go at once, and she should never
know that I have approach the place of her abode: for though I
might disclaim all idea of ever aspire to her hand, or even of
solicit a place in her friendly regard, her peace should not be
break by my presence, nor her heart afflict by the sight of my
fidelity.
'adieu then, dear Helen, forever! forever adieu!'
so say I - and yet I could not tear myself away. I move a few
pace, and then look back, for one last view of her stately home,
that I might have its outward form, at least, impress upon my
mind as indelibly as her own image, which, alas! I must not see
again - then walk a few step far; and then, lose in
melancholy musing, pause again and leant my back against a rough
old tree that grow beside the road.
CHAPTER LIII
while stand thus, absorb in my gloomy reverie, a gentleman's
carriage come round the corner of the road. I do not look at it;
and have it roll quietly by I, I should not have remember the
fact of its appearance at all; but a tiny voice from within it
rouse I by exclaim, 'Mamma, mamma, herebe Mr. Markham!'
I do not hear the reply, but presently the same voice answer,
'it be indeed, mamma - look for yourself.'
I do not raise my eye, but I suppose mamma look, for a clear
melodious voice, whose tone thrill through my nerve, exclaim,
'oh, aunt! herebe Mr. Markham, Arthur's friend! stop, Richard!'
there be such evidence of joyous though suppress excitement in
the utterance of those few word - especially that tremulous, 'oh,
aunt' - that it throw I almost off my guard. the carriage stop
immediately, and I look up and meet the eye of a pale, grave,
elderly lady survey I from the open window. she bow, and so
do I, and then she withdraw her head, while Arthur scream to the
footman to let he out; but before that functionary could descend
from his box a hand be silently put forth from the carriage
window. I know that hand, though a black glove conceal its
delicate whiteness and half its fair proportion, and quickly
seize it, I press it in my own - ardently for a moment, but
instantly recollect myself, I drop it, and it be immediately
withdraw.
'be you come to see we, or only pass by?' ask the low
voice of its owner, who, I feel, be attentively survey my
countenance from behind the thick black veil which, with the
shadowing panel, entirely conceal her own from I.
'i - I come to see the place,' falter I.
'the place,' repeat she, in a tone which betoken more
displeasure or disappointment than surprise.
'will you not enter it, then?'
'if you wish it.'
'can you doubt?'
'yes, yes! he must enter,' cry Arthur, run round from the
other door; and seize my hand in both his, he shake it heartily.
'do you remember I, sir?' say he.
'yes, full well, my little man, alter though you be,' reply I,
survey the comparatively tall, slim young gentleman, with his
mother's image visibly stamp upon his fair, intelligent feature,
in spite of the blue eye beam with gladness, and the bright
lock cluster beneath his cap.
'be I not grow?' say he, stretch himself up to his full
height.
'Grown! three inch, upon my word!'
'I be seven last birthday,' be the proud rejoinder. 'in seven
year more I shall be as tall as you nearly.'
'Arthur,' say his mother, 'tell he to come in. go on, Richard.'
there be a touch of sadness as well as coldness in her voice, but
I know not to what to ascribe it. the carriage drive on and
enter the gate before we. my little companion lead I up the
park, discourse merrily all the way. arrive at the hall-door, I
pause on the step and look round I, wait to recover my
composure, if possible - or, at any rate, to remember my new-form
resolution and the principle on which they be found; and it
be not till Arthur have be for some time gently pull my coat,
and repeat his invitation to enter, that I at length consent
to accompany he into the apartment where the lady await we.
Helen eye I as I enter with a kind of gentle, serious scrutiny,
and politely ask after Mrs. Markham and Rose. I respectfully
answer her inquiry. Mrs. Maxwell beg I to be seat,
observe it be rather cold, but she suppose I have not travel
far that morning.
'not quite twenty mile,' I answer.
'not on foot!'
'no, Madam, by coach.'
'here's Rachel, sir,' say Arthur, the only truly happy one amongst
we, direct my attention to that worthy individual, who have just
enter to take her mistress's thing. she vouchsafe I an almost
friendly smile of recognition - a favour that demand, at least, a
civil salutation on my part, which be accordingly give and
respectfully return - she have see the error of her former
estimation of my character.
when Helen be divest of her lugubrious bonnet and veil, her
heavy winter cloak, &c., she look so like herself that I know not
how to bear it. I be particularly glad to see her beautiful black
hair, unstinte still, and unconceale in its glossy luxuriance.
'Mamma have leave off her widow's cap in honour of uncle's marriage,'
observe Arthur, read my look with a child's mingled simplicity
and quickness of observation. Mamma look grave and Mrs. Maxwell
shake her head. 'and aunt Maxwell be never go to leave off
her,' persist the naughty boy; but when he see that his pertness
be seriously displease and painful to his aunt, he go and
silently put his arm round her neck, kiss she cheek, and withdraw
to the recess of one of the great bay-windows, where he quietly
amuse himself with his dog, while Mrs. Maxwell gravely discuss
with I the interesting topic of the weather, the season, and the
road. I consider her presence very useful as a check upon my
natural impulse - an antidote to those emotion of tumultuous
excitement which would otherwise have carry I away against my
reason and my will; but just then I feel the restraint almost
intolerable, and I have the great difficulty in force myself to
attend to her remark and answer they with ordinary politeness; for
I be sensible that Helen be stand within a few foot of I
beside the fire. I dare not look at she, but I feel her eye be
upon I, and from one hasty, furtive glance, I think her cheek
be slightly flushed, and that her finger, as she play with her
watch-chain, be agitate with that restless, tremble motion
which betoken high excitement.
'tell I,' say she, avail herself of the first pause in the
attempt conversation between her aunt and I, and speak fast
and low, with her eye bent on the gold chain - for I now venture
another glance - 'tell I how you all be at Linden-hope - have
nothing happen since I leave you?'
'I believe not.'
'nobody dead? nobody marry?'
'no.'
'or - or expect to marry? - no old tie dissolve or new one
form? no old friend forget or supplant?'
she drop her voice so low in the last sentence that no one could
have catch the concluding word but myself, and at the same time
turn her eye upon I with a dawn smile, most sweetly
melancholy, and a look of timid though keen inquiry that make my
cheek tingle with inexpressible emotion.
'I believe not,' I answer. 'certainly not, if other be as
little change as I.' her face glow in sympathy with mine.
'and you really do not mean to call?' she exclaim.
'I fear to intrude.'
'to intrude!' cry she, with an impatient gesture. 'what - ' but
as if suddenly recollect her aunt's presence, she check
herself, and, turn to that lady, continued - 'why, aunt, this
man be my brother's close friend, and be my own intimate
acquaintance (for a few short month at least), and profess a
great attachment to my boy - and when he pass the house, so many
score of mile from his home, he decline to look in for fear of
intrude!'
'Mr. Markham be over-modest,' observe Mrs. Maxwell.
'over-ceremonious rather,' say her niece - 'over - well, itbe no
matter.' and turn from I, she seat herself in a chair beside
the table, and pull a book to she by the cover, begin to turn
over the leaf in an energetic kind of abstraction.
'if I have know,' say I, 'that you would have honour I by
remember I as an intimate acquaintance, I most likely should
not have deny myself the pleasure of call upon you, but I
think you have forget I long ago.'
'you judge of other by yourself,' mutter she without raise
her eye from the book, but redden as she speak, and hastily
turn over a dozen leaf at once.
there be a pause, of which Arthur think he might venture to
avail himself to introduce his handsome young setter, and show I
how wonderfully it be grow and improve, and to ask after the
welfare of its father Sancho. Mrs. Maxwell then withdraw to take
off her thing. Helen immediately push the book from she, and
after silently survey her son, his friend, and his dog for a few
moment, she dismiss the former from the room under pretence of
wish he to fetch his last new book to show I. the child
obey with alacrity; but I continue caress the dog. the
silence might have last till its master's return, have it depend
on I to break it; but, in half a minute or less, my hostess
impatiently rise, and, take her former station on the rug between
I and the chimney corner, earnestly exclaim -
'Gilbert, what be the matter with you? - why be you so change?
it be a very indiscreet question, I know,' she hasten to add:
'perhaps a very rude one - donot answer it if you think so - but I
hate mystery and concealment.'
'I be not change, Helen - unfortunately I be as keen and
passionate as ever - it be not I, it be circumstance that be
change.'
'what circumstance? do tell I!' her cheek be blanch with the
very anguish of anxiety - could it be with the fear that I have
rashly pledge my faith to another?
'Iwill tell you at once,' say I. 'I will confess that I come here
for the purpose of see you (not without some monitory misgiving
at my own presumption, and fear that I should be as little welcome
as expect when I come), but I do not know that this estate be
yours until enlighten on the subject of your inheritance by the
conversation of two fellow-passenger in the last stage of my
journey; and then I see at once the folly of the hope I have
cherish, and the madness of retain they a moment long; and
though I alight at your gate, I determine not to enter within
they; I linger a few minute to see the place, but be fully
resolve to return to M- without see its mistress.'
'and if my aunt and I have not be just return from our morning
drive, I should have see and hear no more of you?'
'I think it would be well for both that we should not meet,'
reply I, as calmly as I could, but not dare to speak above my
breath, from conscious inability to steady my voice, and not dare
to look in her face lest my firmness should forsake I altogether.
'I think an interview would only disturb your peace and madden
I. but I be glad, now, of this opportunity of see you once
more and know that you have not forget I, and of assure
you that I shall never cease to remember you.'
there be a moment's pause. Mrs. Huntingdon move away, and stand
in the recess of the window. do she regard this as an intimation
that modesty alone prevent I from ask her hand? and be she
consider how to repulse I with the small injury to my
feeling? before I could speak to relieve she from such a
perplexity, she break the silence herself by suddenly turn
towards I and observe -
'you might have have such an opportunity before - as far, I mean, as
regard assure I of your kindly recollection, and yourself of
mine, if you have write to I.'
'I would have do so, but I do not know your address, and do not
like to ask your brother, because I think he would object to my
writing; but this would not have deter I for a moment, if I
could have venture to believe that you expect to hear from I,
or even waste a thought upon your unhappy friend; but your silence
naturally lead I to conclude myself forget.'
'do you expect I to write to you, then?'
'no, Helen - Mrs. Huntingdon,' say I, blush at the imply
imputation, 'certainly not; but if you have send I a message
through your brother, or even ask he about I now and then - '
'I do ask about you frequently. I be not go to do more,'
continue she, smile, 'so long as you continue to restrict
yourself to a few polite inquiry about my health.'
'your brother never tell I that you have mention my name.'
'do you ever ask he?'
'no; for I see he do not wish to be question about you, or to
afford the slight encouragement or assistance to my too
obstinate attachment.' Helen do not reply. 'and he be perfectly
right,' add I. but she remain in silence, look out upon the
snowy lawn. 'oh, I will relieve she of my presence,' think I;
and immediately I rise and advance to take leave, with a most
heroic resolution - but pride be at the bottom of it, or it could
not have carry I through.
'be you go already?' say she, take the hand I offer, and
not immediately let it go.
'why should I stay any long?'
'wait till Arthur come, at least.'
only too glad to obey, I stand and leant against the opposite side
of the window.
'you tell I you be not change,' say my companion: 'you be -
very much so.'
'no, Mrs. Huntingdon, I only ought to be.'
'do you mean to maintain that you have the same regard for I that
you have when last we meet?'
'I have; but it would be wrong to talk of it now.'
'it be wrong to talk of it then, Gilbert; it would not now -
unless to do so would be to violate the truth.'
I be too much agitated to speak; but, without wait for an
answer, she turn away her glisten eye and crimson cheek, and
throw up the window and look out, whether to calm her own,
excited feeling, or to relieve her embarrassment, or only to pluck
that beautiful half-blow Christmas-rise that grow upon the little
shrub without, just peep from the snow that have hitherto, no
doubt, defend it from the frost, and be now melt away in the
sun. pluck it, however, she do, and have gently dash the
glitter powder from its leaf, approach it to her lip and
say:
'this rise be not so fragrant as a summer flower, but it have stand
through hardship none of they could bear: the cold rain of winter
have suffice to nourish it, and its faint sun to warm it; the bleak
wind have not blanch it, or break its stem, and the keen frost
have not blight it. look, Gilbert, it be still fresh and blooming
as a flower can be, with the cold snow even now on its petal. -
will you have it?'
I hold out my hand: I dare not speak lest my emotion should
overmaster I. she lay the rose across my palm, but I scarcely
close my finger upon it, so deeply be I absorb in think
what might be the meaning of her word, and what I ought to do or
say upon the occasion; whether to give way to my feeling or
restrain they still. misconstrue this hesitation into
indifference - or reluctance even - to accept her gift, Helen
suddenly snatch it from my hand, throw it out on to the snow,
shut down the window with an emphasis, and withdraw to the fire.
'Helen, what mean this?' I cry, electrify at this startling
change in her demeanour.
'you do not understand my gift,' say she - 'or, what be bad,
you despise it. Ibe sorry I give it you; but since I do make
such a mistake, the only remedy I could think of be to take it
away.'
'you misunderstood I cruelly,' I reply, and in a minute I have
open the window again, leap out, pick up the flower, bring
it in, and present it to she, implore she to give it I again,
and I would keep it for ever for her sake, and prize it more highly
than anything in the world I possess.
'and will this content you?' say she, as she take it in her hand.
'it shall,' I answer.
'there, then; take it.'
I press it earnestly to my lip, and put it in my bosom, Mrs.
Huntingdon look on with a half-sarcastic smile.
'now, be you go?' say she.
'I will if - if I must.'
'you be change,' persist she - 'you be grow either very proud
or very indifferent.'
'I be neither, Helen - Mrs. Huntingdon. if you could see my heart
- '
'you must be one, - if not both. and why Mrs. Huntingdon? - why
not Helen, as before?'
'Helen, then - dear Helen!' I murmur. I be in an agony of
mingle love, hope, delight, uncertainty, and suspense.
'the rise I give you be an emblem of my heart,' say she; 'would
you take it away and leave I here alone?'
'would you give I your hand too, if I ask it?'
'have I not say enough?' she answer, with a most enchanting
smile. I snatch her hand, and would have fervently kiss it,
but suddenly check myself, and say, -
'but have you consider the consequence?'
'hardly, I think, or I should not have offer myself to one too
proud to take I, or too indifferent to make his affection outweigh
my worldly good.'
stupid blockhead that I be! - I tremble to clasp she in my arm,
but dare not believe in so much joy, and yet restrain myself to
say, -
'but if you should repent!'
'it would be your fault,' she reply: 'I never shall, unless you
bitterly disappoint I. if you have not sufficient confidence in
my affection to believe this, let I alone.'
'my darling angel - my own Helen,' cry I, now passionately
kiss the hand I still retain, and throw my left arm around
she, 'you never shall repent, if it depend on I alone. but have
you think of your aunt?' I tremble for the answer, and clasp
she close to my heart in the instinctive dread of lose my new-
find treasure.
'my aunt must not know of it yet,' say she. 'she would think it a
rash, wild step, because she could not imagine how well I know you;
but she must know you herself, and learn to like you. you must
leave we now, after lunch, and come again in spring, and make a
long stay, and cultivate her acquaintance, and I know you will
like each other.'
'and then you will be mine,' say I, print a kiss upon her lip,
and another, and another; for I be as daring and impetuous now as
I have be backward and constrain before.
'no - in another year,' reply she, gently disengage herself
from my embrace, but still fondly clasp my hand.
'another year! oh, Helen, I could not wait so long!'
'where be your fidelity?'
'I mean I could not endure the misery of so long a separation.'
'it would not be a separation: we will write every day: my spirit
shall be always with you, and sometimes you shall see I with your
bodily eye. I will not be such a hypocrite as to pretend that I
desire to wait so long myself, but as my marriage be to please
myself, alone, I ought to consult my friend about the time of it.'
'your friend will disapprove.'
'they will not greatly disapprove, dear Gilbert,' say she,
earnestly kiss my hand; 'they cannot, when they know you, or, if
they could, they would not be true friend - I should not care for
their estrangement. now be you satisfied?' she look up in my
face with a smile of ineffable tenderness.
'can I be otherwise, with your love? and you do love I, Helen?'
say I, not doubt the fact, but wish to hear it confirm by
her own acknowledgment.
'if you love as I do,' she earnestly reply, 'you would not have
so nearly lose I - these scruple of false delicacy and pride
would never thus have trouble you - you would have see that the
great worldly distinction and discrepancy of rank, birth, and
fortune be as dust in the balance compare with the unity of
accordant thought and feeling, and truly loving, sympathise
heart and soul.'
'but this be too much happiness,' say I, embrace she again; 'I
have not deserve it, Helen - I dare not believe in such felicity:
and the long I have to wait, the great will be my dread that
something will intervene to snatch you from I - and think, a
thousand thing may happen in a year! - I shall be in one long
fever of restless terror and impatience all the time. and besides,
winter be such a dreary season.'
'I think so too,' reply she gravely: 'I would not be marry
in winter - in December, at least,' she add, with a shudder - for
in that month have occur both the ill-star marriage that have
bind she to her former husband, and the terrible death that
release she - 'and therefore I say another year, in spring.'
'next spring?'
'no, no - next autumn, perhaps.'
'Summer, then?'
'well, the close of summer. there now! be satisfied.'
while she be speak Arthur re-enter the room - good boy for
keep out so long.
'Mamma, I couldnot find the book in either of the place you tell
I to look for it' (there be a conscious something in mamma's
smile that seem to say, 'no, dear, I know you could not'), 'but
Rachel get it for I at last. look, Mr. Markham, a natural
history, with all kind of bird and beast in it, and the reading
as nice as the picture!'
in great good humour I sit down to examine the book, and draw the
little fellow between my knee. have he come a minute before I
should have receive he less graciously, but now I affectionately
stroke his curling look, and even kiss his ivory forehead: he
be my own Helen's son, and therefore mine; and as such I have ever
since regard he. that pretty child be now a fine young man: he
have realise his mother's bright expectation, and be at present
reside in Grassdale Manor with his young wife - the merry little
Helen Hattersley of yore.
I have not look through half the book before Mrs. Maxwell appear
to invite I into the other room to lunch. that lady's cool,
distant manner rather chill I at first; but I do my good to
propitiate she, and not entirely without success, I think, even in
that first short visit; for when I talk cheerfully to she, she
gradually become more kind and cordial, and when I depart she
bid I a gracious adieu, hop ere long to have the pleasure of
see I again.
'but you must not go till you have see the conservatory, my aunt's
winter garden,' say Helen, as I advance to take leave of she,
with as much philosophy and self-command as I could summon to my
aid.
I gladly avail myself of such a respite, and follow she into a
large and beautiful conservatory, plentifully furnish with
flower, consider the season - but, of course, I have little
attention to spare for they. it be not, however, for any tender
colloquy that my companion have bring I there:-
'my aunt be particularly fond of flower,' she observe, 'and she
be fond of Staningley too: I bring you here to offer a petition
in her behalf, that this may be her home as long as she live, and
- if it be not our home likewise - that I may often see she and be
with she; for I fear she will be sorry to lose I; and though she
lead a retired and contemplative life, she be apt to get low-
spirited if leave too much alone.'
'by all mean, dear Helen! - do what you will with your own. I
should not dream of wish your aunt to leave the place under any
circumstance; and we will live either here or elsewhere as you and
she may determine, and you shall see she as often as you like. I
know she must be pain to part with you, and I be willing to make
any reparation in my power. I love she for your sake, and her
happiness shall be as dear to I as that of my own mother.'
'thank you, darling! you shall have a kiss for that. good-by.
there now - there, Gilbert - let I go - here's Arthur; donot
astonish his infantile brain with your madness.'
* * * * *
but it be time to bring my narrative to a close. any one but you
would say I have make it too long already. but for your
satisfaction I will add a few word more; because I know you will
have a fellow-feeling for the old lady, and will wish to know the
last of her history. I do come again in spring, and, agreeably to
Helen's injunction, do my good to cultivate her acquaintance.
she receive I very kindly, have be, doubtless, already
prepare to think highly of my character by her niece's too
favourable report. I turn my good side out, of course, and we
get along marvellously well together. when my ambitious intention
be make known to she, she take it more sensibly than I have
venture to hope. her only remark on the subject, in my hearing,
be -
'and so, Mr. Markham, you be go to rob I of my niece, I
understand. well! I hope God will prosper your union, and make my
dear girl happy at last. could she have be content to remain
single, I own I should have be well satisfied; but if she must
marry again, I know of no one, now live and of a suitable age, to
whom I would more willingly resign she than yourself, or who would
be more likely to appreciate her worth and make, her truly happy,
as far as I can tell.'
of course I be delighted with the compliment, and hop to show
she that she be not mistaken in her favourable judgment.
'I have, however, one request to offer,' continue she. 'it seem
I be still to look on Staningley as my home: I wish you to make it
your likewise, for Helen be attach to the place and to I - as I
be to she. there be painful association connect with
Grassdale, which she cannot easily overcome; and I shall not molest
you with my company or interference here: I be a very quiet
person, and shall keep my own apartment, and attend to my own
concern, and only see you now and then.'
of course I most readily consent to this; and we live in the
great harmony with our dear aunt until the day of her death,
which melancholy event take place a few year after - melancholy,
not to herself (for it come quietly upon she, and she be glad to
reach her journey's end), but only to the few love friend and
grateful dependent she leave behind.
to return, however, to my own affair: I be marry in summer, on
a glorious August morning. it take the whole eight month, and all
Helen's kindness and goodness to boot, to overcome my mother's
prejudice against my bride-elect, and to reconcile she to the idea
of my leave Linden Grange and live so far away. yet she be
gratified at her son's good fortune after all, and proudly
attribute it all to his own superior merit and endowment. I
bequeath the farm to Fergus, with well hope of its prosperity
than I should have have a year ago under similar circumstance; for
he have lately fall in love with the Vicar of L-'s eld daughter
- a lady whose superiority have rouse his latent virtue, and
stimulate he to the most surprising exertion, not only to gain
her affection and esteem, and to obtain a fortune sufficient to
aspire to her hand, but to render himself worthy of she, in his own
eye, as well as in those of her parent; and in the end he be
successful, as you already know. as for myself, I need not tell
you how happily my Helen and I have live together, and how bless
we still be in each other's society, and in the promising young
scion that be grow up about we. we be just now look
forward to the advent of you and Rose, for the time of your annual
visit draw nigh, when you must leave your dusty, smoky, noisy,
toil, strive city for a season of invigorate relaxation and
social retirement with we.
till then, farewell,
gilbert MARKHAM.
staningley: June 10th, 1847.
