AGNES GREY
CHAPTER I--the parsonage
all true history contain instruction; though, in some, the
treasure may be hard to find, and when find, so trivial in
quantity, that the dry, shrivelled kernel scarcely compensate for
the trouble of crack the nut. whether this be the case with my
history or not, I be hardly competent to judge. I sometimes think
it might prove useful to some, and entertaining to other; but the
world may judge for itself. shield by my own obscurity, and by
the lapse of year, and a few fictitious name, I do not fear to
venture; and will candidly lay before the public what I would not
disclose to the most intimate friend.
my father be a clergyman of the north of England, who be
deservedly respect by all who know he; and, in his young day,
live pretty comfortably on the joint income of a small incumbency
and a snug little property of his own. my mother, who marry he
against the wish of her friend, be a squire's daughter, and a
woman of spirit. in vain it be represent to she, that if she
become the poor parson's wife, she must relinquish her carriage and
her lady's-maid, and all the luxury and elegancie of affluence;
which to she be little less than the necessary of life. a
carriage and a lady's-maid be great convenience; but, thank
heaven, she have foot to carry she, and hand to minister to her own
necessity. an elegant house and spacious ground be not to be
despise; but she would rather live in a cottage with Richard Grey
than in a palace with any other man in the world.
find argument of no avail, her father, at length, tell the
lover they might marry if they please; but, in so do, his
daughter would forfeit every fraction of her fortune. he expect
this would cool the ardour of both; but he be mistaken. my father
know too well my mother's superior worth not to be sensible that
she be a valuable fortune in herself: and if she would but
consent to embellish his humble hearth he should be happy to take
she on any term; while she, on her part, would rather labour with
her own hand than be divide from the man she love, whose
happiness it would be her joy to make, and who be already one with
she in heart and soul. so her fortune go to swell the purse of a
wise sister, who have marry a rich nabob; and she, to the wonder
and compassionate regret of all who know she, go to bury herself
in the homely village parsonage among the hill of -. and yet, in
spite of all this, and in spite of my mother's high spirit and my
father's whim, I believe you might search all England through, and
fail to find a happy couple.
of six child, my sister Mary and myself be the only two that
survive the peril of infancy and early childhood. I, be the
young by five or six year, be always regard as the child, and
the pet of the family: father, mother, and sister, all combine to
spoil I--not by foolish indulgence, to render I fractious and
ungovernable, but by ceaseless kindness, to make I too helpless
and dependent--too unfit for buffet with the care and turmoil
of life.
Mary and I be bring up in the strict seclusion. my mother,
be at once highly accomplish, well inform, and fond of
employment, take the whole charge of our education on herself, with
the exception of Latin--which my father undertake to teach we--so
that we never even go to school; and, as there be no society in
the neighbourhood, our only intercourse with the world consist in
a stately tea-party, now and then, with the principal farmer and
tradespeople of the vicinity (just to avoid be stigmatize as
too proud to consort with our neighbour), and an annual visit to
our paternal grandfather's; where himself, our kind grandmamma, a
maiden aunt, and two or three elderly lady and gentleman, be
the only person we ever see. sometimes our mother would amuse we
with story and anecdote of her young day, which, while they
entertain we amazingly, frequently awake--in ME, at least--a
secret wish to see a little more of the world.
I think she must have be very happy: but she never seem to
regret past time. my father, however, whose temper be neither
tranquil nor cheerful by nature, often unduly vex himself with
thinking of the sacrifice his dear wife have make for he; and
trouble his head with revolve endless scheme for the
augmentation of his little fortune, for her sake and our. in vain
my mother assure he she be quite satisfied; and if he would but
lay by a little for the child, we should all have plenty, both
for time present and to come: but saving be not my father's
forte. he would not run in debt (at least, my mother take good
care he should not), but while he have money he must spend it: he
like to see his house comfortable, and his wife and daughter well
clothe, and well attend; and besides, he be charitably
dispose, and like to give to the poor, accord to his mean:
or, as some might think, beyond they.
at length, however, a kind friend suggest to he a means of
double his private property at one stroke; and far increase
it, hereafter, to an untold amount. this friend be a merchant, a
man of enterprise spirit and undoubted talent, who be somewhat
straiten in his mercantile pursuit for want of capital; but
generously propose to give my father a fair share of his profit,
if he would only entrust he with what he could spare; and he
think he might safely promise that whatever sum the latter choose
to put into his hand, it should bring he in cent. per cent. the
small patrimony be speedily sell, and the whole of its price be
deposit in the hand of the friendly merchant; who as promptly
proceed to ship his cargo, and prepare for his voyage.
my father be delighted, so be we all, with our brightening
prospect. for the present, it be true, we be reduce to the
narrow income of the curacy; but my father seem to think there
be no necessity for scrupulously restrict our expenditure to
that; so, with a stand bill at Mr. Jackson's, another at
Smith's, and a third at Hobson's, we get along even more
comfortably than before: though my mother affirm we have well
keep within bound, for our prospect of wealth be but
precarious, after all; and if my father would only trust everything
to her management, he should never feel himself stint: but he,
for once, be incorrigible.
what happy hour Mary and I have pass while sit at our work
by the fire, or wander on the heath-clothe hill, or idle under
the weep birch (the only considerable tree in the garden),
talk of future happiness to ourselves and our parent, of what
we would do, and see, and possess; with no firm foundation for
our goodly superstructure than the rich that be expect to
flow in upon we from the success of the worthy merchant's
speculation. our father be nearly as bad as ourselves; only that
he affect not to be so much in earnest: express his bright
hope and sanguine expectation in jest and playful sally, that
always strike I as be exceedingly witty and pleasant. our
mother laugh with delight to see he so hopeful and happy: but
still she fear he be set his heart too much upon the matter;
and once I hear her whisper as she leave the room, 'God grant he be
not disappointed! I know not how he would bear it.'
disappointed he be; and bitterly, too. it come like a thunder-
clap on we all, that the vessel which contain our fortune have
be wreck, and go to the bottom with all its store, together
with several of the crew, and the unfortunate merchant himself. I
be grieve for he; I be grieve for the overthrow of all our
air-build castle: but, with the elasticity of youth, I soon
recover the shook.
though rich have charm, poverty have no terror for an
inexperienced girl like I. indeed, to say the truth, there be
something exhilarate in the idea of be drive to strait, and
throw upon our own resource. I only wish papa, mamma, and Mary
be all of the same mind as myself; and then, instead of lament
past calamitie we might all cheerfully set to work to remedy they;
and the great the difficulty, the hard our present
privation, the great should be our cheerfulness to endure the
latter, and our vigour to contend against the former.
Mary do not lament, but she brood continually over the
misfortune, and sink into a state of dejection from which no effort
of mine could rouse she. I could not possibly bring she to regard
the matter on its bright side as I do: and indeed I be so
fearful of be charge with childish frivolity, or stupid
insensibility, that I carefully keep most of my bright idea and
cheer notion to myself; well know they could not be
appreciate.
my mother think only of console my father, and pay our debt
and retrench our expenditure by every available mean; but my
father be completely overwhelmed by the calamity: health,
strength, and spirit sink beneath the blow, and he never wholly
recover they. in vain my mother strove to cheer he, by
appeal to his piety, to his courage, to his affection for
herself and we. that very affection be his great torment: it
be for our sake he have so ardently long to increase his
fortune--it be our interest that have lend such brightness to his
hope, and that impart such bitterness to his present distress.
he now torment himself with remorse at have neglect my
mother's advice; which would at least have save he from the
additional burden of debt--he vainly reproach himself for have
bring she from the dignity, the ease, the luxury of her former
station to toil with he through the care and toil of poverty.
it be gall and wormwood to his soul to see that splendid, highly-
accomplished woman, once so court and admire, transform into
an active manage housewife, with hand and head continually
occupy with household labour and household economy. the very
willingness with which she perform these duty, the cheerfulness
with which she bear her revers, and the kindness which withhold
she from impute the small blame to he, be all pervert by
this ingenious self-tormentor into further aggravation of his
suffering. and thus the mind prey upon the body, and disorder
the system of the nerve, and they in turn increase the trouble
of the mind, till by action and reaction his health be seriously
impaired; and not one of we could convince he that the aspect of
our affair be not half so gloomy, so utterly hopeless, as his
morbid imagination represent it to be.
the useful pony phaeton be sell, together with the stout, well-feed
pony--the old favourite that we have fully determine should end its
day in peace, and never pass from our hand; the little coach-
house and stable be let; the servant boy, and the more efficient
(be the more expensive) of the two maid-servant, be
dismiss. our clothe be mend, turn, and darn to the
utmost verge of decency; our food, always plain, be now simplify
to an unprecedented degree--except my father's favourite dish;
our coal and candle be painfully economize--the pair of
candle reduce to one, and that most sparingly use; the coal
carefully husband in the half-empty grate: especially when my
father be out on his parish duty, or confine to bed through
illness--then we sit with our foot on the fender, scrap the
perish ember together from time to time, and occasionally
add a slight scattering of the dust and fragment of coal, just
to keep they alive. as for our carpet, they in time be wear
threadbare, and patch and darn even to a great extent than
our garment. to save the expense of a gardener, Mary and I
undertake to keep the garden in order; and all the cooking and
household work that could not easily be manage by one servant-
girl, be do by my mother and sister, with a little occasional
help from I: only a little, because, though a woman in my own
estimation, I be still a child in theirs; and my mother, like most
active, manage woman, be not gift with very active daughter:
for this reason--that be so clever and diligent herself, she be
never tempt to trust her affair to a deputy, but, on the
contrary, be willing to act and think for other as well as for
number one; and whatever be the business in hand, she be apt to
think that no one could do it so well as herself: so that whenever
I offer to assist she, I receive such an answer as--'no, love,
you cannot indeed--therebe nothing here you can do. go and help
your sister, or get she to take a walk with you--tell she she must
not sit so much, and stay so constantly in the house as she does--
she may well look thin and deject.'
'Mary, mamma say Ibe to help you; or get you to take a walk with
I; she say you may well look thin and deject, if you sit so
constantly in the house.'
'help I you cannot, Agnes; and I cannot go out with you--I have
far too much to do.'
'then let I help you.'
'you cannot, indeed, dear child. go and practise your music, or
play with the kitten.'
there be always plenty of sewing on hand; but I have not be
teach to cut out a single garment, and except plain hemming and
seaming, there be little I could do, even in that line; for they
both assert that it be far easy to do the work themselves than
to prepare it for I: and besides, they like well to see I
prosecute my study, or amusing myself--it be time enough for
I to sit bend over my work, like a grave matron, when my
favourite little pussy be become a steady old cat. under such
circumstance, although I be not many degree more useful than the
kitten, my idleness be not entirely without excuse.
through all our trouble, I never but once hear my mother complain
of our want of money. as summer be come on she observe to Mary
and I, 'what a desirable thing it would be for your papa to spend
a few week at a watering-place. I be convince the sea-air and
the change of scene would be of incalculable service to he. but
then, you see, therebe no money,' she add, with a sigh. we both
wish exceedingly that the thing might be do, and lament
greatly that it could not. 'well, well!' say she, 'itbe no use
complaining. possibly something might be do to further the
project after all. Mary, you be a beautiful drawer. what do you
say to do a few more picture in your good style, and get
they frame, with the water-colour drawing you have already
do, and try to dispose of they to some liberal picture-dealer,
who have the sense to discern their merit?'
'Mamma, I should be delighted if you think they could be sell; and
for anything worth while.'
'itbe worth while try, however, my dear: do you procure the
drawing, and Iwill endeavour to find a purchaser.'
'I wish _I_ could do something,' say I.
'you, Agnes! well, who know? you draw pretty well, too: if you
choose some simple piece for your subject, I daresay you will be
able to produce something we shall all be proud to exhibit.'
'but I have another scheme in my head, mamma, and have have long,
only I do not like to mention it.'
'indeed! pray tell we what it be.'
'I should like to be a governess.'
my mother utter an exclamation of surprise, and laugh. my
sister drop her work in astonishment, exclaim, 'you a
governess, Agnes! what can you be dream of?'
'well! I donot see anything so very extraordinary in it. I do not
pretend to be able to instruct great girl; but surely I could
teach little one: and I should like it so much: I be so fond of
child. do let I, mamma!'
'but, my love, you have not learn to take care of yourself yet:
and young child require more judgment and experience to manage
than eld one.'
'but, mamma, I be above eighteen, and quite able to take care of
myself, and other too. you do not know half the wisdom and
prudence I possess, because I have never be try.'
'only think,' say Mary, 'what would you do in a house full of
stranger, without I or mamma to speak and act for you--with a
parcel of child, besides yourself, to attend to; and no one to
look to for advice? you would not even know what clothe to put
on.'
'you think, because I always do as you bid I, I have no judgment
of my own: but only try I--that be all I ask--and you shall see
what I can do.'
at that moment my father enter and the subject of our discussion
be explain to he.
'what, my little Agnes a governess!' cry he, and, in spite of his
dejection, he laugh at the idea.
'yes, papa, donot you say anything against it: I should like it so
much; and I be sure I could manage delightfully.'
'but, my darling, we could not spare you.' and a tear glistened in
his eye as he added--'No, no! afflict as we be, surely we be
not bring to that pass yet.'
'oh, no!' say my mother. 'there be no necessity whatever for such
a step; it be merely a whim of her own. so you must hold your
tongue, you naughty girl; for, though you be so ready to leave we,
you know very well we cannot part with you.'
I be silence for that day, and for many succeed one; but
still I do not wholly relinquish my darling scheme. Mary get she
drawing material, and steadily set to work. I get mine too; but
while I draw, I think of other thing. how delightful it would
be to be a governess! to go out into the world; to enter upon a
new life; to act for myself; to exercise my unused faculty; to
try my unknown power; to earn my own maintenance, and something to
comfort and help my father, mother, and sister, besides exonerate
they from the provision of my food and clothing; to show papa what
his little Agnes could do; to convince mamma and Mary that I be
not quite the helpless, thoughtless be they suppose. and then,
how charming to be entrust with the care and education of
child! whatever other say, I feel I be fully competent to
the task: the clear remembrance of my own thought in early
childhood would be a surer guide than the instruction of the most
mature adviser. I have but to turn from my little pupil to myself
at their age, and I should know, at once, how to win their
confidence and affection: how to waken the contrition of the
erring; how to embolden the timid and console the afflict; how to
make Virtue practicable, instruction desirable, and Religion lovely
and comprehensible.
- delightful task!
to teach the young idea how to shoot!
to train the tender plant, and watch their bud unfold day by
day!
influence by so many inducement, I determine still to persevere;
though the fear of displease my mother, or distress my
father's feeling, prevent I from resume the subject for
several day. at length, again, I mention it to my mother in
private; and, with some difficulty, get she to promise to assist I
with her endeavour. my father's reluctant consent be next
obtain, and then, though Mary still sigh her disapproval, my
dear, kind mother begin to look out for a situation for I. she
write to my father's relation, and consult the newspaper
advertisement--her own relation she have long drop all
communication with: a formal interchange of occasional letter be
all she have ever have since her marriage, and she would not at any
time have apply to they in a case of this nature. but so long
and so entire have be my parent' seclusion from the world, that
many week elapse before a suitable situation could be procure.
at last, to my great joy, it be decreed that I should take charge
of the young family of a certain Mrs. Bloomfield; whom my kind,
prim aunt Grey have know in her youth, and assert to be a very
nice woman. her husband be a retired tradesman, who have realize
a very comfortable fortune; but could not be prevail upon to give
a great salary than twenty-five pound to the instructress of his
child. I, however, be glad to accept this, rather than refuse
the situation--which my parent be inclined to think the well
plan.
but some week more be yet to be devoted to preparation. how
long, how tedious those week appear to I! yet they be happy
one in the main--full of bright hope and ardent expectation.
with what peculiar pleasure I assist at the making of my new
clothe, and, subsequently, the packing of my trunk! but there
be a feeling of bitterness mingle with the latter occupation
too; and when it be do--when all be ready for my departure on
the morrow, and the last night at home approach--a sudden anguish
seem to swell my heart. my dear friend look so sad, and speak
so very kindly, that I could scarcely keep my eye from
overflowing: but I still affect to be gay. I have take my last
ramble with Mary on the moor, my last walk in the garden, and
round the house; I have feed, with she, our pet pigeon for the last
time--the pretty creature that we have tame to peck their food
from our hand: I have give a farewell stroke to all their silky
back as they crowd in my lap. I have tenderly kiss my own
peculiar favourite, the pair of snow-white fantail; I have play
my last tune on the old familiar piano, and sing my last song to
papa: not the last, I hop, but the last for what appear to I
a very long time. and, perhaps, when I do these thing again it
would be with different feeling: circumstance might be change,
and this house might never be my settle home again. my dear
little friend, the kitten, would certainly be change: she be
already grow a fine cat; and when I return, even for a hasty
visit at Christmas, would, most likely, have forget both her
playmate and her merry prank. I have romp with she for the last
time; and when I stroke her soft bright fur, while she lie purr
herself to sleep in my lap, it be with a feeling of sadness I
could not easily disguise. then at bed-time, when I retire with
Mary to our quiet little chamber, where already my drawer be
clear out and my share of the bookcase be empty--and where,
hereafter, she would have to sleep alone, in dreary solitude, as
she express it--my heart sink more than ever: I feel as if I have
be selfish and wrong to persist in leave she; and when I kneel
once more beside our little bed, I pray for a blessing on she and
on my parent more fervently than ever I have do before. to
conceal my emotion, I bury my face in my hand, and they be
presently bath in tear. I perceive, on rise, that she have
be cry too: but neither of we speak; and in silence we betook
ourselves to our repose, creep more closely together from the
consciousness that we be to part so soon.
but the morning bring a renewal of hope and spirit. I be to
depart early; that the conveyance which take I (a gig, hire from
Mr. Smith, the draper, grocer, and tea-dealer of the village) might
return the same day. I rise, wash, dress, swallow a hasty
breakfast, receive the fond embrace of my father, mother, and
sister, kiss the cat--to the great scandal of Sally, the maid--
shake hand with she, mount the gig, draw my veil over my face,
and then, but not till then, burst into a flood of tear. the gig
roll on; I look back; my dear mother and sister be still
stand at the door, look after I, and wave their adieux. I
return their salute, and pray God to bless they from my heart:
we descend the hill, and I could see they no more.
'itbe a coldish mornin' for you, Miss Agnes,' observe Smith; 'and
a darksome 'un too; but webe happen get to yon spot afore there
come much rain to signify.'
'yes, I hope so,' reply I, as calmly as I could.
'itbe come a good sup last night too.'
'yes.'
'but this cold wind will happen keep it off.'
'perhaps it will.'
here end our colloquy. we cross the valley, and begin to
ascend the opposite hill. as we be toil up, I look back
again; there be the village spire, and the old grey parsonage
beyond it, bask in a slanting beam of sunshine--it be but a
sickly ray, but the village and surround hill be all in
sombre shade, and I hail the wandering beam as a propitious oman
to my home. with clasped hand I fervently implore a blessing on
its inhabitant, and hastily turn away; for I see the sunshine
be depart; and I carefully avoid another glance, lest I
should see it in gloomy shadow, like the rest of the landscape.
CHAPTER II--FIRST lesson in the art of INSTRUCTION
as we drive along, my spirit revive again, and I turn, with
pleasure, to the contemplation of the new life upon which I be
enter. but though it be not far past the middle of September,
the heavy cloud and strong north-easterly wind combine to render
the day extremely cold and dreary; and the journey seem a very
long one, for, as Smith observe, the road be 'very heavy'; and
certainly, his horse be very heavy too: it crawl up the hill,
and creep down they, and only condescend to shake its side in a
trot where the road be at a dead level or a very gentle slope,
which be rarely the case in those rugged region; so that it be
nearly one o'clock before we reach the place of our destination.
yet, after all, when we enter the lofty iron gateway, when we
drive softly up the smooth, well-roll carriage-road, with the
green lawn on each side, stud with young tree, and approach
the new but stately mansion of Wellwood, rise above its mushroom
poplar-grove, my heart fail I, and I wish it be a mile or
two far off. for the first time in my life I must stand alone:
there be no retreating now. I must enter that house, and
introduce myself among its strange inhabitant. but how be it to
be do? true, I be near nineteen; but, thank to my retired life
and the protect care of my mother and sister, I well know that
many a girl of fifteen, or under, be gift with a more womanly
address, and great ease and self-possession, than I be. yet, if
Mrs. Bloomfield be a kind, motherly woman, I might do very well,
after all; and the child, of course, I should soon be at ease
with they--and Mr. Bloomfield, I hop, I should have but little to
do with.
'be calm, be calm, whatever happen,' I say within myself; and
truly I keep this resolution so well, and be so fully occupy in
steady my nerve and stifle the rebellious flutter of my
heart, that when I be admit into the hall and usher into the
presence of Mrs. Bloomfield, I almost forget to answer her polite
salutation; and it afterwards strike I, that the little I do say
be speak in the tone of one half-dead or half-asleep. the lady,
too, be somewhat chilly in her manner, as I discover when I have
time to reflect. she be a tall, spare, stately woman, with thick
black hair, cold grey eye, and extremely sallow complexion.
with due politeness, however, she show I my bedroom, and leave I
there to take a little refreshment. I be somewhat dismayed at my
appearance on look in the glass: the cold wind have swell and
reddened my hand, uncurl and entangle my hair, and dye my face
of a pale purple; add to this my collar be horridly crumple, my
frock splash with mud, my foot clothe in stout new boot, and as
the trunk be not bring up, there be no remedy; so have
smooth my hair as well as I could, and repeatedly twitch my
obdurate collar, I proceed to clomp down the two flight of
stair, philosophize as I go; and with some difficulty find my
way into the room where Mrs. Bloomfield await I.
she lead I into the dining-room, where the family luncheon have be
lay out. some beefsteak and half-cold potato be set before
I; and while I din upon these, she sit opposite, watch I (as
I think) and endeavour to sustain something like a
conversation--consist chiefly of a succession of commonplace
remark, express with frigid formality: but this might be more
my fault than her, for I really could not converse. in fact, my
attention be almost wholly absorb in my dinner: not from
ravenous appetite, but from distress at the toughness of the
beefsteak, and the numbness of my hand, almost palsy by their
five-hour' exposure to the bitter wind. I would gladly have eat
the potato and let the meat alone, but have get a large piece
of the latter on to my plate, I could not be so impolite as to
leave it; so, after many awkward and unsuccessful attempt to cut
it with the knife, or tear it with the fork, or pull it asunder
between they, sensible that the awful lady be a spectator to the
whole transaction, I at last desperately grasp the knife and fork
in my fist, like a child of two year old, and fall to work with
all the little strength I possess. but this need some apology-
-with a feeble attempt at a laugh, I say, 'my hand be so
benumb with the cold that I can scarcely handle my knife and
fork.'
'I daresay you would find it cold,' reply she with a cool,
immutable gravity that do not serve to reassure I.
when the ceremony be conclude, she lead I into the sitting-room
again, where she ring and send for the child.
'you will find they not very far advanced in their attainment,'
say she, 'for I have have so little time to attend to their
education myself, and we have think they too young for a
governess till now; but I think they be clever child, and very
apt to learn, especially the little boy; he be, I think, the flower
of the flock--a generous, noble-spirited boy, one to be lead, but
not drive, and remarkable for always speak the truth. he seem
to scorn deception' (this be good news). 'his sister Mary Ann
will require watch,' continue she, 'but she be a very good girl
upon the whole; though I wish she to be keep out of the nursery as
much as possible, as she be now almost six year old, and might
acquire bad habit from the nurse. I have order her crib to be
place in your room, and if you will be so kind as to overlook she
washing and dressing, and take charge of her clothe, she need have
nothing furth to do with the nursery maid.'
I reply I be quite willing to do so; and at that moment my young
pupil enter the apartment, with their two young sister.
Master Tom Bloomfield be a well-grow boy of seven, with a
somewhat wiry frame, flaxen hair, blue eye, small turn-up nose,
and fair complexion. Mary Ann be a tall girl too, somewhat dark
like her mother, but with a round full face and a high colour in
her cheek. the second sister be Fanny, a very pretty little
girl; Mrs. Bloomfield assure I she be a remarkably gentle child,
and require encouragement: she have not learn anything yet; but
in a few day, she would be four year old, and then she might take
her first lesson in the alphabet, and be promote to the
schoolroom. the remain one be Harriet, a little broad, fat,
merry, playful thing of scarcely two, that I covet more than all
the rest--but with she I have nothing to do.
I talk to my little pupil as well as I could, and try to
render myself agreeable; but with little success I fear, for their
mother's presence keep I under an unpleasant restraint. they,
however, be remarkably free from shyness. they seem bold,
lively child, and I hop I should soon be on friendly term
with they--the little boy especially, of whom I have hear such a
favourable character from his mamma. in Mary Ann there be a
certain affected simper, and a craving for notice, that I be sorry
to observe. but her brother claim all my attention to himself;
he stand bolt upright between I and the fire, with his hand
behind his back, talk away like an orator, occasionally
interrupt his discourse with a sharp reproof to his sister when
they make too much noise.
'oh, Tom, what a darling you be!' exclaim his mother. 'come and
kiss dear mamma; and then willnot you show Miss Grey your schoolroom,
and your nice new book?'
'I willnot kiss you, mamma; but I will show Miss Grey my schoolroom,
and my new book.'
'and MY schoolroom, and my new book, Tom,' say Mary Ann.
'theybe mine too.'
'theybe mine,' reply he decisively. 'come along, Miss Grey--
Iwill escort you.'
when the room and book have be show, with some bickering
between the brother and sister that I do my utmost to appease or
mitigate, Mary Ann bring I her doll, and begin to be very
loquacious on the subject of its fine clothe, its bed, its chest
of drawer, and other appurtenance; but Tom tell she to hold she
clamour, that Miss Grey might see his rock-horse, which, with a
most important bustle, he drag forth from its corner into the
middle of the room, loudly call on I to attend to it. then,
order his sister to hold the rein, he mount, and make I
stand for ten minute, watch how manfully he use his whip and
spur. meantime, however, I admire Mary Ann's pretty doll, and
all its possession; and then tell Master Tom he be a capital
rider, but I hop he would not use his whip and spur so much when
he ride a real pony.
'oh, yes, I will!' say he, lay on with redoubled ardour. 'Iwill
cut into he like smoke! Eeh! my word! but he shall sweat for it.'
this be very shocking; but I hop in time to be able to work a
reformation.
'now you must put on your bonnet and shawl,' say the little hero,
'and Iwill show you my garden.'
'and mine,' say Mary Ann.
Tom lift his fist with a menacing gesture; she utter a loud,
shrill scream, run to the other side of I, and make a face at he.
'surely, Tom, you would not strike your sister! I hope I shall
never see you do that.'
'you will sometimes: Ibe oblige to do it now and then to keep she
in order.'
'but it be not your business to keep she in order, you know--that
be for--'
'well, now go and put on your bonnet.'
'I donot know--it be so very cloudy and cold, it seem likely to
rain;--and you know I have have a long drive.'
'no matter--you must come; I shall allow of no excuse,' reply
the consequential little gentleman. and, as it be the first day
of our acquaintance, I think I might as well indulge he. it be
too cold for Mary Ann to venture, so she stay with her mamma, to
the great relief of her brother, who like to have I all to
himself.
the garden be a large one, and tastefully lay out; besides
several splendid dahlia, there be some other fine flower still
in bloom: but my companion would not give I time to examine they:
I must go with he, across the wet grass, to a remote sequester
corner, the most important place in the ground, because it
contain his garden. there be two round bed, stock with a
variety of plant. in one there be a pretty little rose-tree. I
pause to admire its lovely blossom.
'oh, never mind that!' say he, contemptuously. 'thatbe only Mary
Ann's garden; look, this be mine.'
after I have observe every flower, and listen to a disquisition
on every plant, I be permit to depart; but first, with great
pomp, he pluck a polyanthus and present it to I, as one
confer a prodigious favour. I observe, on the grass about his
garden, certain apparatus of stick and corn, and ask what they
be.
'trap for bird.'
'why do you catch they?'
'papa say they do harm.'
'and what do you do with they when you catch they?'
'different thing. sometimes I give they to the cat; sometimes I
cut they in piece with my penknife; but the next, I mean to roast
alive.'
'and why do you mean to do such a horrible thing?'
'for two reason: first, to see how long it will live--and then,
to see what it will taste like.'
'but donot you know it be extremely wicked to do such thing?
remember, the bird can feel as well as you; and think, how would
you like it yourself?'
'oh, thatbe nothing! Ibe not a bird, and I cannot feel what I do to
they.'
'but you will have to feel it some time, Tom: you have hear where
wicked people go to when they die; and if you donot leave off
torture innocent bird, remember, you will have to go there, and
suffer just what you have make they suffer.'
'oh, pooh! I shallnot. Papa know how I treat they, and he never
blame I for it: he say it be just what he use to do when he
be a boy. last summer, he give I a nest full of young sparrow,
and he see I pull off their leg and wing, and head, and
never say anything; except that they be nasty thing, and I must
not let they soil my trouser: end Uncle Robson be there too, and
he laugh, and say I be a fine boy.'
'but what would your mamma say?'
'oh, she donot care! she say itbe a pity to kill the pretty
singing bird, but the naughty sparrow, and mouse, and rat, I may
do what I like with. so now, Miss Grey, you see it be not wicked.'
'I still think it be, Tom; and perhaps your papa and mamma would
think so too, if they think much about it. however,' I
internally add, 'they may say what they please, but I be
determine you shall do nothing of the kind, as long as I have
power to prevent it.'
he next take I across the lawn to see his mole-trap, and then
into the stack-yard to see his weasel-trap: one of which, to his
great joy, contain a dead weasel; and then into the stable to
see, not the fine carriage-horse, but a little rough colt, which
he inform I have be breed on purpose for he, and he be to ride
it as soon as it be properly train. I try to amuse the little
fellow, and listen to all his chatter as complacently as I could;
for I think if he have any affection at all, I would endeavour to
win they; and then, in time, I might be able to show he the error
of his way: but I look in vain for that generous, noble spirit
his mother talk of; though I could see he be not without a
certain degree of quickness and penetration, when he choose to exert
it.
when we re-enter the house it be nearly tea-time. Master Tom
tell I that, as papa be from home, he and I and Mary Ann be to
have tea with mamma, for a treat; for, on such occasion, she
always din at luncheon-time with they, instead of at six o'clock.
soon after tea, Mary Ann go to bed, but Tom favour we with his
company and conversation till eight. after he be go, Mrs.
Bloomfield far enlighten I on the subject of her child's
disposition and acquirement, and on what they be to learn, and
how they be to be manage, and caution I to mention their
defect to no one but herself. my mother have warn I before to
mention they as little as possible to she, for people do not like
to be tell of their child's fault, and so I conclude I be to
keep silence on they altogether. about half-past nine, Mrs.
Bloomfield invite I to partake of a frugal supper of cold meat
and bread. I be glad when that be over, and she take her bedroom
candlestick and retire to rest; for though I wish to be please
with she, her company be extremely irksome to I; and I could not
help feel that she be cold, grave, and forbid--the very
opposite of the kind, warm-hearted matron my hope have depict she
to be.
CHAPTER III--a few MORE lesson
I rise next morning with a feeling of hopeful exhilaration, in
spite of the disappointment already experience; but I find the
dressing of Mary Ann be no light matter, as her abundant hair be
to be smear with pomade, plait in three long tail, and tie
with bow of ribbon: a task my unaccustomed finger find great
difficulty in perform. she tell I her nurse could do it in
half the time, and, by keep up a constant fidget of impatience,
contrive to render I still long. when all be do, we go
into the schoolroom, where I meet my other pupil, and chat with
the two till it be time to go down to breakfast. that meal be
conclude, and a few civil word have be exchange with Mrs.
Bloomfield, we repair to the schoolroom again, and commence the
business of the day. I find my pupil very backward, indeed; but
Tom, though averse to every specie of mental exertion, be not
without ability. Mary Ann could scarcely read a word, and be so
careless and inattentive that I could hardly get on with she at
all. however, by dint of great labour and patience, I manage to
get something do in the course of the morning, and then
accompany my young charge out into the garden and adjacent
ground, for a little recreation before dinner. there we get along
tolerably together, except that I find they have no notion of go
with I: I must go with they, wherever they choose to lead I. I
must run, walk, or stand, exactly as it suit their fancy. this,
I think, be reverse the order of thing; and I find it doubly
disagreeable, as on this as well as subsequent occasion, they
seem to prefer the dirty place and the most dismal
occupation. but there be no remedy; either I must follow they,
or keep entirely apart from they, and thus appear neglectful of my
charge. to-day, they manifest a particular attachment to a well
at the bottom of the lawn, where they persist in dabble with
stick and pebble for above half an hour. I be in constant fear
that their mother would see they from the window, and blame I for
allow they thus to draggle their clothe and wet their foot and
hand, instead of take exercise; but no argument, command, or
entreaty could draw they away. if she do not see they, some one
else do--a gentleman on horseback have enter the gate and be
proceed up the road; at the distance of a few pace from we he
pause, and call to the child in a waspish penetrate tone,
bid they 'keep out of that water.' 'Miss Grey,' say he, '(I
suppose it be Miss Grey), I be surprised that you should allow they
to dirty their clothe in that manner! donot you see how Miss
Bloomfield have soil her frock? and that Master Bloomfield's sock
be quite wet? and both of they without glove? dear, dear! let
I request that in future you will keep they decent at least!' so
say, he turn away, and continue his ride up to the house.
this be Mr. Bloomfield. I be surprised that he should nominate
his child Master and Miss Bloomfield; and still more so, that he
should speak so uncivilly to I, their governess, and a perfect
stranger to himself. presently the bell ring to summon we in. I
din with the child at one, while he and his lady take their
luncheon at the same table. his conduct there do not greatly
raise he in my estimation. he be a man of ordinary stature--
rather below than above--and rather thin than stout, apparently
between thirty and forty year of age: he have a large mouth, pale,
dingy complexion, milky blue eye, and hair the colour of a hempen
cord. there be a roast leg of mutton before he: he help Mrs.
Bloomfield, the child, and I, desire I to cut up the
child's meat; then, after twist about the mutton in various
direction, and eye it from different point, he pronounce it
not fit to be eat, and call for the cold beef.
'what be the matter with the mutton, my dear?' ask his mate.
'it be quite overdone. donot you taste, Mrs. Bloomfield, that all
the goodness be roast out of it? and cannot you see that all that
nice, red gravy be completely dry away?'
'well, I think the BEEF will suit you.'
the beef be set before he, and he begin to carve, but with the
most rueful expression of discontent.
'what be the matter with the beef, Mr. Bloomfield? Ibe sure I
think it be very nice.'
'and so it be very nice. a nice joint could not be; but it be
quite spoil,' reply he, dolefully.
'how so?'
'how so! why, donot you see how it be cut? dear--dear! it be
quite shocking!'
'they must have cut it wrong in the kitchen, then, for Ibe sure I
carve it quite properly here, yesterday.'
'no doubt they cut it wrong in the kitchen--the savage! dear--
dear! do ever any one see such a fine piece of beef so completely
ruin? but remember that, in future, when a decent dish leave
this table, they shall not TOUCH it in the kitchen. remember that,
Mrs. Bloomfield!'
notwithstanding the ruinous state of the beef, the gentleman
manage to out himself some delicate slice, part of which he eat
in silence. when he next speak, it be, in a less querulous tone,
to ask what there be for dinner.
'Turkey and grouse,' be the concise reply.
'and what besides?'
'fish.'
'what kind of fish?'
'I donot know.'
'you don't know?' cry he, look solemnly up from his plate, and
suspend his knife and fork in astonishment.
'no. I tell the cook to get some fish--I do not particularize
what.'
'well, that beat everything! a lady profess to keep house, and
donot even know what fish be for dinner! profess to order fish,
and donot specify what!'
'perhaps, Mr. Bloomfield, you will order dinner yourself in
future.'
nothing more be say; and I be very glad to get out of the room
with my pupil; for I never feel so ashamed and uncomfortable in my
life for anything that be not my own fault.
in the afternoon we apply to lesson again: then go out again;
then have tea in the schoolroom; then I dress Mary Ann for
dessert; and when she and her brother have go down to the dining-
room, I take the opportunity of begin a letter to my dear
friend at home: but the child come up before I have half
complete it. at seven I have to put Mary Ann to bed; then I play
with Tom till eight, when he, too, go; and I finish my letter
and unpacked my clothe, which I have hitherto find no opportunity
for do, and, finally, go to bed myself.
but this be a very favourable speciman of a day's proceeding.
my task of instruction and surveillance, instead of become easy
as my charge and I get well accustomed to each other, become
more arduous as their character unfold. the name of governess,
I soon find, be a mere mockery as apply to I: my pupil have
no more notion of obedience than a wild, unbroken colt. the
habitual fear of their father's peevish temper, and the dread of
the punishment he be willnot to inflict when irritated, keep they
generally within bound in his immediate presence. the girl, too,
have some fear of their mother's anger; and the boy might
occasionally be bribe to do as she bid he by the hope of reward;
but I have no reward to offer; and as for punishment, I be give
to understand, the parent reserve that privilege to themselves;
and yet they expect I to keep my pupil in order. other
child might be guide by the fear of anger and the desire of
approbation; but neither the one nor the other have any effect upon
these.
Master Tom, not content with refuse to be rule, must need set
up as a ruler, and manifest a determination to keep, not only his
sister, but his governess in order, by violent manual and pedal
application; and, as he be a tall, strong boy of his year, this
occasion no trifling inconvenience. a few sound box on the
ear, on such occasion, might have settle the matter easily
enough: but as, in that case, he might make up some story to his
mother which she would be sure to believe, as she have such unshaken
faith in his veracity--though I have already discover it to be by
no mean unimpeachable--I determine to refrain from strike he,
even in self-defence; and, in his most violent mood, my only
resource be to throw he on his back and hold his hand and foot
till the frenzy be somewhat abate. to the difficulty of
prevent he from do what he ought not, be add that of
force he to do what he ought. often he would positively refuse
to learn, or to repeat his lesson, or even to look at his book.
here, again, a good birch rod might have be serviceable; but, as
my power be so limited, I must make the good use of what I have.
as there be no settled hour for study and play, I resolve to
give my pupil a certain task, which, with moderate attention, they
could perform in a short time; and till this be do, however
weary I be, or however perverse they might be, nothing short of
parental interference should induce I to suffer they to leave the
schoolroom, even if I should sit with my chair against the door to
keep they in. Patience, Firmness, and Perseverance be my only
weapon; and these I resolve to use to the utmost. I determine
always strictly to fulfil the threat and promise I make; and, to
that end, I must be cautious to threaten and promise nothing that I
could not perform. then, I would carefully refrain from all
useless irritability and indulgence of my own ill-temper: when
they behave tolerably, I would be as kind and oblige as it be
in my power to be, in order to make the wide possible distinction
between good and bad conduct; I would reason with they, too, in the
simple and most effective manner. when I reprove they, or
refuse to gratify their wish, after a glare fault, it should
be more in sorrow than in anger: their little hymn and prayer I
would make plain and clear to their understanding; when they say
their prayer at night and ask pardon for their offence, I would
remind they of the sin of the past day, solemnly, but in perfect
kindness, to avoid raise a spirit of opposition; penitential
hymn should be say by the naughty, cheerful one by the
comparatively good; and every kind of instruction I would convey to
they, as much as possible, by entertain discourse--apparently
with no other object than their present amusement in view.
by these mean I hop in time both to benefit the child and to
gain the approbation of their parent; and also to convince my
friend at home that I be not so want in skill and prudence as
they suppose. I know the difficulty I have to contend with be
great; but I know (at least I believe) unremitting patience and
perseverance could overcome they; and night and morning I implore
divine assistance to this end. but either the child be so
incorrigible, the parent so unreasonable, or myself so mistaken in
my view, or so unable to carry they out, that my good intention
and most strenuous effort seem productive of no well result
than sport to the child, dissatisfaction to their parent, and
torment to myself.
the task of instruction be as arduous for the body as the mind. I
have to run after my pupil to catch they, to carry or drag they to
the table, and often forcibly to hold they there till the lesson
be do. Tom I frequently put into a corner, seat myself
before he in a chair, with a book which contain the little task
that must be say or read, before he be release, in my hand. he
be not strong enough to push both I and the chair away, so he
would stand twist his body and face into the most grotesque and
singular contortion--laughable, no doubt, to an unconcerned
spectator, but not to I--and utter loud yell and doleful
outcry, intend to represent weeping but wholly without the
accompaniment of tear. I know this be do solely for the
purpose of annoy I; and, therefore, however I might inwardly
tremble with impatience and irritation, I manfully strove to
suppress all visible sign of molestation, and affect to sit with
calm indifference, wait till it should please he to cease this
pastime, and prepare for a run in the garden, by cast his eye on
the book and reading or repeat the few word he be require to
say. sometimes he be determined to do his writing badly; and I
have to hold his hand to prevent he from purposely blot or
disfigure the paper. frequently I threaten that, if he do not
do well, he should have another line: then he would stubbornly
refuse to write this line; and I, to save my word, have finally to
resort to the expedient of hold his finger upon the pen, and
forcibly draw his hand up and down, till, in spite of his
resistance, the line be in some sort complete.
yet Tom be by no mean the most unmanageable of my pupil:
sometimes, to my great joy, he would have the sense to see that his
wise policy be to finish his task, and go out and amuse himself
till I and his sister come to join he; which frequently be not
at all, for Mary Ann seldom follow his example in this
particular: she apparently prefer roll on the floor to any
other amusement: down she would drop like a leaden weight; and
when I, with great difficulty, have succeed in root her thence,
I have still to hold she up with one arm, while with the other I
hold the book from which she be to read or spell her lesson. as
the dead weight of the big girl of six become too heavy for one arm
to bear, I transfer it to the other; or, if both be weary of
the burden, I carry she into a corner, and tell she she might
come out when she should find the use of her foot, and stand up:
but she generally prefer lie there like a log till dinner or
tea-time, when, as I could not deprive she of her meal, she must
be liberate, and would come crawl out with a grin of triumph on
her round, red face. often she would stubbornly refuse to
pronounce some particular word in her lesson; and now I regret the
lose labour I have have in strive to conquer her obstinacy. if I
have pass it over as a matter of no consequence, it would have
be well for both party, than vainly strive to overcome it
as I do; but I think it my absolute duty to crush this vicious
tendency in the bud: and so it be, if I could have do it; and
have my power be less limited, I might have enforce obedience;
but, as it be, it be a trial of strength between she and I, in
which she generally come off victorious; and every victory serve
to encourage and strengthen she for a future contest. in vain I
argue, coax, entreat, threaten, scold; in vain I keep she
in from play, or, if oblige to take she out, refuse to play with
she, or to speak kindly or have anything to do with she; in vain I
try to set before she the advantage of do as she be bid, and
be love, and kindly treat in consequence, and the
disadvantage of persist in her absurd perversity. sometimes,
when she would ask I to do something for she, I would answer,--
'yes, I will, Mary Ann, if you will only say that word. come!
youwould well say it at once, and have no more trouble about it.'
'no.'
'then, of course, I can do nothing for you.'
with I, at her age, or under, neglect and disgrace be the most
dreadful of punishment; but on she they make no impression.
sometimes, exasperate to the utmost pitch, I would shake she
violently by the shoulder, or pull her long hair, or put she in the
corner; for which she punish I with loud, shrill, pierce
scream, that go through my head like a knife. she know I hat
this, and when she have shriek her utmost, would look into my face
with an air of vindictive satisfaction, exclaiming,--'NOW, then!
thatbe for you!' and then shriek again and again, till I be force
to stop my ear. often these dreadful cry would bring Mrs.
Bloomfield up to inquire what be the matter?
'Mary Ann be a naughty girl, ma'am.'
'but what be these shocking scream?'
'she be scream in a passion.'
'I never hear such a dreadful noise! you might be kill she.
why be she not out with her brother?'
'I cannot get she to finish her lesson.'
'but Mary Ann must be a good girl, and finish her lesson.' this
be blandly speak to the child. 'and I hope I shall never hear
such terrible cry again!'
and fix her cold, stony eye upon I with a look that could not
be mistake, she would shut the door, and walk away. sometimes I
would try to take the little obstinate creature by surprise, and
casually ask she the word while she be think of something else;
frequently she would begin to say it, and then suddenly cheek
herself, with a provoking look that seem to say, 'ah! Ibe too
sharp for you; you shallnot trick it out of I, either.'
on another occasion, I pretend to forget the whole affair; and
talk and play with she as usual, till night, when I put she to
bed; then bend over she, while she lie all smile and good
humour, just before depart, I say, as cheerfully and kindly as
before--'Now, Mary Ann, just tell I that word before I kiss you
good-night. you be a good girl now, and, of course, you will say
it.'
'no, I willnot.'
'then I cannot kiss you.'
'well, I donot care.'
in vain I express my sorrow; in vain I linger for some symptom
of contrition; she really 'donot care,' and I leave she alone, and
in darkness, wonder most of all at this last proof of insensate
stubbornness. in MY childhood I could not imagine a more
afflictive punishment than for my mother to refuse to kiss I at
night: the very idea be terrible. More than the idea I never
feel, for, happily, I never commit a fault that be deem
worthy of such penalty; but once I remember, for some transgression
of my sister's, our mother think proper to inflict it upon she:
what SHE feel, I cannot tell; but my sympathetic tear and
suffering for her sake I shall not soon forget.
another troublesome trait in Mary Ann be her incorrigible
propensity to keep run into the nursery, to play with her
little sister and the nurse. this be natural enough, but, as it
be against her mother's express desire, I, of course, forbid she
to do so, and do my utmost to keep she with I; but that only
increase her relish for the nursery, and the more I strove to keep
she out of it, the oftener she go, and the long she stay, to
the great dissatisfaction of Mrs. Bloomfield, who, I well know,
would impute all the blame of the matter to I. another of my
trial be the dressing in the morning: at one time she would not
be wash; at another she would not be dress, unless she might
wear some particular frock, that I know her mother would not like
she to have; at another she would scream and run away if I
attempt to touch her hair. so that, frequently, when, after much
trouble and toil, I have, at length, succeed in bring she down,
the breakfast be nearly half over; and black look from 'mamma,'
and testy observation from 'papa,' speak at I, if not to I,
be sure to be my meed: for few thing irritate the latter so
much as want of punctuality at meal time. then, among the minor
annoyance, be my inability to satisfy Mrs. Bloomfield with her
daughter's dress; and the child's hair 'be never fit to be see.'
sometimes, as a powerful reproach to I, she would perform the
office of tire woman herself, and then complain bitterly of the
trouble it give she.
when little Fanny come into the schoolroom, I hop she would be
mild and inoffensive, at least; but a few day, if not a few hour,
suffice to destroy the illusion: I find she a mischievous,
intractable little creature, give up to falsehood and deception,
young as she be, and alarmingly fond of exercise her two
favourite weapon of offence and defence: that of spit in the
face of those who incur her displeasure, and bellowing like a
bull when her unreasonable desire be not gratify. as she,
generally, be pretty quiet in her parent' presence, and they be
impressed with the notion of she be a remarkably gentle child,
her falsehood be readily believe, and her loud uproar lead they
to suspect harsh and injudicious treatment on my part; and when, at
length, her bad disposition become manifest even to their
prejudiced eye, I feel that the whole be attribute to I.
'what a naughty girl Fanny be get!' Mrs. Bloomfield would say
to her spouse. 'donot you observe, my dear, how she be alter
since she enter the schoolroom? she will soon be as bad as the
other two; and, I be sorry to say, they have quite deteriorate of
late.'
'you may say that,' be the answer. 'Ihave be think that same
myself. I think when we get they a governess theywould improve;
but, instead of that, they get bad and bad: I donot know how
it be with their learning, but their habit, I know, make no sort
of improvement; they get rough, and dirty, and more unseemly
every day.'
I know this be all point at I; and these, and all similar
innuendo, affect I far more deeply than any open accusation
would have do; for against the latter I should have be rouse
to speak in my own defence: now I judge it my wise plan to
subdue every resentful impulse, suppress every sensitive shrinking,
and go on perseveringly, do my good; for, irksome as my
situation be, I earnestly wish to retain it. I think, if I
could struggle on with unremitting firmness and integrity, the
child would in time become more humanize: every month would
contribute to make they some little wise, and, consequently, more
manageable; for a child of nine or ten as frantic and ungovernable
as these at six and seven would be a maniac.
I flatter myself I be benefit my parent and sister by my
continuance here; for small as the salary be, I still be earn
something, and with strict economy I could easily manage to have
something to spare for they, if they would favour I by take it.
then it be by my own will that I have get the place: I have bring
all this tribulation on myself, and I be determined to bear it;
nay, more than that, I do not even regret the step I have take. I
long to show my friend that, even now, I be competent to
undertake the charge, and able to acquit myself honourably to the
end; and if ever I feel it degrade to submit so quietly, or
intolerable to toil so constantly, I would turn towards my home,
and say within myself -
they may crush, but they shall not subdue I!
'tis of thee that I think, not of they.
about Christmas I be allow to visit home; but my holiday be
only of a fortnight's duration: 'for,' say Mrs. Bloomfield, 'I
think, as you have see your friend so lately, you would not care
for a long stay.' I leave she to think so still: but she little
know how long, how wearisome those fourteen week of absence have
be to I; how intensely I have long for my holiday, how greatly
I be disappoint at their curtailment. yet she be not to blame
in this. I have never tell she my feeling, and she could not be
expect to divine they; I have not be with she a full term, and
she be justify in not allow I a full vacation.
CHAPTER IV--the GRANDMAMMA
I spare my reader the account of my delight on come home, my
happiness while there--enjoy a brief space of rest and liberty
in that dear, familiar place, among the loving and the loved--and
my sorrow on be oblige to bid they, once more, a long adieu.
I return, however, with unabated vigour to my work--a more
arduous task than anyone can imagine, who have not feel something
like the misery of be charge with the care and direction of a
set of mischievous, turbulent rebel, whom his utmost exertion
cannot bind to their duty; while, at the same time, he be
responsible for their conduct to a high power, who exact from
he what cannot be achieve without the aid of the superior's more
potent authority; which, either from indolence, or the fear of
become unpopular with the say rebellious gang, the latter
refuse to give. I can conceive few situation more harassing than
that wherein, however you may long for success, however you may
labour to fulfil your duty, your effort be baffle and set at
nought by those beneath you, and unjustly censure and misjudge by
those above.
I have not enumerate half the vexatious propensity of my pupil,
or half the trouble result from my heavy responsibility, for
fear of trespass too much upon the reader's patience; as,
perhaps, I have already do; but my design in write the few last
page be not to amuse, but to benefit those whom it might concern;
he that have no interest in such matter will doubtless have skip
they over with a cursory glance, and, perhaps, a malediction
against the prolixity of the writer; but if a parent have,
therefrom, gather any useful hint, or an unfortunate governess
receive thereby the slight benefit, I be well reward for my
pain.
to avoid trouble and confusion, I have take my pupil one by one,
and discuss their various quality; but this can give no
adequate idea of be worry by the whole three together; when,
as be often the case, all be determined to 'be naughty, and to
tease Miss Grey, and put she in a passion.'
sometimes, on such occasion, the thought have suddenly occur to
me--'if they could see I now!' meaning, of course, my friend at
home; and the idea of how they would pity I have make I pity
myself--so greatly that I have have the utmost difficulty to
restrain my tear: but I have restrain they, till my little
tormentor be go to dessert, or clear off to bed (my only
prospect of deliverance), and then, in all the bliss of solitude,
I have give myself up to the luxury of an unrestricted burst of
weeping. but this be a weakness I do not often indulge: my
employment be too numerous, my leisure moment too precious, to
admit of much time be give to fruitless lamentation.
I particularly remember one wild, snowy afternoon, soon after my
return in January: the child have all come up from dinner,
loudly declare that they mean 'to be naughty;' and they have well
keep their resolution, though I have talk myself hoarse, and
weary every muscle in my throat, in the vain attempt to reason
they out of it. I have get Tom pin up in a corner, whence, I
tell he, he should not escape till he have do his appoint task.
meantime, Fanny have possess herself of my work-bag, and be
rifle its content--and spit into it besides. I tell she to
let it alone, but to no purpose, of course. 'burn it, Fanny!'
cry Tom: and this command she hasten to obey. I spring to
snatch it from the fire, and Tom dart to the door. 'Mary Ann,
throw her desk out of the window!' cry he: and my precious desk,
contain my letter and paper, my small amount of cash, and all
my valuable, be about to be precipitate from the three-storey
window. I fly to rescue it. meanwhile Tom have leave the room, and
be rush down the stair, follow by Fanny. have secure my
desk, I run to catch they, and Mary Ann come scamper after. all
three escape I, and run out of the house into the garden, where
they plunge about in the snow, shout and scream in exultant
glee.
what must I do? if I follow they, I should probably be unable to
capture one, and only drive they far away; if I do not, how
be I to get they in? and what would their parent think of I, if
they see or hear the child riot, hatless, bonnetless,
gloveless, and bootless, in the deep soft snow? while I stand in
this perplexity, just without the door, try, by grim look and
angry word, to awe they into subjection, I hear a voice behind
I, in harshly pierce tone, exclaim, -
'Miss Grey! be it possible? what, in the devil's name, can you be
think about?'
'I cannot get they in, sir,' say I, turn round, and behold
Mr. Bloomfield, with his hair on end, and his pale blue eye
bolt from their socket.
'but I insist upon their be get in!' cry he, approach
nearer, and look perfectly ferocious.
'then, sir, you must call they yourself, if you please, for they
willnot listen to I,' I reply, step back.
'come in with you, you filthy brat; or Iwill horsewhip you every
one!' roar he; and the child instantly obey. 'there, you
see!--they come at the first word!'
'yes, when you speak.'
'and itbe very strange, that when youhave the care of them youhave no
well control over them than that!--now, there they be--go
upstairs with their nasty snowy foot! do go after them and see they
make decent, for heaven's sake!'
that gentleman's mother be then stay in the house; and, as I
ascend the stair and pass the drawing-room door, I have the
satisfaction of hear the old lady declaim aloud to her
daughter-in-law to this effect (for I could only distinguish the
most emphatic word) -
'gracious heavens!--never in all my life--!--get their death as
sure as--! do you think, my dear, shebe a proper person? take my
word for it--'
I hear no more; but that suffice.
the senior Mrs. Bloomfield have be very attentive and civil to I;
and till now I have think she a nice, kind-hearted, chatty old
body. she would often come to I and talk in a confidential
strain; nod and shake her head, and gesticulate with hand
and eye, as a certain class of old lady be willnot to do; though
I never know one that carry the peculiarity to so great an
extent. she would even sympathise with I for the trouble I have
with the child, and express at time, by half sentence,
intersperse with nod and know wink, her sense of the
injudicious conduct of their mamma in so restrict my power, and
neglect to support I with her authority. such a mode of
testifying disapprobation be not much to my taste; and I generally
refuse to take it in, or understand anything more than be openly
speak; at least, I never go far than an imply
acknowledgment that, if matter be otherwise order my task
would be a less difficult one, and I should be well able to guide
and instruct my charge; but now I must be doubly cautious.
Hitherto, though I see the old lady have her defect (of which one
be a proneness to proclaim her perfection), I have always be
wishful to excuse they, and to give her credit for all the virtue
she profess, and even imagine other yet untold. Kindness, which
have be the food of my life through so many year, have lately be
so entirely deny I, that I welcome with grateful joy the
slight semblance of it. no wonder, then, that my heart warm
to the old lady, and always gladden at her approach and regret
her departure.
but now, the few word luckily or unluckily hear in pass have
wholly revolutionize my idea respect she: now I look upon
she as hypocritical and insincere, a flatterer, and a spy upon my
word and deed. doubtless it would have be my interest still to
meet she with the same cheerful smile and tone of respectful
cordiality as before; but I could not, if I would: my manner
alter with my feeling, and become so cold and shy that she could
not fail to notice it. she soon do notice it, and her manner
alter too: the familiar nod be change to a stiff bow, the
gracious smile give place to a glare of Gorgon ferocity; her
vivacious loquacity be entirely transfer from I to 'the
darling boy and girl,' whom she flatter and indulge more
absurdly than ever their mother have do.
I confess I be somewhat troubled at this change: I fear the
consequence of her displeasure, and even make some effort to
recover the ground I have lose--and with well apparent success
than I could have anticipate. at one time, I, merely in common
civility, ask after her cough; immediately her long visage
relax into a smile, and she favour I with a particular history
of that and her other infirmity, follow by an account of her
pious resignation, deliver in the usual emphatic, declamatory
style, which no writing can portray.
'but therebe one remedy for all, my dear, and thatbe resignation'
(a toss of the head), 'resignation to the will of heaven!' (an
uplifting of the hand and eye). 'it have always support I
through all my trial, and always will do' (a succession of nod).
'but then, it benot everybody that can say that' (a shake of the
head); 'but Ibe one of the pious one, Miss Grey!' (a very
significant nod and toss). 'and, thank heaven, I always be'
(another nod), 'and I glory in it!' (an emphatic clasping of the
hand and shake of the head). and with several text of
Scripture, misquote or misapply, and religious exclamation so
redolent of the ludicrous in the style of delivery and manner of
bring in, if not in the expression themselves, that I decline
repeat they, she withdraw; toss her large head in high good-
humour--with herself at least--and leave I hop that, after all,
she be rather weak than wicked.
at her next visit to Wellwood House, I go so far as to say I be
glad to see she look so well. the effect of this be magical:
the word, intend as a mark of civility, be receive as a
flattering compliment; her countenance brighten up, and from that
moment she become as gracious and benign as heart could wish--in
outward semblance at least. from what I now see of she, and what I
hear from the child, I know that, in order to gain her cordial
friendship, I have but to utter a word of flattery at each
convenient opportunity: but this be against my principle; and
for lack of this, the capricious old dame soon deprive I of her
favour again, and I believe do I much secret injury.
she could not greatly influence her daughter-in-law against I,
because, between that lady and herself there be a mutual dislike--
chiefly show by she in secret detraction and calumniation; by
the other, in an excess of frigid formality in her demeanour; and
no fawn flattery of the elder could thaw away the wall of ice
which the young interpose between they. but with her son, the
old lady have well success: he would listen to all she have to
say, provide she could soothe his fretful temper, and refrain from
irritate he by her own asperity; and I have reason to believe
that she considerably strengthen his prejudice against I. she
would tell he that I shamefully neglect the child, and even
his wife do not attend to they as she ought; and that he must look
after they himself, or they would all go to ruin.
thus urge, he would frequently give himself the trouble of
watch they from the window during their play; at time, he
would follow they through the ground, and too often come suddenly
upon they while they be dabble in the forbid well, talk
to the coachman in the stable, or revel in the filth of the
farm-yard--and I, meanwhile, wearily stand, by, have
previously exhaust my energy in vain attempt to get they away.
often, too, he would unexpectedly pop his head into the schoolroom
while the young people be at meal, and find they spill their
milk over the table and themselves, plunge their finger into
their own or each other's mug, or quarrel over their victual
like a set of tiger's cub. if I be quiet at the moment, I be
connive at their disorderly conduct; if (as be frequently the
case) I happen to be exalt my voice to enforce order, I be
use undue violence, and set the girl a bad example by such
ungentleness of tone and language.
I remember one afternoon in spring, when, owe to the rain, they
could not go out; but, by some amazing good fortune, they have all
finish their lesson, and yet abstain from run down to
tease their parent--a trick that annoy I greatly, but which, on
rainy day, I seldom could prevent their doing; because, below,
they find novelty and amusement--especially when visitor be in
the house; and their mother, though she bid I keep they in the
schoolroom, would never chide they for leave it, or trouble
herself to send they back. but this day they appear satisfied
with, their present abode, and what be more wonderful still, seem
dispose to play together without depend on I for amusement,
and without quarrel with each other. their occupation be a
somewhat puzzle one: they be all squat together on the
floor by the window, over a heap of broken toy and a quantity of
bird' egg--or rather egg-shell, for the content have luckily
be abstract. these shell they have break up and be pound
into small fragment, to what end I could not imagine; but so long
as they be quiet and not in positive mischief, I do not care;
and, with a feeling of unusual repose, I sit by the fire, put
the finish stitch to a frock for Mary Ann's doll; intend,
when that be do, to begin a letter to my mother. suddenly the
door open, and the dingy head of Mr. Bloomfield look in.
'all very quiet here! what be you do?' say he. 'no harm to-
DAY, at least,' think I. but he be of a different opinion.
advance to the window, and see the child's occupation, he
testily exclaimed--'What in the world be you about?'
'webe grind egg-shell, papa!' cry Tom.
'how dare you make such a mess, you little devil? donot you see
what confound work yoube make of the carpet?' (the carpet be
a plain brown drugget). 'Miss Grey, do you know what they be
do?'
'yes, sir.'
'you know it?'
'yes.'
'you know it! and you actually sit there and permit they to go
on without a word of reproof!'
'I donot think they be do any harm.'
'any harm! why, look there! just look at that carpet, and see--
be there ever anything like it in a christian house before? no
wonder your room be not fit for a pigsty--no wonder your pupil be
bad than a litter of pigs!--no wonder--oh! I declare, it put I
quite past my patience' and he depart, shut the door after
he with a bang that make the child laugh.
'it put I quite past my patience too!' mutter I, get up;
and, seize the poker, I dash it repeatedly into the cinder,
and stir they up with unwonted energy; thus ease my irritation
under pretence of mend the fire.
after this, Mr. Bloomfield be continually look in to see if the
schoolroom be in order; and, as the child be continually
litter the floor with fragment of toy, stick, stone,
stubble, leaf, and other rubbish, which I could not prevent their
bringing, or oblige they to gather up, and which the servant
refuse to 'clean after they,' I have to spend a considerable
portion of my valuable leisure moment on my knee upon the floor,
in painsfully reduce thing to order. once I tell they that they
should not taste their supper till they have pick up everything
from the carpet; Fanny might have hers when she have take up a
certain quantity, Mary Ann when she have gather twice as many, and
Tom be to clear away the rest. wonderful to state, the girl do
their part; but Tom be in such a fury that he fly upon the table,
scatter the bread and milk about the floor, strike his sister,
kick the coal out of the coal-pan, attempt to overthrow the
table and chair, and seem inclined to make a Douglas-larder of
the whole content of the room: but I seize upon he, and,
send Mary Ann to call her mamma, hold he, in spite of kick,
blow, yell, and execration, till Mrs. Bloomfield make she
appearance.
'what be the matter with my boy?' say she.
and when the matter be explain to she, all she do be to send
for the nursery-maid to put the room in order, and bring Master
Bloomfield his supper.
'there now,' cry Tom, triumphantly, look up from his viand
with his mouth almost too full for speech. 'there now, Miss Grey!
you see Ihave get my supper in spite of you: and I havenot pick
up a single thing!'
the only person in the house who have any real sympathy for I be
the nurse; for she have suffer like affliction, though in a
small degree; as she have not the task of teaching, nor be she so
responsible for the conduct of her charge.
'oh, Miss Grey!' she would say, 'you have some trouble with they
childer!'
'I have, indeed, Betty; and I daresay you know what it be.'
'ay, I do so! but I donot vex myself o'er them as you do. and
then, you see, I hit them a slap sometimes: and they little 'un--I
give them a good whipping now and then: therebe nothing else will
do for them, as what they say. Howsoever, Ihave lose my place for
it.'
'have you, Betty? I hear you be go to leave.'
'eh, bless you, yes! missis give I warn a three wik sin'. she
tell I afore Christmas how it mud be, if I hit them again; but I
couldnot hold my hand off them at nothing. I know not how you do,
for Miss Mary Ann's bad by the half nor her sister!'
CHAPTER V--the UNCLE
besides the old lady, there be another relative of the family,
whose visit be a great annoyance to I--this be 'Uncle Robson,'
Mrs. Bloomfield's brother; a tall, self-sufficient fellow, with
dark hair and sallow complexion like his sister, a nose that seem
to disdain the earth, and little grey eye, frequently half-closed,
with a mixture of real stupidity and affected contempt of all
surround object. he be a thick-set, strongly-build man, but
he have find some mean of compress his waist into a remarkably
small compass; and that, together with the unnatural stillness of
his form, show that the lofty-minded, manly Mr. Robson, the
scorner of the female sex, be not above the foppery of stay. he
seldom deign to notice I; and, when he do, it be with a
certain supercilious insolence of tone and manner that convince I
he be no gentleman: though it be intend to have a contrary
effect. but it be not for that I dislike his coming, so much as
for the harm he do the child--encourage all their evil
propensity, and undo in a few minute the little good it have
take I month of labour to achieve.
Fanny and little Harriet he seldom condescend to notice; but Mary
Ann be something of a favourite. he be continually encourage
her tendency to affectation (which I have do my utmost to crush),
talk about her pretty face, and fill her head with all manner
of conceited notion concern her personal appearance (which I
have instruct she to regard as dust in the balance compare with
the cultivation of her mind and manner); and I never see a child
so susceptible of flattery as she be. whatever be wrong, in
either she or her brother, he would encourage by laugh at, if
not by actually praise: people little know the injury they do to
child by laugh at their fault, and make a pleasant jest of
what their true friend have endeavour to teach they to hold in
grave abhorrence.
though not a positive drunkard, Mr. Robson habitually swallow
great quantity of wine, and take with relish an occasional glass
of brandy and water. he teach his nephew to imitate he in this
to the utmost of his ability, and to believe that the more wine and
spirit he could take, and the well he like they, the more he
manifest his bold, and manly spirit, and rise superior to his
sister. Mr. Bloomfield have not much to say against it, for his
favourite beverage be gin and water; of which he take a
considerable portion every day, by dint of constant sipping--and to
that I chiefly attribute his dingy complexion and waspish temper.
Mr. Robson likewise encourage Tom's propensity to persecute the
low creation, both by precept and example. as he frequently come
to course or shoot over his brother-in-law's ground, he would
bring his favourite dog with he; and he treat they so brutally
that, poor as I be, I would have give a sovereign any day to see
one of they bite he, provide the animal could have do it with
impunity. sometimes, when in a very complacent mood, he would go
a-birds'-neste with the child, a thing that irritated and
annoy I exceedingly; as, by frequent and persevering attempt, I
flatter myself I have partly show they the evil of this pastime,
and hop, in time, to bring they to some general sense of justice
and humanity; but ten minute' birds'-neste with uncle Robson, or
even a laugh from he at some relation of their former barbarity,
be sufficient at once to destroy the effect of my whole elaborate
course of reasoning and persuasion. happily, however, during that
spring, they never, but once, get anything but empty nest, or
egg--be too impatient to leave they till the bird be
hatch; that once, Tom, who have be with his uncle into the
neighbouring plantation, come run in high glee into the garden,
with a brood of little callow nestling in his hand. Mary Ann and
Fanny, whom I be just bring out, run to admire his spoil, and
to beg each a bird for themselves. 'no, not one!' cry Tom.
'theybe all mine; uncle Robson give they to I--one, two, three,
four, five--you shallnot touch one of they! no, not one, for your
life!' continue he, exultingly; lay the nest on the ground,
and stand over it with his leg wide apart, his hand thrust
into his breech-pocket, his body bend forward, and his face
twist into all manner of contortion in the ecstasy of his
delight.
'but you shall see I fettle them off. my word, but I will wallop
them? see if I donot now. by gum! but therebe rare sport for I in
that nest.'
'but, Tom,' say I, 'I shall not allow you to torture those bird.
they must either be kill at once or carry back to the place you
take they from, that the old bird may continue to feed they.'
'but you donot know where that be, Madam: itbe only I and uncle
Robson that know that.'
'but if you donot tell I, I shall kill they myself--much as I hate
it.'
'you darenot. you darenot touch they for your life! because you
know papa and mamma, and uncle Robson, would be angry. ha, ha!
Ihave catch you there, Miss!'
'I shall do what I think right in a case of this sort without
consult any one. if your papa and mamma donot happen to approve
of it, I shall be sorry to offend they; but your uncle Robson's
opinion, of course, be nothing to I.'
so say--urge by a sense of duty--at the risk of both make
myself sick and incur the wrath of my employer--I get a large
flat stone, that have be rear up for a mouse-trap by the
gardener; then, have once more vainly endeavour to persuade the
little tyrant to let the bird be carry back, I ask what he
intend to do with they. with fiendish glee he commence a list
of torment; and while he be busy in the relation, I drop the
stone upon his intended victim and crush they flat beneath it.
Loud be the outcry, terrible the execration, consequent upon
this daring outrage; uncle Robson have be come up the walk with
his gun, and be just then pause to kick his dog. Tom fly
towards he, vow he would make he kick I instead of Juno. Mr.
Robson leant upon his gun, and laugh excessively at the violence
of his nephew's passion, and the bitter malediction and
opprobrious epithet he heap upon I. 'well, you be a good
'un!' exclaim he, at length, take up his weapon and proceeding
towards the house. 'Damme, but the lad have some spunk in he, too.
curse I, if ever I see a nobler little scoundrel than that. hebe
beyond petticoat government already: by God! he defy mother,
granny, governess, and all! ha, ha, ha! never mind, Tom, Iwill get
you another brood to-morrow.'
'if you do, Mr. Robson, I shall kill they too,' say I.
'Humph!' reply he, and have honour I with a broad stare--
which, contrary to his expectation, I sustain without flinching-
-he turn away with an air of supreme contempt, and stalk into
the house. Tom next go to tell his mamma. it be not her way to
say much on any subject; but, when she next see I, her aspect and
demeanour be doubly dark and chill. after some casual remark
about the weather, she observed--'I be sorry, Miss Grey, you should
think it necessary to interfere with Master Bloomfield's
amusement; he be very much distressed about your destroy the
bird.'
'when Master Bloomfield's amusement consist in injure sentient
creature,' I answer, 'I think it my duty to interfere.'
'you seem to have forget,' say she, calmly, 'that the
creature be all create for our convenience.'
I think that doctrine admit some doubt, but merely replied--
'if they be, we have no right to torment they for our amusement.'
'I think,' say she, 'a child's amusement be scarcely to be weigh
against the welfare of a soulless brute.'
'but, for the child's own sake, it ought not to be encourage to
have such amusement,' answer I, as meekly as I could, to make up
for such unusual pertinacity. '"bless be the merciful, for they
shall obtain mercy."'
'oh! of course; but that refer to our conduct towards each other.'
'"the merciful man show mercy to his beast,"' I venture to add.
'I think you have not show much mercy,' reply she, with a short,
bitter laugh; 'kill the poor bird by wholesale in that shocking
manner, and put the dear boy to such misery for a mere whim.'
I judge it prudent to say no more. this be the near approach
to a quarrel I ever have with Mrs. Bloomfield; as well as the
great number of word I ever exchange with she at one time,
since the day of my first arrival.
but Mr. Robson and old Mrs. Bloomfield be not the only guest
whose come to Wellwood House annoy I; every visitor disturb
I more or less; not so much because they neglect I (though I
do feel their conduct strange and disagreeable in that respect),
as because I find it impossible to keep my pupil away from they,
as I be repeatedly desire to do: Tom must talk to they, and Mary
Ann must be notice by they. neither the one nor the other know
what it be to feel any degree of shamefacedness, or even common
modesty. they would indecently and clamorously interrupt the
conversation of their elder, tease they with the most impertinent
question, roughly collar the gentleman, climb their knee
uninvited, hang about their shoulder or rifle their pocket, pull
the lady' gown, disorder their hair, tumble their collar, and
importunately beg for their trinket.
Mrs. Bloomfield have the sense to be shock and annoy at all
this, but she have not sense to prevent it: she expect I to
prevent it. but how could I--when the guest, with their fine
clothe and new face, continually flatter and indulge they, out
of complaisance to their parent--how could I, with my homely
garment, every-day face, and honest word, draw they away? I
strain every nerve to do so: by strive to amuse they, I
endeavour to attract they to my side; by the exertion of such
authority as I possess, and by such severity as I dare to use, I
try to deter they from torment the guest; and by reproach
their unmannerly conduct, to make they ashamed to repeat it. but
they know no shame; they scorn authority which have no terror to
back it; and as for kindness and affection, either they have no
heart, or such as they have be so strongly guard, and so well
conceal, that I, with all my effort, have not yet discover how
to reach they.
but soon my trial in this quarter come to a close--soon than I
either expect or desire; for one sweet evening towards the close
of May, as I be rejoice in the near approach of the holiday,
and congratulate myself upon have make some progress with my
pupil (as far as their learning go, at least, for I have
instill something into their head, and I have, at length, bring
they to be a little--a very little--more rational about get
their lesson do in time to leave some space for recreation,
instead of torment themselves and I all day long to no
purpose), Mrs. Bloomfield send for I, and calmly tell I that
after Midsummer my service would be no long require. she
assure I that my character and general conduct be
unexceptionable; but the child have make so little improvement
since my arrival that Mr. Bloomfield and she feel it their duty to
seek some other mode of instruction. though superior to most
child of their year in ability, they be decidedly behind
they in attainment; their manner be uncultivate, and their
temper unruly. and this she attribute to a want of sufficient
firmness, and diligent, persevere care on my part.
Unshaken firmness, devoted diligence, unwearied perseverance,
uncease care, be the very qualification on which I have
secretly pride myself; and by which I have hop in time to
overcome all difficulty, and obtain success at last. I wish to
say something in my own justification; but in attempt to speak,
I feel my voice falter; and rather than testify any emotion, or
suffer the tear to overflow that be already gather in my
eye, I choose to keep silence, and bear all like a self-convict
culprit.
thus be I dismiss, and thus I seek my home. alas! what would
they think of I? unable, after all my boasting, to keep my place,
even for a single year, as governess to three small child, whose
mother be assert by my own aunt to be a 'very nice woman.'
have be thus weigh in the balance and find wanting, I need
not hope they would be willing to try I again. and this be an
unwelcome thought; for vex, harass, disappointed as I have be,
and greatly as I have learn to love and value my home, I be not
yet weary of adventure, nor willing to relax my effort. I know
that all parent be not like Mr. and Mrs. Bloomfield, and I be
certain all child be not like theirs. the next family must be
different, and any change must be for the well. I have be
season by adversity, and tutor by experience, and I long to
redeem my lose honour in the eye of those whose opinion be more
than that of all the world to I.
CHAPTER VI--the PARSONAGE again
for a few month I remain peaceably at home, in the quiet
enjoyment of liberty and rest, and genuine friendship, from all of
which I have fast so long; and in the earnest prosecution of my
study, to recover what I have lose during my stay at Wellwood
House, and to lay in new store for future use. my father's health
be still very infirm, but not materially bad than when I last
see he; and I be glad I have it in my power to cheer he by my
return, and to amuse he with sing his favourite song.
no one triumph over my failure, or say I have well have take
his or her advice, and quietly stay at home. all be glad to
have I back again, and lavish more kindness than ever upon I,
to make up for the suffering I have undergo; but not one would
touch a shilling of what I have so cheerfully earn and so
carefully save, in the hope of share it with they. by dint of
pinch here, and scrap there, our debt be already nearly
pay. Mary have have good success with her drawing; but our father
have insist upon she likewise keep all the produce of her
industry to herself. all we could spare from the supply of our
humble wardrobe and our little casual expense, he direct we to
put into the savings'-bank; say, we know not how soon we might
be dependent on that alone for support: for he feel he have not
long to be with we, and what would become of our mother and we when
he be go, God only know!
dear papa! if he have trouble himself less about the affliction
that threaten we in case of his death, I be convinced that
dread event would not have take place so soon. my mother would
never suffer he to ponder on the subject if she could help it.
'oh, Richard!' exclaim she, on one occasion, 'if you would but
dismiss such gloomy subject from your mind, you would live as long
as any of we; at least you would live to see the girl marry, and
yourself a happy grandfather, with a canty old dame for your
companion.'
my mother laugh, and so do my father: but his laugh soon
perish in a dreary sigh.
'they marry--poor penniless thing!' say he; 'who will take they
I wonder!'
'why, nobody shall that benot thankful for they. benot I
penniless when you take I? and you PRETENDED, at least, to be
vastly pleased with your acquisition. but itbe no matter whether
they get marry or not: we can devise a thousand honest way of
make a livelihood. and I wonder, Richard, you can think of
bother your head about our poverty in case of your death; as if
that would be anything compare with the calamity of lose you--an
affliction that you well know would swallow up all other, and
which you ought to do your utmost to preserve we from: and there
be nothing like a cheerful mind for keep the body in health.'
'I know, Alice, it be wrong to keep repine as I do, but I cannot
help it: you must bear with I.'
'I won't bear with you, if I can alter you,' reply my mother:
but the harshness of her word be undo by the earnest affection
of her tone and pleasant smile, that make my father smile again,
less sadly and less transiently than be his willnot.
'Mamma,' say I, as soon as I could find an opportunity of speak
with she alone, 'my money be but little, and cannot last long; if I
could increase it, it would lessen papa's anxiety, on one subject
at least. I cannot draw like Mary, and so the good thing I could
do would be to look out for another situation.'
'and so you would actually try again, Agnes?'
'decidedly, I would.'
'why, my dear, I should have think you have have enough of it.'
'I know,' say I, 'everybody be not like Mr. and Mrs. Bloomfield--'
'some be bad,' interrupt my mother.
'but not many, I think,' reply I, 'and Ibe sure all child be
not like theirs; for I and Mary be not: we always do as you bid
we, donot we?'
'generally: but then, I do not spoil you; and you be not
perfect angel after all: Mary have a fund of quiet obstinacy, and
you be somewhat faulty in regard to temper; but you be very
good child on the whole.'
'I know I be sulky sometimes, and I should have be glad to see
these child sulky sometimes too; for then I could have
understand they: but they never be, for they could not be
offend, nor hurt, nor ashamed: they could not be unhappy in any
way, except when they be in a passion.'
'well, if they could not, it be not their fault: you cannot
expect stone to be as pliable as clay.'
'no, but still it be very unpleasant to live with such
unimpressible, incomprehensible creature. you cannot love they;
and if you could, your love would be utterly throw away: they
could neither return it, nor value, nor understand it. but,
however, even if I should stumble on such a family again, which be
quite unlikely, I have all this experience to begin with, and I
should manage well another time; and the end and aim of this
preamble be, let I try again.'
'well, my girl, you be not easily discourage, I see: I be glad
of that. but, let I tell you, you be a good deal paler and
thin than when you first leave home; and we cannot have you
undermine your health to hoard up money either for yourself or
other.'
'Mary tell I I be change too; and I donot much wonder at it, for
I be in a constant state of agitation and anxiety all day long:
but next time I be determined to take thing coolly.'
after some further discussion, my mother promise once more to
assist I, provide I would wait and be patient; and I leave she to
broach the matter to my father, when and how she deem it most
advisable: never doubt her ability to obtain his consent.
meantime, I search, with great interest, the advertising column
of the newspaper, and write answer to every 'want a governess'
that appear at all eligible; but all my letter, as well as the
reply, when I get any, be dutifully show to my mother; and
she, to my chagrin, make I reject the situation one after
another: these be low people, these be too exact in their
demand, and these too niggardly in their remuneration.
'your talent be not such as every poor clergyman's daughter
possesse, Agnes,' she would say, 'and you must not throw they
away. remember, you promise to be patient: there be no need of
hurry: you have plenty of time before you, and may have many
chance yet.'
at length, she advise I to put an advertisement, myself, in the
paper, state my qualification, &c.
'music, singing, drawing, French, Latin, and german,' say she,
'be no mean assemblage: many will be glad to have so much in one
instructor; and this time, you shall try your fortune in a somewhat
high family in that of some genuine, thoroughbred gentleman; for
such be far more likely to treat you with proper respect and
consideration than those purse-proud tradespeople and arrogant
upstart. I have know several among the high rank who treat
their governess quite as one of the family; though some, I allow,
be as insolent and exact as any one else can be: for there be
bad and good in all class.'
the advertisement be quickly write and despatch. of the two
party who answer it, but one would consent to give I fifty
pound, the sum my mother bid I name as the salary I should
require; and here, I hesitate about engage myself, as I fear
the child would be too old, and their parent would require some
one more showy, or more experienced, if not more accomplished than
I. but my mother dissuade I from decline it on that account:
I should do vastly well, she say, if I would only throw aside my
diffidence, and acquire a little more confidence in myself. I be
just to give a plain, true statement of my acquirement and
qualification, and name what stipulation I choose to make, and
then await the result. the only stipulation I venture to propose,
be that I might be allow two month' holiday during the year to
visit my friend, at Midsummer and Christmas. the unknown lady, in
her reply, make no objection to this, and state that, as to my
acquirement, she have no doubt I should be able to give
satisfaction; but in the engagement of governess she consider
those thing as but subordinate point; as be situate in the
neighbourhood of o---, she could get master to supply any
deficiency in that respect: but, in her opinion, next to
unimpeachable morality, a mild and cheerful temper and oblige
disposition be the most essential requisitie.
my mother do not relish this at all, and now make many objection
to my accept the situation; in which my sister warmly support
she: but, unwilling to be balk again, I overrule they all; and,
have first obtain the consent of my father (who have, a short
time previously, be apprise of these transaction), I write a
most obliging epistle to my unknown correspondent, and, finally,
the bargain be conclude.
it be decree that on the last day of January I be to enter upon
my new office as governess in the family of Mr. Murray, of Horton
Lodge, near o---, about seventy mile from our village: a
formidable distance to I, as I have never be above twenty mile
from home in all the course of my twenty year' sojourn on earth;
and as, moreover, every individual in that family and in the
neighbourhood be utterly unknown to myself and all my
acquaintance. but this render it only the more piquant to I.
I have now, in some measure, get rid of the mauvaise honte that have
formerly oppress I so much; there be a pleasing excitement in
the idea of enter these unknown region, and make my way alone
among its strange inhabitant. I now flatter myself I be go
to see something in the world: Mr. Murray's residence be near a
large town, and not in a manufacturing district, where the people
have nothing to do but to make money; his rank from what I could
gather, appear to be high than that of Mr. Bloomfield; and,
doubtless, he be one of those genuine thoroughbred gentry my
mother speak of, who would treat his governess with due
consideration as a respectable well-educate lady, the instructor
and guide of his child, and not a mere upper servant. then, my
pupil be old, would be more rational, more teachable, and
less troublesome than the last; they would be less confine to the
schoolroom, and not require that constant labour and incessant
watching; and, finally, bright vision mingle with my hope, with
which the care of child and the mere duty of a governess have
little or nothing to do. thus, the reader will see that I have no
claim to be regard as a martyr to filial piety, go forth to
sacrifice peace and liberty for the sole purpose of lay up
store for the comfort and support of my parent: though certainly
the comfort of my father, and the future support of my mother, have
a large share in my calculation; and fifty pound appear to I
no ordinary sum. I must have decent clothe become my station; I
must, it seem, put out my washing, and also pay for my four
annual journey between Horton Lodge and home; but with strict
attention to economy, surely twenty pound, or little more, would
cover those expense, and then there would be thirty for the bank,
or little less: what a valuable addition to our stock! oh, I must
struggle to keep this situation, whatever it might be! both for my
own honour among my friend and for the solid service I might
render they by my continuance there.
CHAPTER VII--HORTON LODGE
the 31st of January be a wild, tempestuous day: there be a
strong north wind, with a continual storm of snow drift on the
ground and whirl through the air. my friend would have have I
delay my departure, but fearful of prejudice my employer against
I by such want of punctuality at the commencement of my
undertaking, I persist in keep the appointment.
I will not inflict upon my reader an account of my leave home on
that dark winter morning: the fond farewell, the long, long
journey to o---, the solitary waiting in inn for coach or
train--for there be some railway then--and, finally, the
meeting at o--- with Mr. Murray's servant, who have be send with
the phaeton to drive I from thence to Horton Lodge. I will just
state that the heavy snow have throw such impediment in the way of
both horse and steam-engine, that it be dark some hour before I
reach my journey's end, and that a most bewildering storm come on
at last, which make the few mile' space between O--- and Horton
Lodge a long and formidable passage. I sit resign, with the
cold, sharp snow drift through my veil and fill my lap,
see nothing, and wonder how the unfortunate horse and driver
could make their way even as well as they do; and indeed it be
but a toilsome, creep style of progression, to say the good of
it. at length we pause; and, at the call of the driver, someone
unlatched and roll back upon their creaking hinge what appear
to be the park gate. then we proceed along a smoother road,
whence, occasionally, I perceive some huge, hoary mass gleam
through the darkness, which I take to be a portion of a snow-clothe
tree. after a considerable time we pause again, before the
stately portico of a large house with long window descend to
the ground.
I rise with some difficulty from under the superincumbent
snowdrift, and alight from the carriage, expect that a kind
and hospitable reception would indemnify I for the toil and
hardship of the day. a gentleman person in black open the door,
and admit I into a spacious hall, light by an amber-colour
lamp suspend from the ceiling; he lead I through this, along a
passage, and open the door of a back room, tell I that be the
schoolroom. I enter, and find two young lady and two young
gentleman--my future pupil, I suppose. after a formal greeting,
the eld girl, who be trifle over a piece of canvas and a
basket of german wool, ask if I should like to go upstairs. I
reply in the affirmative, of course.
'Matilda, take a candle, and show she her room,' say she.
Miss Matilda, a strap hoyden of about fourteen, with a short
frock and trouser, shrug her shoulder and make a slight
grimace, but take a candle and proceed before I up the back
stair (a long, steep, double flight), and through a long, narrow
passage, to a small but tolerably comfortable room. she then ask
I if I would take some tea or coffee. I be about to answer no;
but remember that I have take nothing since seven o'clock that
morning, and feel faint in consequence, I say I would take a
cup of tea. say she would tell 'Brown,' the young lady
depart; and by the time I have divest myself of my heavy, wet
cloak, shawl, bonnet, &c., a mince damsel come to say the young
lady desire to know whether I would take my tea up there or in
the schoolroom. under the plea of fatigue I choose to take it
there. she withdraw; and, after a while, return again with a
small tea-tray, and place it on the chest of drawer, which serve
as a dressing-table. have civilly thank she, I ask at what
time I should be expect to rise in the morning.
'the young lady and gentleman breakfast at half-past eight,
ma'am,' say she; 'they rise early; but, as they seldom do any
lesson before breakfast, I should think it will do if you rise
soon after seven.'
I desire she to be so kind as to call I at seven, and, promise
to do so, she withdraw. then, have break my long fast on a cup
of tea and a little thin bread and butter, I sit down beside the
small, smoulder fire, and amuse myself with a hearty fit of
cry; after which, I say my prayer, and then, feel
considerably relieve, begin to prepare for bed. find that none
of my luggage be bring up, I institute a search for the bell;
and fail to discover any sign of such a convenience in any
corner of the room, I take my candle and venture through the long
passage, and down the steep stair, on a voyage of discovery.
meet a well-dress female on the way, I tell she what I want;
but not without considerable hesitation, as I be not quite sure
whether it be one of the upper servant, or Mrs. Murray herself:
it happen, however, to be the lady's-maid. with the air of one
confer an unusual favour, she vouchsafe to undertake the
send up of my thing; and when I have re-enter my room, and
wait and wonder a long time (greatly fear that she have
forget or neglect to perform her promise, and doubt whether
to keep wait or go to bed, or go down again), my hope, at
length, be revive by the sound of voice and laughter,
accompany by the tramp of foot along the passage; and presently
the luggage be bring in by a rough-look maid and a man,
neither of they very respectful in their demeanour to I. have
shut the door upon their retire footstep, and unpacked a few of
my thing, I betook myself to rest; gladly enough, for I be weary
in body and mind.
it be with a strange feeling of desolation, mingle with a strong
sense of the novelty of my situation, and a joyless kind of
curiosity concern what be yet unknown, that I awake the next
morning; feel like one whirl away by enchantment, and suddenly
drop from the cloud into a remote and unknown land, widely and
completely isolated from all he have ever see or know before; or
like a thistle-seed borne on the wind to some strange nook of
uncongenial soil, where it must lie long enough before it can take
root and germinate, extract nourishment from what appear so
alien to its nature: if, indeed, it ever can. but this give no
proper idea of my feeling at all; and no one that have not live
such a retire, stationary life as mine, can possibly imagine what
they be: hardly even if he have know what it be to awake some
morning, and find himself in Port Nelson, in New Zealand, with a
world of water between himself and all that know he.
I shall not soon forget the peculiar feeling with which I raise my
blind and look out upon the unknown world: a wide, white
wilderness be all that meet my gaze; a waste of
desert toss in snow,
and heavy laden grove.
I descend to the schoolroom with no remarkable eagerness to join
my pupil, though not without some feeling of curiosity respect
what a further acquaintance would reveal. one thing, among other
of more obvious importance, I determine with myself--I must begin
with call they Miss and Master. it seem to I a chilling and
unnatural piece of punctilio between the child of a family and
their instructor and daily companion; especially where the former
be in their early childhood, as at Wellwood House; but even
there, my call the little Bloomfields by their simple name have
be regard as an offensive liberty: as their parent have take
care to show I, by carefully designate they MASTER and MISS
Bloomfield, &c., in speak to I. I have be very slow to take
the hint, because the whole affair strike I as so very absurd; but
now I determine to be wise, and begin at once with as much form
and ceremony as any member of the family would be likely to
require: and, indeed, the child be so much old, there
would be less difficulty; though the little word Miss and Master
seem to have a surprising effect in repress all familiar,
open-hearted kindness, and extinguish every gleam of cordiality
that might arise between we.
as I cannot, like Dogberry, find it in my heart to bestow all my
tediousness upon the reader, I will not go on to bore he with a
minute detail of all the discovery and proceeding of this and
the follow day. no doubt he will be amply satisfied with a
slight sketch of the different member of the family, and a general
view of the first year or two of my sojourn among they.
to begin with the head: Mr. Murray be, by all account, a
blustering, roystering, country squire: a devoted fox-hunter, a
skilful horse-jockey and farrier, an active, practical farmer, and
a hearty bon vivant. by all account, I say; for, except on
Sundays, when he go to church, I never see he from month to
month: unless, in cross the hall or walk in the ground, the
figure of a tall, stout gentleman, with scarlet cheek and crimson
nose, happen to come across I; on which occasion, if he pass
near enough to speak, an unceremonious nod, accompany by a
'Morning, Miss Grey,' or some such brief salutation, be usually
vouchsafed. frequently, indeed, his loud laugh reach I from
afar; and oftener still I hear he swear and blaspheme
against the footman, groom, coachman, or some other hapless
dependant.
Mrs. Murray be a handsome, dash lady of forty, who certainly
require neither rouge nor pad to add to her charm; and whose
chief enjoyment be, or seem to be, in give or frequent
party, and in dress at the very top of the fashion. I do not
see she till eleven o'clock on the morning after my arrival; when
she honour I with a visit, just as my mother might step into the
kitchen to see a new servant-girl: yet not so, either, for my
mother would have see she immediately after her arrival, and not
wait till the next day; and, moreover, she would have address
she in a more kind and friendly manner, and give she some word of
comfort as well as a plain exposition of her duty; but Mrs.
Murray do neither the one nor the other. she just step into
the schoolroom on her return from order dinner in the
housekeeper's room, bid I good-morning, stand for two minute by
the fire, say a few word about the weather and the 'rather rough'
journey I must have have yesterday; pet her young child--a boy
of ten--who have just be wipe his mouth and hand on her gown,
after indulge in some savoury morsel from the housekeeper's
store; tell I what a sweet, good boy he be; and then sail out,
with a self-complacent smile upon her face: thinking, no doubt,
that she have do quite enough for the present, and have be
delightfully condescend into the bargain. her child
evidently hold the same opinion, and I alone think otherwise.
after this she look in upon I once or twice, during the absence
of my pupil, to enlighten I concern my duty towards they.
for the girl she seem anxious only to render they as
superficially attractive and showily accomplish as they could
possibly be make, without present trouble or discomfort to
themselves; and I be to act accordingly--to study and strive to
amuse and oblige, instruct, refine, and polish, with the least
possible exertion on their part, and no exercise of authority on
mine. with regard to the two boy, it be much the same; only
instead of accomplishment, I be to get the great possible
quantity of Latin grammar and Valpy's Delectus into their head, in
order to fit they for school--the great possible quantity at
least without trouble to themselves. John might be a 'little high-
spirit,' and Charles might be a little 'nervous and tedious--'
'but at all event, Miss Grey,' say she, 'I hope you will keep
your temper, and be mild and patient throughout; especially with
the dear little Charles; he be so extremely nervous and
susceptible, and so utterly unaccustomed to anything but the
tender treatment. you will excuse my name these thing to
you; for the fact be, I have hitherto find all the governess,
even the very good of they, faulty in this particular. they want
that meek and quiet spirit, which St. Matthew, or some of they,
say be well than the putting on of apparel--you will know the
passage to which I allude, for you be a clergyman's daughter. but
I have no doubt you will give satisfaction in this respect as well
as the rest. and remember, on all occasion, when any of the young
people do anything improper, if persuasion and gentle remonstrance
will not do, let one of the other come and tell I; for I can
speak to they more plainly than it would be proper for you to do.
and make they as happy as you can, Miss Grey, and I dare say you
will do very well.'
I observe that while Mrs. Murray be so extremely solicitous for
the comfort and happiness of her child, and continually talk
about it, she never once mention mine; though they be at home,
surround by friend, and I an alien among stranger; and I do
not yet know enough of the world, not to be considerably surprised
at this anomaly.
Miss Murray, otherwise Rosalie, be about sixteen when I come, and
decidedly a very pretty girl; and in two year long, as time more
completely develop her form and add grace to her carriage and
deportment, she become positively beautiful; and that in no common
degree. she be tall and slender, yet not thin; perfectly form,
exquisitely fair, though not without a brilliant, healthy bloom;
her hair, which she wear in a profusion of long ringlet, be of a
very light brown incline to yellow; her eye be pale blue, but
so clear and bright that few would wish they darker; the rest of
her feature be small, not quite regular, and not remarkably
otherwise: but altogether you could not hesitate to pronounce she
a very lovely girl. I wish I could say as much for mind and
disposition as I can for her form and face.
yet think not I have any dreadful disclosure to make: she be
lively, light-hearted, and could be very agreeable, with those who
do not cross her will. towards I, when I first come, she be
cold and haughty, then insolent and overbearing; but, on a further
acquaintance, she gradually lay aside her air, and in time become
as deeply attach to I as it be possible for she to be to one of
my character and position: for she seldom lose sight, for above
half an hour at a time, of the fact of my be a hireling and a
poor curate's daughter. and yet, upon the whole, I believe she
respect I more than she herself be aware of; because I be the
only person in the house who steadily profess good principle,
habitually speak the truth, and generally endeavour to make
inclination bow to duty; and this I say, not, of course, in
commendation of myself, but to show the unfortunate state of the
family to which my service be, for the present, devote. there
be no member of it in whom I regret this sad want of principle
so much as Miss Murray herself; not only because she have take a
fancy to I, but because there be so much of what be pleasant and
prepossess in herself, that, in spite of her failing, I really
like she--when she do not rouse my indignation, or ruffle my
temper by TOO great a display of her fault. these, however, I
would fain persuade myself be rather the effect of her education
than her disposition: she have never be perfectly teach the
distinction between right and wrong; she have, like her brother and
sister, be suffer, from infancy, to tyrannize over nurse,
governess, and servant; she have not be teach to moderate her
desire, to control her temper or bridle her will, or to sacrifice
her own pleasure for the good of other. her temper be
naturally good, she be never violent or morose, but from constant
indulgence, and habitual scorn of reason, she be often testy and
capricious; her mind have never be cultivate: her intellect, at
well, be somewhat shallow; she possess considerable vivacity,
some quickness of perception, and some talent for music and the
acquisition of language, but till fifteen she have trouble herself
to acquire nothing;--then the love of display have rouse she
faculty, and induce she to apply herself, but only to the more
showy accomplishment. and when I come it be the same:
everything be neglect but french, german, music, singing,
dancing, fancy-work, and a little drawing--such drawing as might
produce the great show with the small labour, and the
principal part of which be generally do by I. for music and
singing, besides my occasional instruction, she have the attendance
of the good master the country afford; and in these
accomplishment, as well as in dancing, she certainly attain
great proficiency. to music, indeed, she devote too much of she
time, as, governess though I be, I frequently tell she; but her
mother think that if she like it, she could not give too much
time to the acquisition of so attractive an art. of fancy-work I
know nothing but what I gather from my pupil and my own
observation; but no soon be I initiate, than she make I useful
in twenty different way: all the tedious part of her work be
shift on to my shoulder; such as stretch the frame,
stitch in the canvas, sort the wool and silk, put in
the ground, count the stitch, rectify mistake, and
finish the piece she be tired of.
at sixteen, Miss Murray be something of a romp, yet not more so
than be natural and allowable for a girl of that age, but at
seventeen, that propensity, like all other thing, begin to give
way to the rule passion, and soon be swallow up in the all-
absorbing ambition to attract and dazzle the other sex. but enough
of she: now let we turn to her sister.
Miss Matilda Murray be a veritable hoyden, of whom little need be
say. she be about two year and a half young than her sister;
her feature be large, her complexion much dark. she might
possibly make a handsome woman; but she be far too big-boned and
awkward ever to be call a pretty girl, and at present she care
little about it. Rosalie know all her charm, and think they
even great than they be, and value they more highly than she
ought to have do, have they be three time as great; Matilda
think she be well enough, but care little about the matter;
still less do she care about the cultivation of her mind, and the
acquisition of ornamental accomplishment. the manner in which she
learn her lesson and practise her music be calculate to drive
any governess to despair. short and easy as her task be, if
do at all, they be slur over, at any time and in any way;
but generally at the least convenient time, and in the way least
beneficial to herself, and least satisfactory to I: the short
half-hour of practise be horribly strum through; she,
meantime, unsparingly abuse I, either for interrupt she with
correction, or for not rectify her mistake before they be
make, or something equally unreasonable. once or twice, I venture
to remonstrate with she seriously for such irrational conduct; but
on each of those occasion, I receive such reprehensive
expostulation from her mother, as convince I that, if I wish
to keep the situation, I must even let Miss Matilda go on in her
own way.
when her lesson be over, however, her ill-humour be generally
over too: while rid her spirited pony, or romp with the dog
or her brother and sister, but especially with her dear brother
John, she be as happy as a lark. as an animal, Matilda be all
right, full of life, vigour, and activity; as an intelligent being,
she be barbarously ignorant, indocile, careless and irrational;
and, consequently, very distressing to one who have the task of
cultivate her understanding, reform her manner, and aid
she to acquire those ornamental attainment which, unlike her
sister, she despise as much as the rest. her mother be partly
aware of her deficiency, and give I many a lecture as to how I
should try to form her taste, and endeavour to rouse and cherish
her dormant vanity; and, by insinuate, skilful flattery, to win
her attention to the desire object--which I would not do; and how
I should prepare and smooth the path of learn till she could
glide along it without the least exertion to herself: which I
could not, for nothing can be teach to any purpose without some
little exertion on the part of the learner.
as a moral agent, Matilda be reckless, headstrong, violent, and
unamenable to reason. one proof of the deplorable state of her
mind be, that from her father's example she have learn to swear
like a trooper. her mother be greatly shock at the 'unlady-like
trick,' and wonder 'how she have pick it up.' 'but you can soon
break she of it, Miss Grey,' say she: 'it be only a habit; and if
you will just gently remind she every time she do so, I be sure
she will soon lay it aside.' I not only 'gently remind' she, I
try to impress upon she how wrong it be, and how distress to
the ear of decent people: but all in vain: I be only answer
by a careless laugh, and, 'oh, Miss Grey, how shocked you be! Ibe
so glad!' or, 'well! I cannot help it; papa shouldnot have teach
I: I learn it all from he; and maybe a bit from the coachman.'
her brother John, alias Master Murray, be about eleven when I
come: a fine, stout, healthy boy, frank and good-natured in the
main, and might have be a decent lad have he be properly
educate; but now he be as rough as a young bear, boisterous,
unruly, unprincipled, untaught, unteachable--at least, for a
governess under his mother's eye. his master at school might be
able to manage he well--for to school he be send, greatly to my
relief, in the course of a year; in a state, it be true, of
scandalous ignorance as to Latin, as well as the more useful though
more neglect thing: and this, doubtless, would all be lay to
the account of his education have be entrust to an ignorant
female teacher, who have presume to take in hand what she be
wholly incompetent to perform. I be not deliver from his
brother till full twelve month after, when he also be despatch
in the same state of disgraceful ignorance as the former.
Master Charles be his mother's peculiar darling. he be little
more than a year young than John, but much small, paler, and
less active and robust; a pettish, cowardly, capricious, selfish
little fellow, only active in do mischief, and only clever in
invent falsehood: not simply to hide his fault, but, in mere
malicious wantonness, to bring odium upon other. in fact, Master
Charles be a very great nuisance to I: it be a trial of
patience to live with he peaceably; to watch over he be bad;
and to teach he, or pretend to teach he, be inconceivable. at
ten year old, he could not read correctly the easy line in the
simple book; and as, accord to his mother's principle, he be
to be tell every word, before he have time to hesitate or examine
its orthography, and never even to be inform, as a stimulant to
exertion, that other boy be more forward than he, it be not
surprising that he make but little progress during the two year I
have charge of his education. his minute portion of Latin grammar,
&c., be to be repeat over to he, till he choose to say he know
they, and then he be to be help to say they; if he make mistake
in his little easy sum in arithmetic, they be to be show he at
once, and the sum do for he, instead of his be leave to
exercise his faculty in find they out himself; so that, of
course, he take no pain to avoid mistake, but frequently set down
his figure at random, without any calculation at all.
I do not invariably confine myself to these rule: it be against
my conscience to do so; but I seldom could venture to deviate from
they in the slight degree, without incur the wrath of my
little pupil, and subsequently of his mamma; to whom he would
relate my transgression maliciously exaggerated, or adorn with
embellishment of his own; and often, in consequence, be I on the
point of lose or resign my situation. but, for their sake at
home, I smother my pride and suppress my indignation, and
manage to struggle on till my little tormentor be despatch to
school; his father declare that home education be 'no go; for
he, it be plain; his mother spoil he outrageously, and his
governess could make no hand of he at all.'
a few more observation about Horton Lodge and its ongoing, and I
have do with dry description for the present. the house be a
very respectable one; superior to Mr. Bloomfield's, both in age,
size, and magnificence: the garden be not so tastefully lay out;
but instead of the smooth-shaven lawn, the young tree guard by
paling, the grove of upstart poplar, and the plantation of fir,
there be a wide park, stock with deer, and beautify by fine
old tree. the surround country itself be pleasant, as far as
fertile field, flourish tree, quiet green lane, and smile
hedge with wild-flower scatter along their bank, could make
it; but it be depressingly flat to one bear and nurture among the
rugged hill of -.
we be situate nearly two mile from the village church, and,
consequently, the family carriage be put in requisition every
Sunday morning, and sometimes oftener. Mr. and Mrs. Murray
generally think it sufficient to show themselves at church once
in the course of the day; but frequently the child prefer
go a second time to wander about the ground all the day with
nothing to do. if some of my pupil choose to walk and take I with
they, it be well for I; for otherwise my position in the carriage
be to be crush into the corner farth from the open window,
and with my back to the horse: a position which invariably make
I sick; and if I be not actually oblige to leave the church in
the middle of the service, my devotion be disturb with a
feeling of languor and sickliness, and the tormenting fear of its
become bad: and a depressing headache be generally my
companion throughout the day, which would otherwise have be one
of welcome rest, and holy, calm enjoyment.
'itbe very odd, Miss Grey, that the carriage should always make you
sick: it never make I,' remark Miss Matilda,
'nor I either,' say her sister; 'but I dare say it would, if I
sit where she do--such a nasty, horrid place, Miss Grey; I wonder
how you can bear it!'
'I be oblige to bear it, since no choice be leave me,'--I might
have answer; but in tenderness for their feeling I only
replied,--'oh! it be but a short way, and if I be not sick in
church, I donot mind it.'
if I be call upon to give a description of the usual division
and arrangement of the day, I should find it a very difficult
matter. I have all my meal in the schoolroom with my pupil, at
such time as suit their fancy: sometimes they would ring for
dinner before it be half cook; sometimes they would keep it
wait on the table for above an hour, and then be out of humour
because the potato be cold, and the gravy cover with cake of
solid fat; sometimes they would have tea at four; frequently, they
would storm at the servant because it be not in precisely at
five; and when these order be obey, by way of encouragement to
punctuality, they would keep it on the table till seven or eight.
their hour of study be manage in much the same way; my judgment
or convenience be never once consult. sometimes Matilda and
John would determine 'to get all the plaguy business over before
breakfast,' and send the maid to call I up at half-past five,
without any scruple or apology; sometimes, I be tell to be ready
precisely at six, and, have dress in a hurry, come down to an
empty room, and after wait a long time in suspense, discover
that they have change their mind, and be still in bed; or,
perhaps, if it be a fine summer morning, Brown would come to tell
I that the young lady and gentleman have take a holiday, and
be go out; and then I be keep wait for breakfast till I be
almost ready to faint: they have fortify themselves with
something before they go.
often they would do their lesson in the open air; which I have
nothing to say against: except that I frequently catch cold by
sit on the damp grass, or from exposure to the evening dew, or
some insidious draught, which seem to have no injurious effect on
they. it be quite right that they should be hardy; yet, surely,
they might have be teach some consideration for other who be
less so. but I must not blame they for what be, perhaps, my own
fault; for I never make any particular objection to sit where
they please; foolishly choose to risk the consequence, rather
than trouble they for my convenience. their indecorous manner of
do their lesson be quite as remarkable as the caprice
display in their choice of time and place. while receive my
instruction, or repeat what they have learn, they would lounge
upon the sofa, lie on the rug, stretch, yawn, talk to each other,
or look out of the window; whereas, I could not so much as stir the
fire, or pick up the handkerchief I have drop, without be
rebuke for inattention by one of my pupil, or tell that 'mamma
would not like I to be so careless.'
the servant, see in what little estimation the governess be
hold by both parent and child, regulate their behaviour by the
same standard. I have frequently stand up for they, at the risk of
some injury to myself, against the tyranny and injustice of their
young master and mistress; and I always endeavour to give they
as little trouble as possible: but they entirely neglect my
comfort, despise my request, and slight my direction. all
servant, I be convince, would not have do so; but domestic in
general, be ignorant and little accustomed to reason and
reflection, be too easily corrupt by the carelessness and bad
example of those above they; and these, I think, be not of the
good order to begin with.
I sometimes feel myself degrade by the life I lead, and ashamed of
submit to so many indignity; and sometimes I think myself a
fool for care so much about they, and fear I must be sadly
want in christian humility, or that charity which 'suffereth
long and be kind, seeketh not her own, be not easily provoke,
beareth all thing, endureth all thing.'
but, with time and patience, matter begin to be slightly
ameliorate: slowly, it be true, and almost imperceptibly; but I
get rid of my male pupil (that be no trifling advantage), and the
girl, as I intimate before concern one of they, become a
little less insolent, and begin to show some symptom of esteem.
'Miss Grey be a queer creature: she never flatter, and do not
praise they half enough; but whenever she do speak favourably of
they, or anything belong to they, they could be quite sure her
approbation be sincere. she be very obliging, quiet, and
peaceable in the main, but there be some thing that put she out
of temper: they do not much care for that, to be sure, but still
it be well to keep she in tune; as when she be in a good humour
she would talk to they, and be very agreeable and amusing
sometimes, in her way; which be quite different to mamma's, but
still very well for a change. she have her own opinion on every
subject, and keep steadily to they--very tiresome opinion they
often be; as she be always think of what be right and what
be wrong, and have a strange reverence for matter connect with
religion, and an unaccountable liking to good people.'
CHAPTER VIII--the 'come out'
at eighteen, Miss Murray be to emerge from the quiet obscurity of
the schoolroom into the full blaze of the fashionable world--as
much of it, at least, as could be have out of London; for her papa
could not be persuade to leave his rural pleasure and pursuit,
even for a few week' residence in town. she be to make her debut
on the third of January, at a magnificent ball, which her mamma
propose to give to all the nobility and choice gentry of o--- and
its neighbourhood for twenty mile round. of course, she look
forward to it with the wild impatience, and the most extravagant
anticipation of delight.
'Miss Grey,' say she, one evening, a month before the all-
important day, as I be peruse a long and extremely interesting
letter of my sister'--which I have just glance at in the morning
to see that it contain no very bad news, and keep till now,
unable before to find a quiet moment for read it,--'Miss Grey,
do put away that dull, stupid letter, and listen to I! Ibe sure
my talk must be far more amusing than that.'
she seat herself on the low stool at my foot; and I, suppress
a sigh of vexation, begin to fold up the epistle.
'you should tell the good people at home not to bore you with such
long letter,' say she; 'and, above all, do bid they write on
proper note-paper, and not on those great vulgar sheet. you
should see the charming little lady-like note mamma write to her
friend.'
'the good people at home,' reply I, 'know very well that the
long their letter be, the well I like they. I should be very
sorry to receive a charming little lady-like note from any of they;
and I think you be too much of a lady yourself, Miss Murray, to
talk about the "vulgarity" of write on a large sheet of paper.'
'well, I only say it to tease you. but now I want to talk about
the ball; and to tell you that you positively must put off your
holiday till it be over.'
'why so?--i shall not be present at the ball.'
'no, but you will see the room deck out before it begin, and
hear the music, and, above all, see I in my splendid new dress. I
shall be so charming, youwill be ready to worship I--you really
must stay.'
'I should like to see you very much; but I shall have many
opportunity of see you equally charming, on the occasion of
some of the numberless ball and party that be to be, and I
cannot disappoint my friend by postpone my return so long.'
'oh, never mind your friend! tell they we willnot let you go.'
'but, to say the truth, it would be a disappointment to myself: I
long to see they as much as they to see I--perhaps more.'
'well, but it be such a short time.'
'nearly a fortnight by my computation; and, besides, I cannot bear
the thought of a Christmas spend from home: and, moreover, my
sister be go to be marry.'
'be she--when?'
'not till next month; but I want to be there to assist she in
make preparation, and to make the good of her company while we
have she.'
'why donot you tell I before?'
'Ihave only get the news in this letter, which you stigmatize as
dull and stupid, and willnot let I read.'
'to whom be she to be marry?'
'to Mr. Richardson, the vicar of a neighbouring parish.'
'be he rich?'
'no; only comfortable.'
'be he handsome?'
'no; only decent.'
'young?'
'no; only middling.'
'oh, mercy! what a wretch! what sort of a house be it?'
'a quiet little vicarage, with an ivy-clothe porch, an old-fashioned
garden, and--'
'oh, stop!--you'll make I sick. how can she bear it?'
'I expect shewill not only be able to bear it, but to be very happy.
you do not ask I if Mr. Richardson be a good, wise, or amiable
man; I could have answer yes, to all these question--at least so
Mary think, and I hope she will not find herself mistaken.'
'but--miserable creature! how can she think of spend her life
there, coope up with that nasty old man; and no hope of change?'
'he be not old: hebe only six or seven and thirty; and she herself
be twenty-eight, and as sober as if she be fifty.'
'oh! thatbe well then--they're well match; but do they call he
the "worthy vicar"?'
'I donot know; but if they do, I believe he merit the epithet.'
'mercy, how shocking! and will she wear a white apron and make pie
and pudding?'
'I donot know about the white apron, but I dare say she will make
pie and pudding now and then; but that will be no great hardship,
as she have do it before.'
'and will she go about in a plain shawl, and a large straw bonnet,
carry tract and bone soup to her husband's poor parishioner?'
'Ibe not clear about that; but I dare say she will do she good to
make they comfortable in body and mind, in accordance with our
mother's example.'
CHAPTER IX--the ball
'now, Miss Grey,' exclaim Miss Murray, immediately I enter the
schoolroom, after have take off my outdoor garment, upon
return from my four week' recreation, 'now--shut the door, and
sit down, and Iwill tell you all about the ball.'
'no--damn it, no!' shout Miss Matilda. 'hold your tongue, cannot
ye? and let I tell she about my new mare--SUCH a splendour, Miss
Grey! a fine blood mare--'
'do be quiet, Matilda; and let I tell my news first.'
'no, no, Rosalie; youwill be such a damned long time over it--she
shall hear I first--i'll be hang if she donot!'
'Ibe sorry to hear, Miss Matilda, that youhave not get rid of that
shocking habit yet.'
'well, I cannot help it: but Iwill never say a wicked word again, if
youwill only listen to I, and tell Rosalie to hold she confound
tongue.'
Rosalie remonstrate, and I think I should have be tear in
piece between they; but Miss Matilda have the loud voice, her
sister at length give in, and suffer she to tell her story first:
so I be doom to hear a long account of her splendid mare, its
breeding and pedigree, its pace, its action, its spirit, &c., and
of her own amazing skill and courage in rid it; conclude with
an assertion that she could clear a five-bar gate 'like
wink,' that papa say she might hunt the next time the hound
meet, and mamma have order a bright scarlet hunting-habit for she.
'oh, Matilda! what story you be tell!' exclaim her sister.
'well,' answer she, no whit abash, 'I know I could clear a
five-bar gate, if I try, and papa will say I may hunt, and
mamma will order the habit when I ask it.'
'well, now get along,' reply Miss Murray; 'and do, dear Matilda,
try to be a little more lady-like. Miss Grey, I wish you would
tell she not to use such shocking word; she will call her horse a
mare: it be so inconceivably shocking! and then she use such
dreadful expression in describe it: she must have learn it
from the groom. it nearly put I into fit when she begin.'
'I learn it from papa, you ass! and his jolly friend,' say the
young lady, vigorously crack a hunting-whip, which she
habitually carry in her hand. 'Ibe as good judge of horseflesh
as the good of 'm.'
'well, now get along, you shock girl! I really shall take a fit
if you go on in such a way. and now, Miss Grey, attend to I; Ibe
go to tell you about the ball. you must be die to hear about
it, I know. oh, SUCH a ball! you never see or hear, or read, or
dream of anything like it in all your life. the decoration, the
entertainment, the supper, the music be indescribable! and then
the guest! there be two nobleman, three baronet, and five
title lady, and other lady and gentleman innumerable. the
lady, of course, be of no consequence to I, except to put I
in a good humour with myself, by show how ugly and awkward most
of they be; and the good, mamma tell me,--the most transcendent
beauty among they, be nothing to I. as for I, Miss Grey--I'm
so sorry you donot see I! I be CHARMING--wasn't I, Matilda?'
'middling.'
'no, but I really be--at least so mamma say--and Brown and
Williamson. Brown say she be sure no gentleman could set eye on
I without fall in love that minute; and so I may be allow to
be a little vain. I know you think I a shocking, conceited,
frivolous girl; but then, you know, I donot attribute it all to my
personal attraction: I give some praise to the hairdresser, and
some to my exquisitely lovely dress--you must see it to-morrow--
white gauze over pink satin--and so SWEETLY make! and a necklace
and bracelet of beautiful, large pearl!'
'I have no doubt you look very charming: but should that delight
you so very much?'
'oh, no!--not that alone: but, then, I be so much admired; and I
make so many conquest in that one night--you'd be astonish to
hear--'
'but what good will they do you?'
'what good! think of any woman ask that!'
'well, I should think one conquest would be enough; and too much,
unless the subjugation be mutual.'
'oh, but you know I never agree with you on those point. now,
wait a bit, and Iwill tell you my principal admirer--those who make
themselves very conspicuous that night and after: for Ihave be to
two party since. unfortunately the two nobleman, Lord G--- and
Lord F---, be marry, or I might have condescend to be
particularly gracious to they; as it be, I do not: though Lord
F---, who hat his wife, be evidently much strike with I. he
ask I to dance with he twice--he be a charming dancer, by-the-
by, and so be I: you cannot think how well I do--I be astonish
at myself. my lord be very complimentary too--rather too much so
in fact--and I think proper to be a little haughty and repellent;
but I have the pleasure of see his nasty, cross wife ready to
perish with spite and vexation--'
'oh, Miss Murray! you donot mean to say that such a thing could
really give you pleasure? however cross or--'
'well, I know itbe very wrong;--but never mind! I mean to be good
some time--only donot preach now, therebe a good creature. I
havenot tell you half yet. let I see. oh! I be go to tell
you how many unmistakeable admirer I had:- Sir Thomas Ashby be
one,--sir Hugh Meltham and Sir Broadley Wilson be old codger,
only fit companion for papa and mamma. Sir Thomas be young, rich,
and gay; but an ugly beast, nevertheless: however, mamma say I
should not mind that after a few month' acquaintance. then, there
be Henry Meltham, Sir Hugh's young son; rather good-look, and
a pleasant fellow to flirt with: but be a young son, that be
all he be good for; then there be young Mr. Green, rich enough,
but of no family, and a great stupid fellow, a mere country booby!
and then, our good rector, Mr. Hatfield: an HUMBLE admirer he
ought to consider himself; but I fear he have forget to number
humility among his stock of christian virtue.'
'be Mr. Hatfield at the ball?'
'yes, to be sure. do you think he be too good to go?'
'I think be might consider it unclerical.'
'by no mean. he do not profane his cloth by dancing; but it be
with difficulty he could refrain, poor man: he look as if he
be die to ask my hand just for one set; and--oh! by-the-by--
hebe get a new curate: that seedy old fellow Mr. Bligh have get his
long-wish-for live at last, and be go.'
'and what be the new one like?'
'oh, SUCH a beast! Weston his name be. I can give you his
description in three word--an insensate, ugly, stupid blockhead.
thatbe four, but no matter--enough of HIM now.'
then she return to the ball, and give I a further account of her
deportment there, and at the several party she have since
attend; and further particular respect Sir Thomas Ashby and
Messrs. Meltham, Green, and Hatfield, and the ineffaceable
impression she have work upon each of they.
'well, which of the four do you like good?' say I, suppress my
third or fourth yawn.
'I det they all!' reply she, shake her bright ringlet in
vivacious scorn.
'that mean, I suppose, "I like they all"--but which most?'
'no, I really detest they all; but Harry Meltham be the handsome
and most amusing, and Mr. Hatfield the cleverest, Sir Thomas the
wicked, and Mr. Green the most stupid. but the one Ibe to have,
I suppose, if Ibe doom to have any of they, be Sir Thomas Ashby.'
'surely not, if hebe so wicked, and if you dislike he?'
'oh, I donot mind his be wicked: hebe all the well for that;
and as for dislike he--I shouldnot greatly object to be Lady
Ashby of Ashby Park, if I must marry. but if I could be always
young, I would be always single. I should like to enjoy myself
thoroughly, and coquet with all the world, till I be on the verge
of be call an old maid; and then, to escape the infamy of
that, after have make ten thousand conquest, to break all their
heart save one, by marry some high-bear, rich, indulgent
husband, whom, on the other hand, fifty lady be die to have.'
'well, as long as you entertain these view, keep single by all
mean, and never marry at all: not even to escape the infamy of
old-maidenhood.'
CHAPTER X--the CHURCH
'well, Miss Grey, what do you think of the new curate?' ask Miss
Murray, on our return from church the Sunday after the
recommencement of our duty.
'I can scarcely tell,' be my reply: 'I have not even hear he
preach.'
'well, but you see he, donot you?'
'yes, but I cannot pretend to judge of a man's character by a
single cursory glance at his face.'
'but benot he ugly?'
'he do not strike I as be particularly so; I donot dislike
that cast of countenance: but the only thing I particularly
notice about he be his style of reading; which appear to I
good--infinitely well, at least, than Mr. Hatfield's. he read
the Lessons as if he be bent on give full effect to every
passage; it seem as if the most careless person could not have
help attend, nor the most ignorant have fail to understand;
and the prayer he read as if he be not read at all, but
pray earnestly and sincerely from his own heart.'
'oh, yes, thatbe all he be good for: he can plod through the
service well enough; but he have not a single idea beyond it.'
'how do you know?'
'oh! I know perfectly well; I be an excellent judge in such
matter. do you see how he go out of church? stump along--as
if there be nobody there but himself--never look to the right
hand or the left, and evidently think of nothing but just
get out of the church, and, perhaps, home to his dinner: his
great stupid head could contain no other idea.'
'I suppose you would have have he cast a glance into the squire's
pew,' say I, laugh at the vehemence of her hostility.
'indeed! I should have be highly indignant if he have dare to do
such a thing!' reply she, haughtily toss her head; then, after
a moment's reflection, she added--'well, well! I suppose hebe good
enough for his place: but Ibe glad Ibe not dependent on HIM for
amusement--thatbe all. do you see how Mr. Hatfield hurry out to
get a bow from I, and be in time to put we into the carriage?'
'yes,' answer I; internally add, 'and I think it somewhat
derogatory to his dignity as a clergyman to come fly from the
pulpit in such eager haste to shake hand with the squire, and hand
his wife and daughter into their carriage: and, moreover, I owe
he a grudge for nearly shut I out of it'; for, in fact,
though I be stand before his face, close beside the carriage
step, wait to get in, he would persist in put they up and
close the door, till one of the family stop he by call out
that the governess be not in yet; then, without a word of apology,
he depart, wish they good-morning, and leave the footman to
finish the business.
Nota bene.--mr. Hatfield never speak to I, neither do Sir Hugh or
Lady Meltham, nor Mr. Harry or Miss Meltham, nor Mr. Green or his
sister, nor any other lady or gentleman who frequent that
church: nor, in fact, any one that visit at Horton Lodge.
Miss Murray order the carriage again, in the afternoon, for
herself and her sister: she say it be too cold for they to enjoy
themselves in the garden; and besides, she believe Harry Meltham
would be at church. 'for,' say she, smile slyly at her own fair
image in the glass, 'he have be a most exemplary attendant at
church these last few sunday: you would think he be quite a good
Christian. and you may go with we, Miss Grey: I want you to see
he; he be so greatly improve since he return from abroad--you
cannot think! and besides, then you will have an opportunity of
see the beautiful Mr. Weston again, and of hear he preach.'
I do hear he preach, and be decidedly pleased with the
evangelical truth of his doctrine, as well as the earnest
simplicity of his manner, and the clearness and force of his style.
it be truly refreshing to hear such a sermon, after be so long
accustomed to the dry, prosy discourse of the former curate, and
the still less edify harangue of the rector. Mr. Hatfield
would come sail up the aisle, or rather sweeping along like a
whirlwind, with his rich silk gown fly behind he and rustle
against the pew door, mount the pulpit like a conqueror ascend
his triumphal car; then, sink on the velvet cushion in an
attitude of studied grace, remain in silent prostration for a
certain time; then mutter over a Collect, and gabble through the
Lord's Prayer, rise, draw off one bright lavender glove, to give
the congregation the benefit of his sparkling ring, lightly pass
his finger through his well-curl hair, flourish a cambric
handkerchief, recite a very short passage, or, perhaps, a mere
phrase of scripture, as a head-piece to his discourse, and,
finally, deliver a composition which, as a composition, might be
consider good, though far too studied and too artificial to be
pleasing to I: the proposition be well lay down, the
argument logically conduct; and yet, it be sometimes hard to
listen quietly throughout, without some slight demonstration of
disapproval or impatience.
his favourite subject be church discipline, rite and
ceremony, apostolical succession, the duty of reverence and
obedience to the clergy, the atrocious criminality of dissent, the
absolute necessity of observe all the form of godliness, the
reprehensible presumption of individual who attempt to think for
themselves in matter connect with religion, or to be guide by
their own interpretation of scripture, and, occasionally (to
please his wealthy parishioner) the necessity of deferential
obedience from the poor to the rich--support his maxim and
exhortation throughout with quotation from the father: with
whom he appear to be far well acquaint than with the apostle
and evangelist, and whose importance he seem to consider at
least equal to theirs. but now and then he give we a sermon of a
different order--what some would call a very good one; but sunless
and severe: represent the deity as a terrible taskmaster rather
than a benevolent father. yet, as I listen, I feel inclined to
think the man be sincere in all he say: he must have change his
view, and become decidedly religious, gloomy and austere, yet
still devout. but such illusion be usually dissipate, on
come out of church, by hear his voice in jocund colloquy with
some of the Melthams or Greens, or, perhaps, the Murrays
themselves; probably laugh at his own sermon, and hop that he
have give the rascally people something to think about; perchance,
exult in the thought that old Betty Holmes would now lay aside
the sinful indulgence of her pipe, which have be her daily solace
for upwards of thirty year: that George Higgins would be
frighten out of his Sabbath evening walk, and Thomas Jackson
would be sorely trouble in his conscience, and shake in his sure
and certain hope of a joyful resurrection at the last day.
thus, I could not but conclude that Mr. Hatfield be one of those
who 'bind heavy burden, and grievous to be bear, and lie they
upon man's shoulder, while they themselves will not move they with
one of their finger'; and who 'make the word of God of none effect
by their tradition, teach for doctrine the commandment of
man.' I be well pleased to observe that the new curate resemble
he, as far as I could see, in none of these particular.
'well, Miss Grey, what do you think of he now?' say Miss Murray,
as we take our place in the carriage after service.
'no harm still,' reply I.
'no harm!' repeat she in amazement. 'what do you mean?'
'I mean, I think no bad of he than I do before.'
'no bad! I should think not indeed--quite the contrary! be he
not greatly improve?'
'oh, yes; very much indeed,' reply I; for I have now discover
that it be Harry Meltham she mean, not Mr. Weston. that
gentleman have eagerly come forward to speak to the young lady: a
thing he would hardly have venture to do have their mother be
present; he have likewise politely hand they into the carriage.
he have not attempt to shut I out, like Mr. Hatfield; neither, of
course, have he offer I his assistance (I should not have
accept it, if he have), but as long as the door remain open he
have stand smirk and chat with they, and then lift his hat
and depart to his own abode: but I have scarcely notice he all
the time. my companion, however, have be more observant; and, as
we roll along, they discuss between they not only his look,
word, and action, but every feature of his face, and every
article of his apparel.
'you shallnot have he all to yourself, Rosalie,' say Miss Matilda
at the close of this discussion; 'I like he: I know hewould make a
nice, jolly companion for I.'
'well, yoube quite welcome to he, Matilda,' reply her sister,
in a tone of affected indifference.
'and Ibe sure,' continue the other, 'he admire I quite as much
as he do you; donot he, Miss Grey?'
'I donot know; Ibe not acquaint with his sentiment.'
'well, but he do though.'
'my DEAR Matilda! nobody will ever admire you till you get rid of
your rough, awkward manner.'
'oh, stuff! Harry Meltham like such manner; and so do papa's
friend.'
'well, you may captivate old man, and young son; but nobody
else, I be sure, will ever take a fancy to you.'
'I donot care: Ibe not always grab after money, like you and
mamma. if my husband be able to keep a few good horse and dog, I
shall be quite satisfied; and all the rest may go to the devil!'
'well, if you use such shocking expression, Ibe sure no real
gentleman will ever venture to come near you. really, Miss Grey,
you should not let she do so.'
'I cannot possibly prevent it, Miss Murray.'
'and yoube quite mistaken, Matilda, in suppose that Harry
Meltham admire you: I assure you he do nothing of the kind.'
Matilda be begin an angry reply; but, happily, our journey be
now at an end; and the contention be cut short by the footman
open the carriage-door, and let down the step for our
descent.
CHAPTER XI--the cottager
as I have now only one regular pupil--though she contrive to give
I as much trouble as three or four ordinary one, and though her
sister still take lesson in German and draw--I have considerably
more time at my own disposal than I have ever be bless with
before, since I have take upon I the governess's yoke; which time
I devote partly to correspondence with my friend, partly to
reading, study, and the practice of music, singing, &c., partly to
wander in the ground or adjacent field, with my pupil if they
want I, alone if they do not.
often, when they have no more agreeable occupation at hand, the
Misses Murray would amuse themselves with visit the poor
cottager on their father's estate, to receive their flattering
homage, or to hear the old story or gossip news of the
garrulous old woman; or, perhaps, to enjoy the purer pleasure of
make the poor people happy with their cheer presence and their
occasional gift, so easily bestow, so thankfully receive.
sometimes, I be call upon to accompany one or both of the
sister in these visit; and sometimes I be desire to go alone,
to fulfil some promise which they have be more ready to make than
to perform; to carry some small donation, or read to one who be
sick or seriously dispose: and thus I make a few acquaintance
among the cottager; and, occasionally, I go to see they on my
own account.
I generally have more satisfaction in go alone than with either
of the young lady; for they, chiefly owe to their defective
education, comport themselves towards their inferior in a manner
that be highly disagreeable for I to witness. they never, in
thought, exchange place with they; and, consequently, have no
consideration for their feeling, regard they as an order of
being entirely different from themselves. they would watch the
poor creature at their meal, make uncivil remark about their
food, and their manner of eat; they would laugh at their simple
notion and provincial expression, till some of they scarcely
durst venture to speak; they would call the grave elderly man and
woman old fool and silly old blockhead to their face: and all
this without meaning to offend. I could see that the people be
often hurt and annoy by such conduct, though their fear of the
'grand lady' prevent they from testify any resentment; but
they never perceive it. they think that, as these cottager
be poor and untaught, they must be stupid and brutish; and as
long as they, their superior, condescend to talk to they, and to
give they shilling and half-crown, or article of clothing, they
have a right to amuse themselves, even at their expense; and the
people must adore they as angel of light, condescend to
minister to their necessity, and enlighten their humble
dwelling.
I make many and various attempt to deliver my pupil from these
delusive notion without alarm their pride--which be easily
offend, and not soon appease--but with little apparent result;
and I know not which be the more reprehensible of the two:
Matilda be more rude and boisterous; but from Rosalie's womanly
age and lady-like exterior well thing be expect: yet she
be as provokingly careless and inconsiderate as a giddy child of
twelve.
one bright day in the last week of February, I be walk in the
park, enjoy the threefold luxury of solitude, a book, and
pleasant weather; for Miss Matilda have set out on her daily ride,
and Miss Murray be go in the carriage with her mamma to pay some
morning call. but it strike I that I ought to leave these
selfish pleasure, and the park with its glorious canopy of bright
blue sky, the west wind sound through its yet leafless branch,
the snow-wreath still linger in its hollow, but melt fast
beneath the sun, and the graceful deer browse on its moist
herbage already assume the freshness and verdure of spring--and
go to the cottage of one Nancy Brown, a widow, whose son be at
work all day in the field, and who be afflict with an
inflammation in the eye; which have for some time incapacitate she
from reading: to her own great grief, for she be a woman of a
serious, thoughtful turn of mind. I accordingly go, and find
she alone, as usual, in her little, close, dark cottage, redolent
of smoke and confine air, but as tidy and clean as she could make
it. she be seat beside her little fire (consist of a few red
cinder and a bit of stick), busily knit, with a small
sackcloth cushion at her foot, place for the accommodation of her
gentle friend the cat, who be seat thereon, with her long tail
half encircle her velvet paw, and her half-close eye dreamily
gaze on the low, crooked fender.
'well, Nancy, how be you to-day?'
'why, middling, Miss, I' myseln--my eye be no well, but Ibe a
deal easy I' my mind nor I have be,' reply she, rise to
welcome I with a contented smile; which I be glad to see, for
Nancy have be somewhat afflict with religious melancholy. I
congratulate she upon the change. she agree that it be a great
blessing, and express herself 'right down thankful for it';
add, 'if it please God to spare my sight, and make I so as I
can read my Bible again, I think I shall be as happy as a queen.'
'I hope he will, Nancy,' reply I; 'and, meantime, Iwill come and
read to you now and then, when I have a little time to spare.'
with expression of grateful pleasure, the poor woman move to get
I a chair; but, as I save she the trouble, she busy herself
with stir the fire, and add a few more stick to the
decaying ember; and then, take she well-use Bible from the
shelf, dust it carefully, and give it I. on my asking if there
be any particular part she should like I to read, she answer -
'well, Miss Grey, if itbe all the same to you, I should like to
hear that chapter in the First Epistle of St. John, that say, "God
be love, and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in
he."'
with a little searching, I find these word in the fourth chapter.
when I come to the seventh verse she interrupt I, and, with
needless apology for such a liberty, desire I to read it very
slowly, that she might take it all in, and dwell on every word;
hop I would excuse she, as she be but a 'simple body.'
'the wise person,' I reply, 'might think over each of these
verse for an hour, and be all the well for it; and I would
rather read they slowly than not.'
accordingly, I finish the chapter as slowly as need be, and at
the same time as impressively as I could; my auditor listen most
attentively all the while, and sincerely thank I when I have
do. I sit still about half a minute to give her time to reflect
upon it; when, somewhat to my surprise, she break the pause by
ask I how I like Mr. Weston?
'I donot know,' I reply, a little startle by the suddenness of
the question; 'I think he preach very well.'
'ay, he do so; and talk well too.'
'do he?'
'he do. maybe, you havenot see he--not to talk to he much,
yet?'
'no, I never see any one to talk to--except the young lady of the
Hall.'
'ah; theybe nice, kind young lady; but they cannot talk as he
do.'
'then he come to see you, Nancy?'
'he do, Miss; and i'se thankful for it. he come to see all we
poor body a deal ofter nor Maister Bligh, or th' Rector ever do;
an' itbe well he do, for hebe always welcome: we cannot say as
much for th' Rector--there be 'at say theybe fair fear on he.
when he come into a house, they say hebe sure to find summut
wrong, and begin a-call them as soon as he cross th' doorstun:
but maybe he think it his duty like to tell them whatbe wrong. and
very oft he come o' purpose to reprove folk for not come to
church, or not kneel an' standing when other folk do, or go
to the Methody chapel, or summut o' that sort: but I cannot say 'at
he ever fund much fault wi' I. he come to see I once or twice,
afore Maister Weston come, when I be so ill trouble in my mind;
and as I have only very poor health beside, I make bold to send for
he--and he come right enough. I be sore distressed, Miss Grey--
thank God, itbe owere now--but when I take my Bible, I could get
no comfort of it at all. that very chapter 'at youhave just be
read trouble I as much as aught--"He that loveth not, knoweth
not God." it seem fearsome to I; for I feel that I love
neither God nor man as I should do, and could not, if I try ever
so. and th' chapter afore, where it says,--"He that be bear of God
cannot commit sin." and another place where it says,--"love be the
fulfilling of the Law." and many, many other, Miss: I should
fair weary you out, if I be to tell they all. but all seem to
condemn I, and to show I 'at I be not in the right way; and as I
know not how to get into it, I send our Bill to beg Maister
Hatfield to be as kind as look in on I some day and when he come,
I tell he all my trouble.'
'and what do he say, Nancy?'
'why, Miss, he seem to scorn I. I might be mista'en--but he
like give a sort of a whistle, and I see a bit of a smile on his
face; and he say, "oh, itbe all stuff! youhave be among the
Methodists, my good woman." but I tell he Iwould never be near
the Methodies. and then he said,--"well," say he, "you must come
to church, where youwill hear the scripture properly explain,
instead of sit pore over your Bible at home."
'but I tell he I always use come to church when I have my
health; but this very cold winter weather I hardly durst venture so
far--and I so bad wi' th' rheumatic and all.
'but he say, "itwill do your rheumatiz good to hobble to church:
therebe nothing like exercise for the rheumatiz. you can walk
about the house well enough; why cannot you walk to church? the
fact be," say he, "yoube get too fond of your ease. itbe
always easy to find excuse for shirk one's duty."
'but then, you know, Miss Grey, it benot so. however, I tell
he Iwould try. "but please, sir," say I, "if I do go to church,
what the well shall I be? I want to have my sin blot out,
and to feel that they be remember no more against I, and that
the love of God be shed abroad in my heart; and if I can get no
good by read my Bible an' say my prayer at home, what good
shall I get by go to church?"'
'"the church," say he, "be the place appoint by God for his
worship. itbe your duty to go there as often as you can. if you
want comfort, you must seek it in the path of duty,"--an' a deal
more he say, but I cannot remember all his fine word. however,
it all come to this, that I be to come to church as oft as ever I
could, and bring my prayer-book with I, an' read up all the
sponser after the clerk, an' stand, an' kneel, an' sit, an' do all
as I should, and take the Lord's supper at every opportunity, an'
hearken his sermon, and Maister Bligh's, an' it 'ud be all right:
if I go on do my duty, I should get a blessing at last.
'"but if you get no comfort that way," say he, "itbe all up."
'"then, sir," say I, "should you think Ibe a reprobate?"
'"why," say he--he say, "if you do your good to get to heaven and
cannot manage it, you must be one of those that seek to enter in at
the strait gate and shall not be able."
'An' then he ask I if Ihave see any of the lady o' th' Hall
about that mornin'; so I tell he where I have see the young
miss go on th' Moss Lane;--an' he kick my poor cat right across
th' floor, an' go after them as gay as a lark: but I be very
sad. that last word o' his fair sunk into my heart, an' lay there
like a lump o' lead, till I be weary to bear it.
'Howsever, I follere his advice: I think he mean it all for
th' well, though he have a queer way with he. but you know, Miss,
hebe rich an' young, and such like cannot right understand the
thought of a poor old woman such as I. but, howsever, I do my
good to do all as he bid I--but maybe Ibe plague you, Miss, wi'
my chatter.'
'oh, no, Nancy! go on, and tell I all.'
'well, my rheumatiz get well--I know not whether wi' go to
church or not, but one frosty Sunday I get this cold I' my eye.
Th' inflammation donot come on all at once like, but bit by bit--
but I benot go to tell you about my eye, I be talk about
my trouble o' mind;--and to tell the truth, Miss Grey, I donot
think it be anyways ease by come to church--nought to speak on,
at least: I like get my health well; but that donot mend my
soul. I hearken and hearken the minister, and read an' read
at my prayer-book; but it be all like sound brass and a
tinkle cymbal: the sermon I couldnot understand, an' th'
prayer-book only serve to show I how wicked I be, that I could
read such good word an' never be no well for it, and often feel
it a sore labour an' a heavy task beside, instead of a blessing and
a privilege as all good Christians do. it seem like as all
be barren an' dark to I. and then, they dreadful word, "many
shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able." they like as they
fair dry up my sperrit.
'but one Sunday, when Maister Hatfield give out about the
sacrament, I notice where he say, "if there be any of you that
cannot quiet his own conscience, but requireth further comfort or
counsel, let he come to I, or some other discreet and learn
minister of God's word, and open his grief!" so next Sunday
morning, afore service, I just look into the vestry, an' begin a-
talk to th' Rector again. I hardly could fashion to take such a
liberty, but I think when my soul be at stake I shouldnot stick
at a trifle. but he say he havenot time to attend to I then.
'"and, indeed," say he, "Ihave nothing to say to you but what Ihave
say before. take the sacrament, of course, and go on do your
duty; and if that willnot serve you, nothing will. so donot bother
I any more."
'so then, I go away. but I hear Maister Weston--Maister Weston
be there, Miss--this be his first Sunday at Horton, you know, an'
he be I' th' vestry in his surplice, help th' Rector on with
his gown--'
'yes, Nancy.'
'and I hear he ask Maister Hatfield who I be, an' he say, "oh,
shebe a cant old fool."
'and I be very ill grieve, Miss Grey; but I go to my seat, and
I try to do my duty as aforetime: but I like get no peace. an'
I even take the sacrament; but I feel as though I be eat and
drink to my own damnation all th' time. so I go home, sorely
troubled.
'but next day, afore Iwould get fettle up--for indeed, Miss, Iwould
no heart to sweep an' fettling, an' washing pot; so I sit I
down I' th' muck--who should come in but Maister Weston! I start
side stuff then, an' sweeping an' doing; and I expect hewould
begin a-call I for my idle way, as Maister Hatfield would a'
do; but I be mista'en: he only bid I good-mornin' like, in a
quiet dacent way. so I dust he a chair, an' fettle up th'
fireplace a bit; but I havenot forget th' Rector's word, so say
I, "I wonder, sir, you should give yourself that trouble, to come
so far to see a 'cant old fool,' such as I."
'he seem take aback at that; but he would fain persuade I 'at
the Rector be only in jest; and when that wouldnot do, he say,
"well, Nancy, you shouldnot think so much about it: Mr. Hatfield
be a little out of humour just then: you know webe none of we
perfect--even Moses speak unadvisedly with his lip. but now sit
down a minute, if you can spare the time, and tell I all your
doubt and fear; and Iwill try to remove they."
'so I sit I down anent he. he be quite a stranger, you know,
Miss Grey, and even young nor Maister Hatfield, I believe; and I
have think he not so pleasant-look as he, and rather a bit
crossish, at first, to look at; but he spake so civil like--and
when th' cat, poor thing, jump on to his knee, he only stroke
she, and give a bit of a smile: so I think that be a good sign;
for once, when she do so to th' Rector, he knock she off, like
as it might be in scorn and anger, poor thing. but you cannot
expect a cat to know manner like a Christian, you know, Miss
Grey.'
'no; of course not, Nancy. but what do Mr. Weston say then?'
'he say nought; but he listen to I as steady an' patient as
could be, an' never a bit o' scorn about he; so I go on, an'
tell he all, just as Ihave tell you--an' more too.
'"well," say he, "Mr. Hatfield be quite right in tell you to
persevere in do your duty; but in advise you to go to church
and attend to the service, and so on, he donot mean that be the
whole of a Christian's duty: he only think you might there learn
what more be to be do, and be lead to take delight in those
exercise, instead of find they a task and a burden. and if you
have ask he to explain those word that trouble you so much, I
think he would have tell you, that if many shall seek to enter in
at the strait gate and shall not be able, it be their own sin that
hinder they; just as a man with a large sack on his back might wish
to pass through a narrow doorway, and find it impossible to do so
unless he would leave his sack behind he. but you, Nancy, I dare
say, have no sin that you would not gladly throw aside, if you
know how?"
'"indeed, sir, you speak truth," say I.
'"well," say he, "you know the first and great commandment--and
the second, which be like unto it--on which two commandment hang
all the law and the prophet? you say you cannot love God; but it
strike I that if you rightly consider who and what he be, you
cannot help it. he be your father, your good friend: every
blessing, everything good, pleasant, or useful, come from he; and
everything evil, everything you have reason to hate, to shun, or to
fear, come from Satan--his enemy as well as ours. and for this
cause be God manifest in the flesh, that he might destroy the
work of the Devil: in one word, God be LOVE; and the more of love
we have within we, the nearer we be to he and the more of his
spirit we possess."
'"well, sir," I say, "if I can always think on these thing, I
think I might well love God: but how can I love my neighbour,
when they vex I, and be so contrary and sinful as some on them be?"
'"it may seem a hard matter," say he, "to love our neighbour, who
have so much of what be evil about they, and whose fault so often
awaken the evil that linger within ourselves; but remember that he
make they, and he love they; and whosoever loveth he that begat,
loveth he that be beget also. and if God so loveth we, that he
give his only begotten Son to die for we, we ought also to love one
another. but if you cannot feel positive affection for those who
do not care for you, you can at least try to do to they as you
would they should do unto you: you can endeavour to pity their
failing and excuse their offence, and to do all the good you can
to those about you. and if you accustom yourself to this, Nancy,
the very effort itself will make you love they in some degree--to
say nothing of the goodwill your kindness would beget in they,
though they might have little else that be good about they. if we
love God and wish to serve he, let we try to be like he, to do
his work, to labour for his glory--which be the good of man--to
hasten the coming of his kingdom, which be the peace and happiness
of all the world: however powerless we may seem to be, in do
all the good we can through life, the humblest of we may do much
towards it: and let we dwell in love, that he may dwell in we and
we in he. the more happiness we bestow, the more we shall
receive, even here; and the great will be our reward in heaven
when we rest from our labour." I believe, Miss, they be his very
word, for Ihave think them ower many a time. an' then he take
that Bible, an' read bit here and there, an' explain them as
clear as the day: and it seem like as a new light break in on my
soul; an' I feel fair aglow about my heart, an' only wish poor
Bill an' all the world could ha' be there, an' hear it all, and
rejoice wi' I.
'after he be go, Hannah Rogers, one o' th' neighbour, come in
and want I to help she to wash. I tell she I couldnot just
then, for I havenot set on th' potatie for th' dinner, nor wash
up th' breakfast stuff yet. so then she begin a-call I for my
nasty idle way. I be a little bit vex at first, but I never
say nothing wrong to she: I only tell she like all in a quiet
way, 'at Iwould have th' new parson to see I; but Iwould get do as
quick as ever I could, an' then come an' help she. so then she
soften down; and my heart like as it warm towards she, an' in a
bit we be very good friend. an' so it be, Miss Grey, "a soft
answer turneth away wrath; but grievous word stir up anger." it
benot only in they you speak to, but in yourself.'
'very true, Nancy, if we could always remember it.'
'ay, if we could!'
'and do Mr. Weston ever come to see you again?'
'yes, many a time; and since my eye have be so bad, hebe sit an'
read to I by the half-hour together: but you know, Miss, he have
other folk to see, and other thing to do--God bless he! an'
that next Sunday he preach such a sermon! his text be, "come
unto I all ye that labour and be heavy laden, and I will give you
rest," and they two bless verse that follow. you benot there,
Miss, you be with your friend then--but it make I so happy! and
I be happy now, thank God! an' I take a pleasure, now, in do
little bit o' job for my neighbour--such as a poor old body
'at' half blind can do; and they take it kindly of I, just as he
say. you see, Miss, Ibe knit a pair o' stocking now;--
theybe for Thomas Jackson: hebe a queerish old body, an' wehave
have many a bout at threape, one anent t'other; an' at time wehave
differ sorely. so I think I couldnot do well nor knit he a
pair o' warm stocking; an' Ihave feel to like he a deal well,
poor old man, sin' I begin. itbe turn out just as Maister Weston
say.'
'well, Ibe very glad to see you so happy, Nancy, and so wise: but
I must go now; I shall be want at the Hall,' say I; and bid
her good-bye, I depart, promise to come again when I have time,
and feel nearly as happy as herself.
at another time I go to read to a poor labourer who be in the
last stage of consumption. the young lady have be to see he,
and somehow a promise of reading have be extract from they; but
it be too much trouble, so they beg I to do it instead. I
go, willingly enough; and there too I be gratify with the
praise of Mr. Weston, both from the sick man and his wife. the
former tell I that he derive great comfort and benefit from the
visit of the new parson, who frequently come to see he, and be
'another guess sort of man' to Mr. Hatfield; who, before the
other's arrival at Horton, have now and then pay he a visit; on
which occasion he would always insist upon have the cottage-door
keep open, to admit the fresh air for his own convenience, without
consider how it might injure the sufferer; and have open his
prayer-book and hastily read over a part of the Service for the
Sick, would hurry away again: if he do not stay to administer
some harsh rebuke to the afflicted wife, or to make some
thoughtless, not to say heartless, observation, rather calculate
to increase than diminish the trouble of the suffering pair.
'whereas,' say the man, 'Maister Weston 'ull pray with I quite in
a different fashion, an' talk to I as kind as owt; an' oft read to
I too, an' sit beside I just like a brother.'
'just for all the world!' exclaim his wife; 'an' about a three
wik sin', when he seed how poor Jem shiver wi' cold, an' what
pitiful fire we keep, he ax if wer stock of coal be nearly
do. I tell he it be, an' we be ill set to get more: but
you know, mum, I donot think o' he help we; but, howsever, he
send we a sack o' coal next day; an' wehave have good fire ever
sin': and a great blessing it be, this winter time. but thatbe
his way, Miss Grey: when he come into a poor body's house a-
seein' sick folk, he like notice what they most stand I' need on;
an' if he think they cannot readily get it therseln, he never say
nowt about it, but just get it for them. an' it benot everybody
'at 'ud do that, 'at have as little as he have: for you know, mum,
hebe nowt at all to live on but what he get fra' th' Rector, an'
thatbe little enough they say.'
I remember then, with a species of exultation, that he have
frequently be style a vulgar brute by the amiable Miss Murray,
because he wear a silver watch, and clothe not quite so bright and
fresh as Mr. Hatfield's.
in return to the Lodge I feel very happy, and thank God that I
have now something to think about; something to dwell on as a relief
from the weary monotony, the lonely drudgery, of my present life:
for I be lonely. never, from month to month, from year to year,
except during my brief interval of rest at home, do I see one
creature to whom I could open my heart, or freely speak my thought
with any hope of sympathy, or even comprehension: never one,
unless it be poor Nancy Brown, with whom I could enjoy a single
moment of real social intercourse, or whose conversation be
calculate to render I well, wise, or happy than before; or
who, as far as I could see, could be greatly benefit by mine. my
only companion have be unamiable child, and ignorant, wrong-
head girl; from whose fatigue folly, unbroken solitude be
often a relief most earnestly desire and dearly prize. but to be
restrict to such associate be a serious evil, both in its
immediate effect and the consequence that be likely to ensue.
never a new idea or stirring thought come to I from without; and
such as rise within I be, for the most part, miserably crush
at once, or doom to sicken or fade away, because they could not
see the light.
habitual associate be know to exercise a great influence over
each other's mind and manner. those whose action be for ever
before our eye, whose word be ever in our ear, will naturally
lead we, albeit against our will, slowly, gradually, imperceptibly,
perhaps, to act and speak as they do. I will not presume to say
how far this irresistible power of assimilation extend; but if one
civilised man be doom to pass a dozen year amid a race of
intractable savage, unless he have power to improve they, I greatly
question whether, at the close of that period, he would not have
become, at least, a barbarian himself. and I, as I could not make
my young companion well, fear exceedingly that they would make
I bad--would gradually bring my feeling, habit, capacity, to
the level of their own; without, however, impart to I their
lightheartedness and cheerful vivacity.
already, I seem to feel my intellect deteriorate, my heart
petrifying, my soul contracting; and I tremble lest my very moral
perception should become deaden, my distinction of right and
wrong confound, and all my well faculty be sink, at last,
beneath the baneful influence of such a mode of life. the gross
vapour of earth be gather around I, and close in upon my
inward heaven; and thus it be that Mr. Weston rise at length upon
I, appear like the morning star in my horizon, to save I from
the fear of utter darkness; and I rejoice that I have now a subject
for contemplation that be above I, not beneath. I be glad to
see that all the world be not make up of Bloomfields, murray,
Hatfields, Ashbys, &c.; and that human excellence be not a mere
dream of the imagination. when we hear a little good and no harm
of a person, it be easy and pleasant to imagine more: in short, it
be needless to analyse all my thought; but Sunday be now become a
day of peculiar delight to I (I be now almost break-in to the
back corner in the carriage), for I like to hear he--and I like
to see he, too; though I know he be not handsome, or even what be
call agreeable, in outward aspect; but, certainly, he be not
ugly.
in stature he be a little, a very little, above the middle size;
the outline of his face would be pronounce too square for beauty,
but to I it announce decision of character; his dark brown hair
be not carefully curl, like Mr. Hatfield's, but simply brush
aside over a broad white forehead; the eyebrow, I suppose, be
too project, but from under those dark brow there gleam an
eye of singular power, brown in colour, not large, and somewhat
deep-set, but strikingly brilliant, and full of expression; there
be character, too, in the mouth, something that bespoke a man of
firm purpose and an habitual thinker; and when he smile--but I
will not speak of that yet, for, at the time I mention, I have never
see he smile: and, indeed, his general appearance do not
impress I with the idea of a man give to such a relaxation, nor
of such an individual as the cottager describe he. I have early
form my opinion of he; and, in spite of Miss Murray's
objurgation: be fully convince that he be a man of strong
sense, firm faith, and ardent piety, but thoughtful and stern: and
when I find that, to his other good quality, be add that of
true benevolence and gentle, considerate kindness, the discovery,
perhaps, delight I the more, as I have not be prepare to
expect it.
CHAPTER XII--the SHOWER
the next visit I pay to Nancy Brown be in the second week in
March: for, though I have many spare minute during the day, I
seldom could look upon an hour as entirely my own; since, where
everything be leave to the caprice of Miss Matilda and her sister,
there could be no order or regularity. whatever occupation I
choose, when not actually busy about they or their concern, I
have, as it be, to keep my loin gird, my shoe on my foot, and
my staff in my hand; for not to be immediately forthcoming when
call for, be regard as a grave and inexcusable offence: not
only by my pupil and their mother, but by the very servant, who
come in breathless haste to call I, exclaim, 'yoube to go to
the schoolroom DIRECTLY, mum, the young lady be wait!!'
Climax of horror! actually wait for their governess!!!
but this time I be pretty sure of an hour or two to myself; for
Matilda be prepare for a long ride, and Rosalie be dress for
a dinner-party at Lady Ashby's: so I take the opportunity of
repair to the widow's cottage, where I find she in some anxiety
about her cat, which have be absent all day. I comfort she with
as many anecdote of that animal's rove propensity as I could
recollect. 'Ibe fear o' th' gamekeeper,' say she: 'thatbe all
'at I think on. if th' young gentleman have be at home, I should
a' thought theywould be set their dog at she, an' worried she,
poor thing, as they do many a poor thing's cat; but I havenot that
to be fear on now.' Nancy's eye be well, but still far from
well: she have be try to make a Sunday shirt for her son, but
tell I she could only bear to do a little bit at it now and then,
so that it progress but slowly, though the poor lad want it
sadly. so I propose to help she a little, after I have read to
she, for I have plenty of time that evening, and need not return
till dusk. she thankfully accept the offer. 'an' youwill be a
bit o' company for I too, Miss,' say she; 'I like as I feel
lonesome without my cat.' but when I have finish reading, and
do the half of a seam, with Nancy's capacious brass thimble
fit on to my finger by mean of a roll of paper, I be disturb
by the entrance of Mr. Weston, with the identical cat in his arm.
I now see that he could smile, and very pleasantly too.
'Ihave do you a piece of good service, Nancy,' he begin: then
see I, he acknowledge my presence by a slight bow. I should
have be invisible to Hatfield, or any other gentleman of those
part. 'Ihave deliver your cat,' he continue, 'from the hand,
or rather the gun, of Mr. Murray's gamekeeper.'
'God bless you, sir!' cry the grateful old woman, ready to weep
for joy as she receive her favourite from his arm.
'take care of it,' say he, 'and donot let it go near the rabbit-
warren, for the gamekeeper swear hewill shoot it if he see it
there again: he would have do so to-day, if I have not be in
time to stop he. I believe it be rain, Miss Grey,' add he,
more quietly, observe that I have put aside my work, and be
prepare to depart. 'donot let I disturb you--I shallnot stay two
minute.'
'youwill both stay while this shower get owere,' say Nancy, as
she stir the fire, and place another chair beside it; 'what!
therebe room for all.'
'I can see well here, thank you, Nancy,' reply I, take my
work to the window, where she have the goodness to suffer I to
remain unmolested, while she get a brush to remove the cat's hair
from Mr. Weston's coat, carefully wipe the rain from his hat, and
give the cat its supper, busily talk all the time: now thank
her clerical friend for what he have do; now wonder how the cat
have find out the warren; and now lament the probable
consequence of such a discovery. he listen with a quiet, good-
natured smile, and at length take a seat in compliance with she
press invitation, but repeat that he do not mean to stay.
'I have another place to go to,' say he, 'and I see' (glance at
the book on the table) 'someone else have be read to you.'
'yes, sir; Miss Grey have be as kind as read I a chapter; an' now
shebe help I with a shirt for our Bill--but Ibe fear shewill
be cold there. willnot you come to th' fire, Miss?'
'no, thank you, Nancy, Ibe quite warm. I must go as soon as this
shower be over.'
'oh, Miss! you say you could stop while dusk!' cry the
provoke old woman, and Mr. Weston seize his hat.
'Nay, sir,' exclaim she, 'pray donot go now, while it rain so
fast.'
'but it strike I Ibe keep your visitor away from the fire.'
'no, yoube not, Mr. Weston,' reply I, hop there be no harm
in a falsehood of that description.
'no, sure!' cry Nancy. 'what, therebe lot o' room!'
'Miss Grey,' say he, half-jestingly, as if he feel it necessary to
change the present subject, whether he have anything particular to
say or not, 'I wish you would make my peace with the squire, when
you see he. he be by when I rescue Nancy's cat, and do not
quite approve of the deed. I tell he I think he might well
spare all his rabbit than she her cat, for which audacious
assertion he treat I to some rather ungentlemanly language; and
I fear I retort a trifle too warmly.'
'oh, lawful sir! I hope you donot fall out wi' th' maister for
sake o' my cat! he cannot bide answer again--can th' maister.'
'oh! itbe no matter, Nancy: I donot care about it, really; I say
nothing VERY uncivil; and I suppose Mr. Murray be accustom to use
rather strong language when hebe heat.'
'ay, sir: itbe a pity.'
'and now, I really must go. I have to visit a place a mile beyond
this; and you would not have I to return in the dark: besides, it
have nearly do raining now--so good-evening, Nancy. good-evening,
Miss Grey.'
'good-evening, Mr. Weston; but donot depend upon I for make your
peace with Mr. Murray, for I never see he--to speak to.'
'donot you; it cannot be help then,' reply he, in dolorous
resignation: then, with a peculiar half-smile, he add, 'but
never mind; I imagine the squire have more to apologise for than I;'
and leave the cottage.
I go on with my sewing as long as I could see, and then bade
Nancy good-evening; check she too lively gratitude by the
undeniable assurance that I have only do for she what she would
have do for I, if she have be in my place and I in her. I
hasten back to Horton Lodge, where, have enter the
schoolroom, I find the tea-table all in confusion, the tray
flood with slop, and Miss Matilda in a most ferocious humour.
'Miss Grey, whatever have you be about? Ihave have tea half an
hour ago, and have to make it myself, and drink it all alone! I
wish you would come in soon!'
'Ihave be to see Nancy Brown. I think you would not be back
from your ride.'
'how could I ride in the rain, I should like to know. that damned
pelt shower be vexatious enough--come on when I be just in
full swing: and then to come and find nobody in to tea! and you
know I cannot make the tea as I like it.'
'I donot think of the shower,' reply I (and, indeed, the thought
of its drive her home have never enter my head).
'no, of course; you be under shelter yourself, and you never
think of other people.'
I bear her coarse reproach with astonishing equanimity, even with
cheerfulness; for I be sensible that I have do more good to Nancy
Brown than harm to she: and perhaps some other thought assist
to keep up my spirit, and impart a relish to the cup of cold,
overdrawn tea, and a charm to the otherwise unsightly table; and--I
have almost say--to Miss Matilda's unamiable face. but she soon
betook herself to the stable, and leave I to the quiet enjoyment
of my solitary meal.
CHAPTER XIII--the primrose
Miss Murray now always go twice to church, for she so love
admiration that she could not bear to lose a single opportunity of
obtain it; and she be so sure of it wherever she show
herself, that, whether Harry Meltham and Mr. Green be there or
not, there be certain to be somebody present who would not be
insensible to her charm, besides the Rector, whose official
capacity generally oblige he to attend. usually, also, if the
weather permit, both she and her sister would walk home;
Matilda, because she hat the confinement of the carriage; she,
because she dislike the privacy of it, and enjoy the company
that generally enliven the first mile of the journey in walk
from the church to Mr. Green's park-gates: near which commence
the private road to Horton Lodge, which lie in the opposite
direction, while the highway conduct in a straightforward course
to the still more distant mansion of Sir Hugh Meltham. thus there
be always a chance of be accompany, so far, either by Harry
Meltham, with or without Miss Meltham, or Mr. Green, with perhaps
one or both of his sister, and any gentleman visitor they might
have.
whether I walk with the young lady or ride with their parent,
depend upon their own capricious will: if they choose to 'take'
I, I go; if, for reason well know to themselves, they choose to
go alone, I take my seat in the carriage. I like walk well,
but a sense of reluctance to obtrude my presence on anyone who do
not desire it, always keep I passive on these and similar
occasion; and I never inquire into the cause of their vary
whim. indeed, this be the good policy--for to submit and oblige
be the governess's part, to consult their own pleasure be that of
the pupil. but when I do walk, the first half of journey be
generally a great nuisance to I. as none of the before-mention
lady and gentleman ever notice I, it be disagreeable to walk
beside they, as if listen to what they say, or wish to be
think one of they, while they talk over I, or across; and if
their eye, in speak, chance to fall on I, it seem as if
they look on vacancy--as if they either do not see I, or be
very desirous to make it appear so. it be disagreeable, too, to
walk behind, and thus appear to acknowledge my own inferiority;
for, in truth, I consider myself pretty nearly as good as the
good of they, and wish they to know that I do so, and not to
imagine that I look upon myself as a mere domestic, who know she
own place too well to walk beside such fine lady and gentleman as
they be--though her young lady might choose to have she with
they, and even condescend to converse with she when no well
company be at hand. thus--I be almost ashamed to confess it--but
indeed I give myself no little trouble in my endeavour (if I do
keep up with they) to appear perfectly unconscious or regardless of
their presence, as if I be wholly absorb in my own reflection,
or the contemplation of surround object; or, if I linger
behind, it be some bird or insect, some tree or flower, that
attract my attention, and have duly examine that, I would
pursue my walk alone, at a leisurely pace, until my pupil have
bid adieu to their companion and turn off into the quiet
private road.
one such occasion I particularly well remember; it be a lovely
afternoon about the close of March; Mr. Green and his sister have
send their carriage back empty, in order to enjoy the bright
sunshine and balmy air in a sociable walk home along with their
visitor, Captain Somebody and Lieutenant Somebody-else (a couple
of military fop), and the Misses Murray, who, of course, contrive
to join they. such a party be highly agreeable to Rosalie; but
not find it equally suitable to my taste, I presently fall back,
and begin to botanise and entomologise along the green bank and
bud hedge, till the company be considerably in advance of I,
and I could hear the sweet song of the happy lark; then my spirit
of misanthropy begin to melt away beneath the soft, pure air and
genial sunshine; but sad thought of early childhood, and yearning
for depart joy, or for a bright future lot, arise instead. as
my eye wander over the steep bank cover with young grass and
green-leave plant, and surmount by bud hedge, I long
intensely for some familiar flower that might recall the woody
dale or green hill-side of home: the brown moorland, of course,
be out of the question. such a discovery would make my eye gush
out with water, no doubt; but that be one of my great
enjoyment now. at length I descry, high up between the twisted
root of an oak, three lovely primrose, peep so sweetly from
their hiding-place that the tear already start at the sight; but
they grow so high above I, that I try in vain to gather one or
two, to dream over and to carry with I: I could not reach they
unless I climb the bank, which I be deter from do by
hear a footstep at that moment behind I, and be, therefore,
about to turn away, when I be startle by the word, 'allow I to
gather they for you, Miss Grey,' speak in the grave, low tone of
a well-know voice. immediately the flower be gather, and in
my hand. it be Mr. Weston, of course--who else would trouble
himself to do so much for I?
'I thank he; whether warmly or coldly, I cannot tell: but
certain I be that I do not express half the gratitude I feel. it
be foolish, perhaps, to feel any gratitude at all; but it seem
to I, at that moment, as if this be a remarkable instance of his
good-nature: an act of kindness, which I could not repay, but
never should forget: so utterly unaccustomed be I to receive such
civility, so little prepared to expect they from anyone within
fifty mile of Horton Lodge. yet this do not prevent I from
feel a little uncomfortable in his presence; and I proceed to
follow my pupil at a much quick pace than before; though,
perhaps, if Mr. Weston have take the hint, and let I pass without
another word, I might have repeat it an hour after: but he do
not. a somewhat rapid walk for I be but an ordinary pace for
he.
'your young lady have leave you alone,' say he.
'yes, they be occupy with more agreeable company.'
'then donot trouble yourself to overtake they.' I slacken my
pace; but next moment regret have do so: my companion do
not speak; and I have nothing in the world to say, and fear he
might be in the same predicament. at length, however, he break the
pause by ask, with a certain quiet abruptness peculiar to
himself, if I like flower.
'yes; very much,' I answer, 'wild-flower especially.'
'_i_ like wild-flower,' say he; 'other I donot care about,
because I have no particular association connect with them--
except one or two. what be your favourite flower?'
'primrose, bluebell, and heath-blossom.'
'not violet?'
'no; because, as you say, I have no particular association
connect with they; for there be no sweet violet among the hill
and valley round my home.'
'it must be a great consolation to you to have a home, Miss Grey,'
observe my companion after a short pause: 'however remote, or
however seldom visit, still it be something to look to.'
'it be so much that I think I could not live without it,' reply
I, with an enthusiasm of which I immediately repent; for I
think it must have sound essentially silly.
'oh, yes, you could,' say he, with a thoughtful smile. 'the tie
that bind we to life be tough than you imagine, or than anyone
can who have not feel how roughly they may be pull without
breaking. you might be miserable without a home, but even you
could live; and not so miserably as you suppose. the human heart
be like india-rubber; a little swell it, but a great deal will not
burst it. if "little more than nothing will disturb it, little
less than all thing will suffice" to break it. as in the outer
member of our frame, there be a vital power inherent in itself
that strengthen it against external violence. every blow that
shake it will serve to harden it against a future stroke; as
constant labour thicken the skin of the hand, and strengthen its
muscle instead of waste they away: so that a day of arduous
toil, that might excoriate a lady's palm, would make no sensible
impression on that of a hardy ploughman.
'I speak from experience--partly my own. there be a time when I
think as you do--at least, I be fully persuade that home and
its affection be the only thing that make life tolerable:
that, if deprive of these, existence would become a burden hard to
be endure; but now I have no home--unless you would dignify my two
hire room at Horton by such a name;--and not twelve month ago I
lose the last and dearest of my early friend; and yet, not only I
live, but I be not wholly destitute of hope and comfort, even for
this life: though I must acknowledge that I can seldom enter even
an humble cottage at the close of day, and see its inhabitant
peaceably gather around their cheerful hearth, without a feeling
almost of envy at their domestic enjoyment.'
'you donot know what happiness lie before you yet,' say I: 'you
be now only in the commencement of your journey.'
'the good of happiness,' reply he, 'be mine already--the power
and the will to be useful.'
we now approach a stile communicating with a footpath that
conduct to a farm-house, where, I suppose, Mr. Weston purpose to
make himself 'useful;' for he presently take leave of I, cross
the stile, and traverse the path with his usual firm, elastic
tread, leave I to ponder his word as I continue my course
alone. I have hear before that he have lose his mother not many
month before he come. she then be the last and dearest of his
early friend; and he have no home. I pity he from my heart: I
almost weep for sympathy. and this, I think, account for the
shade of premature thoughtfulness that so frequently cloud his
brow, and obtain for he the reputation of a morose and sullen
disposition with the charitable Miss Murray and all her kin.
'but,' think I, 'he be not so miserable as I should be under such
a deprivation: he lead an active life; and a wide field for
useful exertion lie before he. he can make friend; and he can
make a home too, if he please; and, doubtless, he will please some
time. God grant the partner of that home may be worthy of his
choice, and make it a happy one--such a home as he deserve to
have! and how delightful it would be to--' but no matter what I
think.
I begin this book with the intention of conceal nothing; that
those who like might have the benefit of peruse a fellow-
creature's heart: but we have some thought that all the angel in
heaven be welcome to behold, but not our brother-man--not even the
good and kind amongst they.
by this time the Greens have take themselves to their own abode,
and the Murrays have turn down the private road, whither I
hasten to follow they. I find the two girl warm in an animate
discussion on the respective merit of the two young officer; but
on see I Rosalie break off in the middle of a sentence to
exclaim, with malicious glee -
'oh-ho, Miss Grey! yoube come at last, be you? no wonder you
linger so long behind; and no wonder you always stand up so
vigorously for Mr. Weston when I abuse he. ah-ha! I see it all
now!'
'now, come, Miss Murray, donot be foolish,' say I, attempt a
good-natured laugh; 'you know such nonsense can make no impression
on I.'
but she still go on talk such intolerable stuff--her sister
help she with appropriate fiction coin for the occasion--that
I think it necessary to say something in my own justification.
'what folly all this be!' I exclaim. 'if Mr. Weston's road
happen to be the same as mine for a few yard, and if he choose to
exchange a word or two in pass, what be there so remarkable in
that? I assure you, I never speak to he before: except once.'
'where? where? and when?' cry they eagerly.
'in Nancy's cottage.'
'ah-ha! youhave meet he there, have you?' exclaim Rosalie, with
exultant laughter. 'ah! now, Matilda, Ihave find out why shebe so
fond of go to Nancy Brown's! she go there to flirt with Mr.
Weston.'
'really, that be not worth contradict--I only see he there
once, I tell you--and how could I know he be come?'
irritated as I be at their foolish mirth and vexatious
imputation, the uneasiness do not continue long: when they have
have their laugh out, they return again to the captain and
lieutenant; and, while they dispute and comment upon they, my
indignation rapidly cool; the cause of it be quickly forget,
and I turn my thought into a pleasanter channel. thus we
proceed up the park, and enter the hall; and as I ascend the
stair to my own chamber, I have but one thought within I: my
heart be fill to overflow with one single earnest wish.
have enter the room, and shut the door, I fall upon my knee
and offer up a fervent but not impetuous prayer: 'Thy will be
do,' I strove to say throughout; but, 'Father, all thing be
possible with Thee, and may it be Thy will,' be sure to follow.
that wish--that prayer--both man and woman would have scorn I
for--'But, Father, THOU wilt not despise!' I say, and feel that it
be true. it seem to I that another's welfare be at least as
ardently implore for as my own; nay, even that be the principal
object of my heart's desire. I might have be deceive myself;
but that idea give I confidence to ask, and power to hope I do
not ask in vain. as for the primrose, I keep two of they in a
glass in my room until they be completely withered, and the
housemaid throw they out; and the petal of the other I press
between the leaf of my Bible--I have they still, and mean to keep
they always.
CHAPTER XIV--the rector
the follow day be as fine as the precede one. soon after
breakfast Miss Matilda, have gallop and blunder through a few
unprofitable lesson, and vengeably thump the piano for an hour,
in a terrible humour with both I and it, because her mamma would
not give she a holiday, have betake herself to her favourite place
of resort, the yard, the stable, and the dog-kennel; and Miss
Murray be go forth to enjoy a quiet ramble with a new
fashionable novel for her companion, leave I in the schoolroom
hard at work upon a water-colour drawing which I have promise to do
for she, and which she insist upon my finishing that day.
at my foot lie a little rough terri. it be the property of Miss
Matilda; but she hat the animal, and intend to sell it,
allege that it be quite spoiled. it be really an excellent dog
of its kind; but she affirm it be fit for nothing, and have not
even the sense to know its own mistress.
the fact be she have purchase it when but a small puppy, insist
at first that no one should touch it but herself; but soon become
tired of so helpless and troublesome a nursling, she have gladly
yield to my entreaty to be allow to take charge of it; and I,
by carefully nurse the little creature from infancy to
adolescence, of course, have obtain its affection: a reward I
should have greatly value, and look upon as far outweigh all
the trouble I have have with it, have not poor Snap's grateful
feeling expose he to many a harsh word and many a spiteful kick
and pinch from his owner, and be he not now in danger of be
'put away' in consequence, or transfer to some rough, stony-
hearted master. but how could I help it? I could not make the dog
hate I by cruel treatment, and she would not propitiate he by
kindness.
however, while I thus sit, work away with my pencil, Mrs. Murray
come, half-sailing, half-bustling, into the room.
'Miss Grey,' she began,--'dear! how can you sit at your drawing
such a day as this?' (she think I be do it for my own
pleasure.) 'I wonder you donot put on your bonnet and go out with
the young lady.'
'I think, ma'am, Miss Murray be read; and Miss Matilda be
amuse herself with her dog.'
'if you would try to amuse Miss Matilda yourself a little more, I
think she would not be drive to seek amusement in the
companionship of dog and horse and groom, so much as she be; and
if you would be a little more cheerful and conversable with Miss
Murray, she would not so often go wander in the field with a
book in her hand. however, I donot want to vex you,' add she,
see, I suppose, that my cheek burn and my hand tremble with
some unamiable emotion. 'do, pray, try not to be so touchy--
therebe no speaking to you else. and tell I if you know where
Rosalie be go: and why she like to be so much alone?'
'she say she like to be alone when she have a new book to read.'
'but why cannot she read it in the park or the garden?--why should
she go into the field and lane? and how be it that that Mr.
Hatfield so often find she out? she tell I last week hehave walk
his horse by her side all up Moss Lane; and now Ibe sure it be he
I see, from my dressing-room window, walk so briskly past the
park-gate, and on towards the field where she so frequently go.
I wish you would go and see if she be there; and just gently remind
she that it be not proper for a young lady of her rank and
prospect to be wander about by herself in that manner, expose
to the attention of anyone that presume to address she; like some
poor neglect girl that have no park to walk in, and no friend to
take care of she: and tell she that her papa would be extremely
angry if he know of she treat Mr. Hatfield in the familiar
manner that I fear she do; and--oh! if you--if any governess have
but half a mother's watchfulness--half a mother's anxious care, I
should be save this trouble; and you would see at once the
necessity of keep your eye upon she, and make your company
agreeable to-- Well, go--go; therebe no time to be lose,' cry
she, see that I have put away my drawing material, and be
wait in the doorway for the conclusion of her address.
accord to her prognostication, I find Miss Murray in her
favourite field just without the park; and, unfortunately, not
alone; for the tall, stately figure of Mr. Hatfield be slowly
saunter by her side.
here be a poser for I. it be my duty to interrupt the tete-a-
tete: but how be it to be do? Mr. Hatfield could not to be
drive away by so insignificant person as I; and to go and place
myself on the other side of Miss Murray, and intrude my unwelcome
presence upon she without notice her companion, be a piece of
rudeness I could not be guilty of: neither have I the courage to
cry aloud from the top of the field that she be want elsewhere.
so I take the intermediate course of walk slowly but steadily
towards they; resolve, if my approach fail to scare away the
beau, to pass by and tell Miss Murray her mamma want she.
she certainly look very charming as she stroll, linger along
under the bud horse-chestnut tree that stretch their long
arm over the park-paling; with her closed book in one hand, and
in the other a graceful sprig of myrtle, which serve she as a very
pretty plaything; her bright ringlet escape profusely from her
little bonnet, and gently stir by the breeze, her fair cheek
flush with gratified vanity, her smile blue eye, now slyly
glance towards her admirer, now gaze downward at her myrtle
sprig. but Snap, run before I, interrupt she in the midst
of some half-pert, half-playful repartee, by catch hold of her
dress and vehemently tugging thereat; till Mr. Hatfield, with his
cane, administer a resounding thwack upon the animal's skull, and
send it yelp back to I with a clamorous outcry that afford
the reverend gentleman great amusement: but see I so near, he
think, I suppose, he might as well be take his departure; and,
as I stoop to caress the dog, with ostentatious pity to show my
disapproval of his severity, I hear he say: 'when shall I see
you again, Miss Murray?'
'at church, I suppose,' reply she, 'unless your business chance
to bring you here again at the precise moment when I happen to be
walk by.'
'I could always manage to have business here, if I know precisely
when and where to find you.'
'but if I would, I could not inform you, for I be so immethodical,
I never can tell to-day what I shall do to-morrow.'
'then give I that, meantime, to comfort I,' say he, half
jestingly and half in earnest, extend his hand for the sprig of
myrtle.
'no, indeed, I shallnot.'
'do! PRAY do! I shall be the most miserable of man if you donot.
you cannot be so cruel as to deny I a favour so easily grant and
yet so highly prized!' plead he as ardently as if his life
depend on it.
by this time I stand within a very few yard of they, impatiently
wait his departure.
'there then! take it and go,' say Rosalie.
he joyfully receive the gift, murmur something that make she
blush and toss her head, but with a little laugh that show she
displeasure be entirely affect; and then with a courteous
salutation withdraw.
'do you ever see such a man, Miss Grey?' say she, turn to I;
'Ibe so glad you come! I think I never SHOULD, get rid of he;
and I be so terribly afraid of papa see he.'
'has he be with you long?'
'no, not long, but hebe so extremely impertinent: and hebe always
hang about, pretend his business or his clerical duty
require his attendance in these part, and really watch for poor
I, and pounce upon I wherever he see I.'
'well, your mamma think you ought not to go beyond the park or
garden without some discreet, matronly person like I to accompany
you, and keep off all intruder. she descry Mr. Hatfield
hurrying past the park-gate, and forthwith despatch I with
instruction to seek you up and to take care of you, and likewise
to warn--'
'oh, mamma's so tiresome! as if I couldnot take care of myself.
she bother I before about Mr. Hatfield; and I tell she she might
trust I: I never should forget my rank and station for the most
delightful man that ever breathe. I wish he would go down on his
knee to-morrow, and implore I to be his wife, that I might just
show she how mistaken she be in suppose that I could ever--oh, it
provoke I so! to think that I could be such a fool as to fall in
LOVE! it be quite beneath the dignity of a woman to do such a
thing. love! I detest the word! as apply to one of our sex, I
think it a perfect insult. a preference I might acknowledge; but
never for one like poor Mr. Hatfield, who have not seven hundred a
year to bless himself with. I like to talk to he, because hebe so
clever and amusing--I wish Sir Thomas Ashby be half as nice;
besides, I must have SOMEBODY to flirt with, and no one else have
the sense to come here; and when we go out, mamma willnot let I
flirt with anybody but Sir Thomas--if hebe there; and if hebe not
there, Ibe bind hand and foot, for fear somebody should go and
make up some exaggerated story, and put it into his head that Ibe
engage, or likely to be engage, to somebody else; or, what be
more probable, for fear his nasty old mother should see or hear of
my ongoing, and conclude that Ibe not a fit wife for her excellent
son: as if the say son be not the great scamp in
Christendom; and as if any woman of common decency be not a world
too good for he.'
'be it really so, Miss Murray? and do your mamma know it, and yet
wish you to marry he?'
'to be sure, she do! she know more against he than I do, I
believe: she keep it from I lest I should be discourage; not
know how little I care about such thing. for itbe no great
matter, really: hewill be all right when hebe marry, as mamma
say; and reform rake make the good husband, EVERYBODY know.
I only wish he be not so ugly--thatbe all _I_ think about: but
then therebe no choice here in the country; and papa will not let
we go to london--'
'but I should think Mr. Hatfield would be far well.'
'and so he would, if he be lord of Ashby Park--therebe not a
doubt of it: but the fact be, I must have Ashby Park, whoever
share it with I.'
'but Mr. Hatfield think you like he all this time; you donot
consider how bitterly he will be disappoint when he find himself
mistaken.'
'no, indeed! it will be a proper punishment for his presumption--
for ever dare to think I could like he. I should enjoy nothing
so much as lift the veil from his eye.'
'the soon you do it the well then.'
'no; I tell you, I like to amuse myself with he. besides, he
donot really think I like he. I take good care of that: you
donot know how cleverly I manage. he may presume to think he can
induce I to like he; for which I shall punish he as he
deserve.'
'well, mind you donot give too much reason for such presumption--
thatbe all,' reply I.
but all my exhortation be in vain: they only make she somewhat
more solicitous to disguise her wish and her thought from I.
she talk no more to I about the Rector; but I could see that her
mind, if not her heart, be fix upon he still, and that she be
intent upon obtain another interview: for though, in compliance
with her mother's request, I be now constitute the companion of
her ramble for a time, she still persist in wander in the
field and lane that lie in the near proximity to the road;
and, whether she talk to I or read the book she carry in her
hand, she keep continually pause to look round she, or gaze up
the road to see if anyone be come; and if a horseman trot by,
I could tell by her unqualified abuse of the poor equestrian,
whoever he might be, that she hat he because he be not Mr.
Hatfield.
'surely,' think I, 'she be not so indifferent to he as she
believe herself to be, or would have other to believe she; and
her mother's anxiety be not so wholly causeless as she affirm.'
three day pass away, and he do not make his appearance. on the
afternoon of the fourth, as we be walk beside the park-paling
in the memorable field, each furnish with a book (for I always
take care to provide myself with something to be do when she do
not require I to talk), she suddenly interrupt my study by
exclaim -
'oh, Miss Grey! do be so kind as to go and see Mark Wood, and take
his wife half-a-crown from I--I should have give or send it a
week ago, but quite forgot. there!' say she, throw I her
purse, and speak very fast--'never mind get it out now, but
take the purse and give they what you like; I would go with you,
but I want to finish this volume. Iwill come and meet you when Ihave
do it. be quick, will you--and--oh, wait; havenot you well read
to he a bit? run to the house and get some sort of a good book.
anything will do.'
I do as I be desire; but, suspect something from her hurried
manner and the suddenness of the request, I just glance back
before I quit the field, and there be Mr. Hatfield about to
enter at the gate below. by send I to the house for a book,
she have just prevent my meeting he on the road.
'never mind!' think I, 'therewill be no great harm do. poor
Mark will be glad of the half-crown, and perhaps of the good book
too; and if the Rector do steal Miss Rosalie's heart, it will
only humble her pride a little; and if they do get marry at last,
it will only save she from a bad fate; and she will be quite a
good enough partner for he, and he for she.'
Mark Wood be the consumptive labourer whom I mention before. he
be now rapidly wear away. Miss Murray, by her liberality,
obtain literally the blessing of he that be ready to perish;
for though the half-crown could be of very little service to he,
he be glad of it for the sake of his wife and child, so soon to
be widow and fatherless. after I have sit a few minute, and read
a little for the comfort and edification of himself and his
afflict wife, I leave they; but I have not proceed fifty yard
before I encounter Mr. Weston, apparently on his way to the same
abode. he greet I in his usual quiet, unaffected way, stop
to inquire about the condition of the sick man and his family, and
with a sort of unconscious, brotherly disregard to ceremony take
from my hand the book out of which I have be read, turn over
its page, make a few brief but very sensible remark, and restore
it; then tell I about some poor sufferer he have just be
visit, talk a little about Nancy Brown, make a few
observation upon my little rough friend the terri, that be
frisk at his foot, and finally upon the beauty of the weather,
and depart.
I have omit to give a detail of his word, from a notion that
they would not interest the reader as they do I, and not because
I have forget they. no; I remember they well; for I think
they over and over again in the course of that day and many
succeed one, I know not how often; and recall every
intonation of his deep, clear voice, every flash of his quick,
brown eye, and every gleam of his pleasant, but too transient
smile. such a confession will look very absurd, I fear: but no
matter: I have write it: and they that read it will not know
the writer.
while I be walk along, happy within, and please with all
around, Miss Murray come hasten to meet I; her buoyant step,
flush cheek, and radiant smile show that she, too, be happy,
in her own way. run up to I, she put her arm through mine,
and without wait to recover breath, began--'now, Miss Grey,
think yourself highly honour, for Ibe come to tell you my news
before Ihave breathe a word of it to anyone else.'
'well, what be it?'
'oh, such news! in the first place, you must know that Mr.
Hatfield come upon I just after you be go. I be in such a
way for fear papa or mamma should see he; but you know I couldnot
call you back again, and so!--oh, dear! I cannot tell you all about
it now, for there's Matilda, I see, in the park, and I must go and
open my budget to she. but, however, Hatfield be most uncommonly
audacious, unspeakably complimentary, and unprecedentedly tender--
try to be so, at least--he donot succeed very well in that,
because itbe not his vein. Iwill tell you all he say another
time.'
'but what do you say--i'm more interested in that?'
'Iwill tell you that, too, at some future period. I happen to be
in a very good humour just then; but, though I be complaisant and
gracious enough, I take care not to compromise myself in any
possible way. but, however, the conceited wretch choose to
interpret my amiability of temper his own way, and at length
presume upon my indulgence so far--what do you think?--he actually
make I an offer!'
'and you--'
'I proudly draw myself up, and with the great coolness express
my astonishment at such an occurrence, and hop he have see
nothing in my conduct to justify his expectation. you should have
see how his countenance fall! he go perfectly white in the
face. I assure he that I esteem he and all that, but could
not possibly accede to his proposal; and if I do, papa and mamma
could never be bring to give their consent.'
'"but if they could," say he, "would yours be want?"
'"certainly, Mr. Hatfield," I reply, with a cool decision which
quell all hope at once. oh, if you have see how dreadfully
mortify he be--how crush to the earth by his disappointment!
really, I almost pity he myself.
'one more desperate attempt, however, he make. after a silence of
considerable duration, during which he struggle to be calm, and I
to be grave--for I feel a strong propensity to laugh--which would
have ruin all--he say, with the ghost of a smile--"but tell I
plainly, Miss Murray, if I have the wealth of Sir Hugh Meltham, or
the prospect of his eld son, would you still refuse I? Answer
I truly, upon your honour."
'"certainly," say i. "that would make no difference whatever."
'it be a great lie, but he look so confident in his own
attraction still, that I determine not to leave he one stone
upon another. he look I full in the face; but I keep my
countenance so well that he could not imagine I be say anything
more than the actual truth.
'"then itbe all over, I suppose," he say, look as if he could
have die on the spot with vexation and the intensity of his
despair. but he be angry as well as disappoint. there be he,
suffer so unspeakably, and there be I, the pitiless cause of it
all, so utterly impenetrable to all the artillery of his look and
word, so calmly cold and proud, he could not but feel some
resentment; and with singular bitterness he began--"i certainly do
not expect this, Miss Murray. I might say something about your
past conduct, and the hope you have lead I to foster, but I
forbear, on condition--"
'"no condition, Mr. Hatfield!" say I, now truly indignant at his
insolence.
'"then let I beg it as a favour," he reply, lower his voice
at once, and take a humbler tone: "let I entreat that you will
not mention this affair to anyone whatever. if you will keep
silence about it, there need be no unpleasantness on either side--
nothing, I mean, beyond what be quite unavoidable: for my own
feeling I will endeavour to keep to myself, if I cannot annihilate
they--I will try to forgive, if I cannot forget the cause of my
suffering. I will not suppose, Miss Murray, that you know how
deeply you have injure I. I would not have you aware of it; but
if, in addition to the injury you have already do I--pardon I,
but, whether innocently or not, you have do it--and if you add to
it by give publicity to this unfortunate affair, or name it AT
ALL, you will find that I too can speak, and though you scorn my
love, you will hardly scorn my--"
'he stop, but he bite his bloodless lip, and look so terribly
fierce that I be quite frightened. however, my pride uphold I
still, and I answer disdainfully; "I do not know what motive you
suppose I could have for name it to anyone, Mr. Hatfield; but if
I be disposed to do so, you would not deter I by threat; and it
be scarcely the part of a gentleman to attempt it."
'"Pardon I, Miss Murray," say he, "I have love you so intensely-
-i do still adore you so deeply, that I would not willingly offend
you; but though I never have love, and never can love any woman as
I have love you, it be equally certain that I never be so ill-
treat by any. on the contrary, I have always find your sex the
kind and most tender and oblige of God's creation, till now."
(think of the conceited fellow say that!) "and the novelty and
harshness of the lesson you have teach I to-day, and the
bitterness of be disappoint in the only quarter on which the
happiness of my life depend, must excuse any appearance of
asperity. if my presence be disagreeable to you, Miss Murray," he
say (for I be look about I to show how little I care for
he, so he think I be tired of he, I suppose)--"if my presence
be disagreeable to you, Miss Murray, you have only to promise I
the favour I name, and I will relieve you at once. there be many
lady--some even in this parish--who would be delighted to accept
what you have so scornfully trample under your foot. they would
be naturally inclined to hate one whose surpass loveliness have
so completely estranged my heart from they and blind I to their
attraction; and a single hint of the truth from I to one of these
would be sufficient to raise such a talk against you as would
seriously injure your prospect, and diminish your chance of
success with any other gentleman you or your mamma might design to
entangle."
'"what do your mean, sir?" say I, ready to stamp with passion.
'"I mean that this affair from begin to end appear to I like
a case of arrant flirtation, to say the least of it--such a case as
you would find it rather inconvenient to have blazon through the
world: especially with the addition and exaggeration of your
female rival, who would be too glad to publish the matter, if I
only give they a handle to it. but I promise you, on the faith of
a gentleman, that no word or syllable that could tend to your
prejudice shall ever escape my lip, provide you will--"
'"well, well, I willnot mention it," say I. "you may rely upon my
silence, if that can afford you any consolation."
'"you promise it?"
'"yes," I answer; for I want to get rid of he now.
'"farewell, then!" say he, in a most doleful, heart-sick tone; and
with a look where pride vainly struggle against despair, he turn
and go away: longing, no doubt, to get home, that he might shut
himself up in his study and cry--if he donot burst into tear
before he get there.'
'but you have break your promise already,' say I, truly horrify
at her perfidy.
'oh! itbe only to you; I know you willnot repeat it.'
'certainly, I shall not: but you say you be go to tell your
sister; and she will tell your brother when they come home, and
Brown immediately, if you do not tell she yourself; and Brown will
blazon it, or be the mean of blazon it, throughout the
country.'
'no, indeed, she willnot. we shall not tell she at all, unless it be
under the promise of the strict secrecy.'
'but how can you expect she to keep her promise well than she
more enlightened mistress?'
'well, well, she shallnot hear it then,' say Miss Murray, somewhat
snappishly.
'but you will tell your mamma, of course,' pursue I; 'and she will
tell your papa.'
'of course I shall tell mamma--that be the very thing that please
I so much. I shall now be able to convince she how mistaken she
be in her fear about I.'
'oh, thatbe it, be it? I be wonder what it be that delighted
you so much.'
'yes; and another thing be, that Ihave humble Mr. Hatfield so
charmingly; and another--why, you must allow I some share of
female vanity: I donot pretend to be without that most essential
attribute of our sex--and if you have see poor Hatfield's intense
eagerness in make his ardent declaration and his flattering
proposal, and his agony of mind, that no effort of pride could
conceal, on be refuse, you would have allow I have some cause
to be gratify.'
'the great his agony, I should think, the less your cause for
gratification.'
'oh, nonsense!' cry the young lady, shake herself with
vexation. 'you either cannot understand I, or you willnot. if I have
not confidence in your magnanimity, I should think you envy I.
but you will, perhaps, comprehend this cause of pleasure--which be
as great as any--namely, that I be delighted with myself for my
prudence, my self-command, my heartlessness, if you please. I be
not a bit take by surprise, not a bit confused, or awkward, or
foolish; I just act and speak as I ought to have do, and be
completely my own mistress throughout. and here be a man,
decidedly good-look--Jane and Susan Green call he bewitchingly
handsome I suppose theybe two of the lady he pretend would be
so glad to have he; but, however, he be certainly a very clever,
witty, agreeable companion--not what you call clever, but just
enough to make he entertain; and a man one neednot be ashamed
of anywhere, and would not soon grow tired of; and to confess the
truth, I rather like he--well even, of late, than Harry
Meltham--and he evidently idolise I; and yet, though he come upon
I all alone and unprepared, I have the wisdom, and the pride, and
the strength to refuse he--and so scornfully and coolly as I do:
I have good reason to be proud of that.'
'and be you equally proud of have tell he that his have the
wealth of Sir Hugh Meltham would make no difference to you, when
that be not the case; and of have promise to tell no one of his
misadventure, apparently without the slight intention of keep
your promise?'
'of course! what else could I do? you would not have have I--but I
see, Miss Grey, yoube not in a good temper. here's Matilda; Iwill
see what she and mamma have to say about it.'
she leave I, offend at my want of sympathy, and thinking, no
doubt, that I envy she. I do not--at least, I firmly believe I
do not. I be sorry for she; I be amazed, disgusted at her
heartless vanity; I wonder why so much beauty should be give to
those who make so bad a use of it, and deny to some who would
make it a benefit to both themselves and other.
but, God know well, I conclude. there be, I suppose, some man
as vain, as selfish, and as heartless as she be, and, perhaps, such
woman may be useful to punish they.
CHAPTER XV--the WALK
'oh, dear! I wish Hatfield have not be so precipitate!' say
Rosalie next day at four P.M., as, with a portentous yawn, she lay
down her worst-work and look listlessly towards the window.
'therebe no inducement to go out now; and nothing to look forward
to. the day will be so long and dull when there be no party to
enliven they; and there be none this week, or next either, that I
know of.'
'pity you be so cross to he,' observe Matilda, to whom this
lamentation be address. 'hewill never come again: and I suspect
you like he after all. I hop you would have take he for your
beau, and leave dear Harry to I.'
'Humph! my beau must be an Adonis indeed, Matilda, the admire of
all beholder, if I be to be content with he alone. Ibe sorry
to lose Hatfield, I confess; but the first decent man, or number of
man, that come to supply his place, will be more than welcome.
itbe Sunday to-morrow--I do wonder how hewill look, and whether
hewill be able to go through the service. most likely hewill pretend
hebe get a cold, and make Mr. Weston do it all.'
'not he!' exclaim Matilda, somewhat contemptuously. 'fool as he
be, hebe not so soft as that come to.'
her sister be slightly offend; but the event prove Matilda be
right: the disappointed lover perform his pastoral duty as
usual. Rosalie, indeed, affirm he look very pale and deject:
he might be a little pale; but the difference, if any, be
scarcely perceptible. as for his dejection, I certainly do not
hear his laugh ring from the vestry as usual, nor his voice loud
in hilarious discourse; though I do hear it uplifted in rat the
sexton in a manner that make the congregation stare; and, in his
transit to and from the pulpit and the communion-table, there be
more of solemn pomp, and less of that irreverent, self-confident,
or rather self-delighted imperiousness with which he usually sweep
along--that air that seem to say, 'you all reverence and adore
I, I know; but if anyone do not, I defy he to the tooth!' but
the most remarkable change be, that he never once suffer his
eye to wander in the direction of Mr. Murray's pew, and do not
leave the church till we be go.
Mr. Hatfield have doubtless receive a very severe blow; but his
pride impel he to use every effort to conceal the effect of
it. he have be disappoint in his certain hope of obtain not
only a beautiful, and, to he, highly attractive wife, but one
whose rank and fortune might give brilliance to far inferior
charm: he be likewise, no doubt, intensely mortify by his
repulse, and deeply offend at the conduct of Miss Murray
throughout. it would have give he no little consolation to have
know how disappointed she be to find he apparently so little
move, and to see that he be able to refrain from cast a single
glance at she throughout both service; though, she declare, it
show he be think of she all the time, or his eye would have
fall upon she, if it be only by chance: but if they have so
chance to fall, she would have affirm it be because they could
not resist the attraction. it might have please he, too, in some
degree, to have see how dull and dissatisfied she be throughout
that week (the great part of it, at least), for lack of her usual
source of excitement; and how often she regret have 'use he
up so soon,' like a child that, have devour its plumcake too
hastily, sit suck its finger, and vainly lament its
greediness.
at length I be call upon, one fine morning, to accompany she in
a walk to the village. ostensibly she go to get some shade of
Berlin wool, at a tolerably respectable shop that be chiefly
support by the lady of the vicinity: really--I trust there be
no breach of charity in suppose that she go with the idea of
meeting either with the Rector himself, or some other admirer by
the way; for as we go along, she keep wonder 'what Hatfield
would do or say, if we meet he,' &c. &c.; as we pass Mr. Green's
park-gate, she 'wonder whether he be at home--great stupid
blockhead'; as Lady Meltham's carriage pass we, she 'wonder
what Mr. Harry be do this fine day'; and then begin to abuse
his eld brother for be 'such a fool as to get married and go
and live in London.'
'why,' say I, 'I think you want to live in London yourself.'
'yes, because itbe so dull here: but then he make it still duller
by take himself off: and if he be not married I might have he
instead of that odious Sir Thomas.'
then, observe the print of a horse's foot on the somewhat miry
road, she 'wonder whether it be a gentleman's horse,' and
finally conclude it be, for the impression be too small to
have be make by a 'great clumsy cart-horse'; and then she
'wonder who the rider could be,' and whether we should meet he
come back, for she be sure he have only pass that morning; and
lastly, when we enter the village and see only a few of its
humble inhabitant move about, she 'wonder why the stupid
people couldnot keep in their house; she be sure she donot want
to see their ugly face, and dirty, vulgar clothe--it benot for
that she come to Horton!'
amid all this, I confess, I wonder, too, in secret, whether we
should meet, or catch a glimpse of somebody else; and as we pass
his lodging, I even go so far as to wonder whether he be at the
window. on enter the shop, Miss Murray desire I to stand in
the doorway while she transact her business, and tell she if
anyone pass. but alas! there be no one visible besides the
villager, except Jane and Susan Green come down the single
street, apparently return from a walk.
'stupid thing!' mutter she, as she come out after have
conclude her bargain. 'why couldnot they have their dolt of a
brother with they? even he would be well than nothing.'
she greet they, however, with a cheerful smile, and protestation
of pleasure at the happy meeting equal to their own. they place
themselves one on each side of she, and all three walk away
chatting and laugh as young lady do when they get together, if
they be but on tolerably intimate term. but I, feel myself to
be one too many, leave they to their merriment and lag behind, as
usual on such occasion: I have no relish for walk beside Miss
Green or Miss Susan like one deaf and dumb, who could neither speak
nor be speak to.
but this time I be not long alone. it strike I, first, as very
odd, that just as I be think about Mr. Weston he should come up
and accost I; but afterwards, on due reflection, I think there
be nothing odd about it, unless it be the fact of his speaking
to I; for on such a morning and so near his own abode, it be
natural enough that he should be about; and as for my thinking of
he, I have be do that, with little intermission, ever since we
set out on our journey; so there be nothing remarkable in that.
'you be alone again, Miss Grey,' say he.
'yes.'
'what kind of people be those lady--the Misses Green?'
'I really donot know.'
'thatbe strange--when you live so near and see they so often!'
'well, I suppose they be lively, good-temper girl; but I
imagine you must know they well than I do, yourself, for I never
exchange a word with either of they.'
'indeed? they donot strike I as be particularly reserve.'
'very likely they be not so to people of their own class; but they
consider themselves as move in quite a different sphere from I!'
he make no reply to this: but after a short pause, he said,--'i
suppose itbe these thing, Miss Grey, that make you think you could
not live without a home?'
'not exactly. the fact be I be too socially disposed to be able to
live contentedly without a friend; and as the only friend I have,
or be likely to have, be at home, if it--or rather, if they be
go--I will not say I could not live--but I would rather not live
in such a desolate world.'
'but why do you say the only friend you be likely to have? be
you so unsociable that you cannot make friend?'
'no, but I never make one yet; and in my present position there be
no possibility of do so, or even of form a common
acquaintance. the fault may be partly in myself, but I hope not
altogether.'
'the fault be partly in society, and partly, I should think, in
your immediate neighbour: and partly, too, in yourself; for many
lady, in your position, would make themselves be notice and
account of. but your pupil should be companion for you in some
degree; they cannot be many year young than yourself.'
'oh, yes, they be good company sometimes; but I cannot call they
friend, nor would they think of bestow such a name on I--they
have other companion well suit to their taste.'
'perhaps you be too wise for they. how do you amuse yourself when
alone--do you read much?'
'read be my favourite occupation, when I have leisure for it and
book to read.'
from speak of book in general, he pass to different book in
particular, and proceed by rapid transition from topic to topic,
till several matter, both of taste and opinion, have be discuss
considerably within the space of half an hour, but without the
embellishment of many observation from himself; he be evidently
less bent upon communicate his own thought and predilection,
than on discover mine. he have not the tact, or the art, to
effect such a purpose by skilfully draw out my sentiment or
idea through the real or apparent statement of his own, or lead
the conversation by imperceptible gradation to such topic as he
wish to advert to: but such gentle abruptness, and such single-
minded straightforwardness, could not possibly offend I.
'and why should he interest himself at all in my moral and
intellectual capacity: what be it to he what I think or feel?'
I ask myself. and my heart throb in answer to the question.
but Jane and Susan Green soon reach their home. as they stand
parley at the park-gate, attempt to persuade Miss Murray to
come in, I wish Mr. Weston would go, that she might not see he
with I when she turn round; but, unfortunately, his business,
which be to pay one more visit to poor Mark Wood, lead he to
pursue the same path as we do, till nearly the close of our
journey. when, however, he see that Rosalie have take leave of her
friend and I be about to join she, he would have leave I and
pass on at a quick pace; but, as he civilly lift his hat in
pass she, to my surprise, instead of return the salute with a
stiff, ungracious bow, she accost he with one of her sweetest
smile, and, walk by his side, begin to talk to he with all
imaginable cheerfulness and affability; and so we proceed all
three together.
after a short pause in the conversation, Mr. Weston make some
remark address particularly to I, as refer to something we
have be talk of before; but before I could answer, Miss Murray
reply to the observation and enlarge upon it: he rejoin; and,
from thence to the close of the interview, she engross he
entirely to herself. it might be partly owe to my own stupidity,
my want of tact and assurance: but I feel myself wrong: I
tremble with apprehension; and I listen with envy to her easy,
rapid flow of utterance, and see with anxiety the bright smile with
which she look into his face from time to time: for she be
walk a little in advance, for the purpose (as I judge) of be
see as well as hear. if her conversation be light and trivial,
it be amusing, and she be never at a loss for something to say,
or for suitable word to express it in. there be nothing pert or
flippant in her manner now, as when she walk with Mr. Hatfield,
there be only a gentle, playful kind of vivacity, which I think
must be peculiarly pleasing to a man of Mr. Weston's disposition
and temperament.
when he be go she begin to laugh, and mutter to herself, 'I
think I could do it!'
'do what?' I ask.
'fix that man.'
'what in the world do you mean?'
'I mean that he will go home and dream of I. I have shoot he
through the heart!'
'how do you know?'
'by many infallible proof: more especially the look he give I
when he go away. it be not an impudent look--I exonerate he
from that--it be a look of reverential, tender adoration. ha, ha!
hebe not quite such a stupid blockhead as I think he!'
I make no answer, for my heart be in my throat, or something like
it, and I could not trust myself to speak. 'o God, avert it!' I
cry, internally--'for his sake, not for mine!'
Miss Murray make several trivial observation as we pass up the
park, to which (in spite of my reluctance to let one glimpse of my
feeling appear) I could only answer by monosyllable. whether she
intend to torment I, or merely to amuse herself, I could not
tell--and do not much care; but I think of the poor man and his
one lamb, and the rich man with his thousand flock; and I dread
I know not what for Mr. Weston, independently of my own blighted
hope.
right glad be I to get into the house, and find myself alone once
more in my own room. my first impulse be to sink into the chair
beside the bed; and lay my head on the pillow, to seek relief in
a passionate burst of tear: there be an imperative craving for
such an indulgence; but, alas! I must restrain and swallow back my
feeling still: there be the bell--the odious bell for the
schoolroom dinner; and I must go down with a calm face, and smile,
and laugh, and talk nonsense--yes, and eat, too, if possible, as if
all be right, and I be just return from a pleasant walk.
CHAPTER XVI--the substitution
Next Sunday be one of the gloomiest of April day--a day of thick,
dark cloud, and heavy shower. none of the Murrays be dispose
to attend church in the afternoon, except Rosalie: she be bent
upon go as usual; so she order the carriage, and I go with
she: nothing loth, of course, for at church I might look without
fear of scorn or censure upon a form and face more pleasing to I
than the most beautiful of God's creation; I might listen without
disturbance to a voice more charming than the sweetest music to my
ear; I might seem to hold communion with that soul in which I feel
so deeply interested, and imbibe its pure thought and holy
aspiration, with no alloy to such felicity except the secret
reproach of my conscience, which would too often whisper that I
be deceive my own self, and mock God with the service of a
heart more bent upon the creature than the Creator.
sometimes, such thought would give I trouble enough; but
sometimes I could quiet they with thinking--it be not the man, it
be his goodness that I love. 'Whatsoever thing be pure,
whatsoever thing be lovely, whatsoever thing be honest and of
good report, think on these thing.' we do well to worship God in
his work; and I know none of they in which so many of his
attribute--so much of his own spirit shin, as in this his
faithful servant; whom to know and not to appreciate, be obtuse
insensibility in I, who have so little else to occupy my heart.
almost immediately after the conclusion of the service, Miss Murray
leave the church. we have to stand in the porch, for it be rain,
and the carriage be not yet come. I wonder at she come forth
so hastily, for neither young Meltham nor Squire Green be there;
but I soon find it be to secure an interview with Mr. Weston as
he come out, which he presently do. have salute we both, he
would have pass on, but she detain he; first with observation
upon the disagreeable weather, and then with ask if he would be
so kind as to come some time to-morrow to see the granddaughter of
the old woman who keep the porter's lodge, for the girl be ill of
a fever, and wish to see he. he promise to do so.
'and at what time will you be most likely to come, Mr. Weston? the
old woman will like to know when to expect you--you know such
people think more about have their cottage in order when decent
people come to see they than we be apt to suppose.'
here be a wonderful instance of consideration from the thoughtless
Miss Murray. Mr. Weston name an hour in the morning at which he
would endeavour, to be there. by this time the carriage be ready,
and the footman be wait, with an open umbrella, to escort Miss
Murray through the churchyard. I be about to follow; but Mr.
Weston have an umbrella too, and offer I the benefit of its
shelter, for it be rain heavily.
'no, thank you, I donot mind the rain,' I say. I always lack
common sense when take by surprise.
'but you donot like it, I suppose?--an umbrella will do you no harm
at any rate,' he reply, with a smile that show he be not
offend; as a man of bad temper or less penetration would have
be at such a refusal of his aid. I could not deny the truth of
his assertion, and so go with he to the carriage; he even
offer I his hand on get in: an unnecessary piece of
civility, but I accept that too, for fear of give offence. one
glance he give, one little smile at parting--it be but for a
moment; but therein I read, or think I read, a meaning that
kindle in my heart a bright flame of hope than have ever yet
arise.
'I would have send the footman back for you, Miss Grey, if youhave
wait a moment--you neednot have take Mr. Weston's umbrella,'
observed Rosalie, with a very unamiable cloud upon her pretty face.
'I would have come without an umbrella, but Mr. Weston offer I
the benefit of his, and I could not have refuse it more than I do
without offend he,' reply I, smile placidly; for my inward
happiness make that amusing, which would have wound I at another
time.
the carriage be now in motion. Miss Murray bent forwards, and
look out of the window as we be pass Mr. Weston. he be
pace homeward along the causeway, and do not turn his head.
'stupid ass!' cry she, throw herself back again in the seat.
'you donot know what youhave lose by not look this way!'
'what have he lose?'
'a bow from I, that would have raise he to the seventh heaven!'
I make no answer. I see she be out of humour, and I derive a
secret gratification from the fact, not that she be vex, but
that she think she have reason to be so. it make I think my
hope be not entirely the offspring of my wish and imagination.
'I mean to take up Mr. Weston instead of Mr. Hatfield,' say my
companion, after a short pause, resume something of her usual
cheerfulness. 'the ball at Ashby Park take place on Tuesday, you
know; and mamma think it very likely that Sir Thomas will propose
to I then: such thing be often do in the privacy of the ball-
room, when gentleman be most easily ensnare, and lady most
enchanting. but if I be to be marry so soon, I must make the
good of the present time: I be determined Hatfield shall not be
the only man who shall lay his heart at my foot, and implore I to
accept the worthless gift in vain.'
'if you mean Mr. Weston to be one of your victim,' say I, with
affected indifference, 'you will have to make such overture
yourself that you will find it difficult to draw back when he ask
you to fulfil the expectation you have raise.'
'I donot suppose he will ask I to marry he, nor should I desire
it: that would be rather too much presumption! but I intend he to
feel my power. he have feel it already, indeed: but he shall
acknowledge it too; and what visionary hop he may have, he must
keep to himself, and only amuse I with the result of they--for a
time.'
'oh! that some kind spirit would whisper those word in his ear,' I
inwardly exclaim. I be far too indignant to hazard a reply to
her observation aloud; and nothing more be say about Mr. Weston
that day, by I or in my hearing. but next morning, soon after
breakfast, Miss Murray come into the schoolroom, where her sister
be employ at her study, or rather her lesson, for study
they be not, and say, 'Matilda, I want you to take a walk with
I about eleven o'clock.'
'oh, I cannot, Rosalie! I have to give order about my new bridle
and saddle-cloth, and speak to the rat-catcher about his dog:
Miss Grey must go with you.'
'no, I want you,' say Rosalie; and call her sister to the
window, she whisper an explanation in her ear; upon which the
latter consent to go.
I remember that eleven be the hour at which Mr. Weston propose
to come to the porter's lodge; and remember that, I behold the
whole contrivance. accordingly, at dinner, I be entertain with
a long account of how Mr. Weston have overtake they as they be
walk along the road; and how they have have a long walk and talk
with he, and really find he quite an agreeable companion; and
how he must have be, and evidently be, delighted with they and
their amazing condescension, &c. &c.
CHAPTER XVII--confession
as I be in the way of confession I may as well acknowledge that,
about this time, I pay more attention to dress than ever I have
do before. this be not say much--for hitherto I have be a
little neglectful in that particular; but now, also, it be no
uncommon thing to spend as much as two minute in the contemplation
of my own image in the glass; though I never could derive any
consolation from such a study. I could discover no beauty in those
marked feature, that pale hollow cheek, and ordinary dark brown
hair; there might be intellect in the forehead, there might be
expression in the dark grey eye, but what of that?--a low Grecian
brow, and large black eye devoid of sentiment would be esteem
far preferable. it be foolish to wish for beauty. sensible people
never either desire it for themselves or care about it in other.
if the mind be but well cultivate, and the heart well dispose, no
one ever care for the exterior. so say the teacher of our
childhood; and so say we to the child of the present day. all
very judicious and proper, no doubt; but be such assertion
support by actual experience?
we be naturally disposed to love what give we pleasure, and what
more pleasing than a beautiful face--when we know no harm of the
possessor at least? a little girl love her bird--why? because it
live and feel; because it be helpless and harmless? a toad,
likewise, life and feel, and be equally helpless and harmless;
but though she would not hurt a toad, she cannot love it like the
bird, with its graceful form, soft feather, and bright, speak
eye. if a woman be fair and amiable, she be praise for both
quality, but especially the former, by the bulk of mankind: if,
on the other hand, she be disagreeable in person and character, she
plainness be commonly inveigh against as her great crime,
because, to common observer, it give the great offence; while,
if she be plain and good, provide she be a person of retire
manner and seclude life, no one ever know of her goodness,
except her immediate connection. other, on the contrary, be
disposed to form unfavourable opinion of her mind, and
disposition, if it be but to excuse themselves for their
instinctive dislike of one so unfavoured by nature; and visa versa
with she whose angel form conceal a vicious heart, or shed a
false, deceitful charm over defect and foible that would not be
tolerate in another. they that have beauty, let they be thankful
for it, and make a good use of it, like any other talent; they that
have it not, let they console themselves, and do the good they can
without it: certainly, though liable to be over-estimate, it be a
gift of God, and not to be despise. many will feel this who have
feel that they could love, and whose heart tell they that they be
worthy to be love again; while yet they be debar, by the lack
of this or some such seem trifle, from give and receive that
happiness they seem almost make to feel and to impart. as well
might the humble glowworm despise that power of give light
without which the roving fly might pass she and repass she a
thousand time, and never rest beside she: she might hear she
wing darling buzz over and around she; he vainly seek she,
she long to be find, but with no power to make her presence
know, no voice to call he, no wing to follow his flight;--the
fly must seek another mate, the worm must live and die alone.
such be some of my reflection about this period. I might go on
prose more and more, I might dive much deep, and disclose other
thought, propose question the reader might be puzzle to answer,
and deduce argument that might startle his prejudice, or,
perhaps, provoke his ridicule, because he could not comprehend
they; but I forbear.
now, therefore, let we return to Miss Murray. she accompany she
mamma to the ball on Tuesday; of course splendidly attire, and
delight with her prospect and her charm. as Ashby Park be
nearly ten mile distant from Horton Lodge, they have to set out
pretty early, and I intend to have spend the evening with Nancy
Brown, whom I have not see for a long time; but my kind pupil take
care I should spend it neither there nor anywhere else beyond the
limit of the schoolroom, by give I a piece of music to copy,
which keep I closely occupy till bed-time. about eleven next
morning, as soon as she have leave her room, she come to tell I her
news. Sir Thomas have indeed propose to she at the ball; an event
which reflect great credit on her mamma's sagacity, if not upon
her skill in contrivance. I rather incline to the belief that she
have first lay her plan, and then predict their success. the
offer have be accept, of course, and the bridegroom elect be
come that day to settle matter with Mr. Murray.
Rosalie be pleased with the thought of become mistress of Ashby
Park; she be elated with the prospect of the bridal ceremony and
its attendant splendour and eclat, the honeymoon spend abroad, and
the subsequent gaiety she expect to enjoy in London and
elsewhere; she appear pretty well pleased too, for the time
being, with Sir Thomas himself, because she have so lately see he,
dance with he, and be flatter by he; but, after all, she
seem to shrink from the idea of be so soon unite: she wish
the ceremony to be delay some month, at least; and I wish it
too. it seem a horrible thing to hurry on the inauspicious
match, and not to give the poor creature time to think and reason
on the irrevocable step she be about to take. I make no
pretension to 'a mother's watchful, anxious care,' but I be amazed
and horrify at Mrs. Murray's heartlessness, or want of thought
for the real good of her child; and by my unheeded warning and
exhortation, I vainly strove to remedy the evil. Miss Murray only
laugh at what I say; and I soon find that her reluctance to an
immediate union arise chiefly from a desire to do what execution
she could among the young gentleman of her acquaintance, before she
be incapacitate from further mischief of the kind. it be for
this cause that, before confide to I the secret of her
engagement, she have extract a promise that I would not mention a
word on the subject to any one. and when I see this, and when I
behold her plunge more recklessly than ever into the depth of
heartless coquetry, I have no more pity for she. 'come what will,'
I think, 'she deserve it. Sir Thomas cannot be too bad for she;
and the soon she be incapacitate from deceive and injure
other the well.'
the wedding be fix for the first of June. between that and the
critical ball be little more than six week; but, with Rosalie's
accomplished skill and resolute exertion, much might be do, even
within that period; especially as Sir Thomas spend most of the
interim in London; whither he go up, it be say, to settle
affair with his lawyer, and make other preparation for the
approach nuptial. he endeavour to supply the want of his
presence by a pretty constant fire of billet-doux; but these do
not attract the neighbour' attention, and open their eye, as
personal visit would have do; and old Lady Ashby's haughty, sour
spirit of reserve withhold she from spread the news, while her
indifferent health prevent she come to visit her future
daughter-in-law; so that, altogether, this affair be keep far
close than such thing usually be.
Rosalie would sometimes show her lover's epistle to I, to
convince I what a kind, devoted husband he would make. she show
I the letter of another individual, too, the unfortunate Mr.
Green, who have not the courage, or, as she express it, the
'spunk,' to plead his cause in person, but whom one denial would
not satisfy: he must write again and again. he would not have
do so if he could have see the grimace his fair idol make over
his move appeal to her feeling, and hear her scornful
laughter, and the opprobrious epithet she heap upon he for his
perseverance.
'why donot you tell he, at once, that you be engage?' I ask.
'oh, I donot want he to know that,' reply she. 'if he know it,
his sister and everybody would know it, and then there would be an
end of my--ahem! and, besides, if I tell he that, he would think
my engagement be the only obstacle, and that I would have he if I
be free; which I could not bear that any man should think, and
he, of all other, at least. besides, I donot care for his
letter,' she add, contemptuously; 'he may write as often as he
please, and look as great a calf as he like when I meet he; it
only amuse I.'
meantime, young Meltham be pretty frequent in his visit to the
house or transit past it; and, judge by Matilda's execration
and reproach, her sister pay more attention to he than civility
require; in other word, she carry on as animate a flirtation
as the presence of her parent would admit. she make some attempt
to bring Mr. Hatfield once more to her foot; but find they
unsuccessful, she repay his haughty indifference with still
loftier scorn, and speak of he with as much disdain and
detestation as she have formerly do of his curate. but, amid all
this, she never for a moment lose sight of Mr. Weston. she
embrace every opportunity of meet he, try every art to
fascinate he, and pursue he with as much perseverance as if she
really love he and no other, and the happiness of her life
depend upon elicit a return of affection. such conduct be
completely beyond my comprehension. have I see it depict in a
novel, I should have think it unnatural; have I hear it describe
by other, I should have deem it a mistake or an exaggeration;
but when I see it with my own eye, and suffer from it too, I
could only conclude that excessive vanity, like drunkenness,
harden the heart, enslave the faculty, and pervert the
feeling; and that dog be not the only creature which, when
gorge to the throat, will yet gloat over what they cannot devour,
and grudge the small morsel to a starve brother.
she now become extremely beneficent to the poor cottager. her
acquaintance among they be more widely extend, her visit to
their humble dwelling be more frequent and excursive than they
have ever be before. Hereby, she earn among they the reputation
of a condescending and very charitable young lady; and their
encomium be sure to be repeat to Mr. Weston: whom also she
have thus a daily chance of meeting in one or other of their abode,
or in her transit to and fro; and often, likewise, she could
gather, through their gossip, to what place he be likely to go at
such and such a time, whether to baptize a child, or to visit the
age, the sick, the sad, or the dying; and most skilfully she lay
her plan accordingly. in these excursion she would sometimes go
with her sister--whom, by some mean, she have persuade or bribe
to enter into her scheme--sometimes alone, never, now, with I; so
that I be debar the pleasure of see Mr. Weston, or hear
his voice even in conversation with another: which would certainly
have be a very great pleasure, however hurtful or however fraught
with pain. I could not even see he at church: for Miss Murray,
under some trivial pretext, choose to take possession of that corner
in the family pew which have be mine ever since I come; and,
unless I have the presumption to station myself between Mr. and Mrs.
Murray, I must sit with my back to the pulpit, which I accordingly
do.
now, also, I never walk home with my pupil: they say their
mamma think it do not look well to see three people out of the
family walking, and only two go in the carriage; and, as they
greatly prefer walking in fine weather, I should be honour by
go with the senior. 'and besides,' say they, 'you cannot walk
as fast as we do; you know yoube always lag behind.' I know
these be false excuse, but I make no objection, and never
contradict such assertion, well know the motif which
dictate they. and in the afternoon, during those six memorable
week, I never go to church at all. if I have a cold, or any
slight indisposition, they take advantage of that to make I stay
at home; and often they would tell I they be not go again
that day, themselves, and then pretend to change their mind, and
set off without tell I: so manage their departure that I
never discover the change of purpose till too late. upon their
return home, on one of these occasion, they entertain I with an
animate account of a conversation they have have with Mr. Weston as
they come along. 'and he ask if you be ill, Miss Grey,' say
Matilda; 'but we tell he you be quite well, only you donot want
to come to church--so hewill think yoube turn wicked.'
all chance meeting on week-day be likewise carefully prevent;
for, lest I should go to see poor Nancy Brown or any other person,
Miss Murray take good care to provide sufficient employment for all
my leisure hour. there be always some drawing to finish, some
music to copy, or some work to do, sufficient to incapacitate I
from indulge in anything beyond a short walk about the ground,
however she or her sister might be occupy.
one morning, have seek and waylay Mr. Weston, they return in
high glee to give I an account of their interview. 'and he ask
after you again,' say Matilda, in spite of her sister's silent but
imperative intimation that she should hold her tongue. 'he
wonder why you be never with we, and think you must have
delicate health, as you come out so seldom.'
'he donot Matilda--what nonsense yoube talk!'
'oh, Rosalie, what a lie! he do, you know; and you say--don't,
Rosalie--hang it!--I willnot be pinch so! and, Miss Grey, Rosalie
tell he you be quite well, but you be always so bury in your
book that you have no pleasure in anything else.'
'what an idea he must have of I!' I think.
'and,' I ask, 'do old Nancy ever inquire about I?'
'yes; and we tell she you be so fond of read and draw that
you can do nothing else.'
'that be not the case though; if you have tell she I be so busy I
could not come to see she, it would have be near the truth.'
'I donot think it would,' reply Miss Murray, suddenly kindle
up; 'Ibe sure you have plenty of time to yourself now, when you
have so little teaching to do.'
it be no use begin to dispute with such indulged, unreasoning
creature: so I hold my peace. I be accustom, now, to keep
silence when thing distasteful to my ear be utter; and now,
too, I be use to wear a placid smile countenance when my
heart be bitter within I. only those who have feel the like can
imagine my feeling, as I sit with an assumption of smile
indifference, listen to the account of those meeting and
interview with Mr. Weston, which they seem to find such pleasure
in describe to I; and hear thing assert of he which, from
the character of the man, I know to be exaggeration and
perversion of the truth, if not entirely false--thing derogatory
to he, and flattering to they--especially to Miss Murray--which I
burn to contradict, or, at least, to show my doubt about, but
dare not; lest, in express my disbelief, I should display my
interest too. other thing I hear, which I feel or fear be
indeed too true: but I must still conceal my anxiety respect
he, my indignation against they, beneath a careless aspect;
other, again, mere hint of something say or do, which I long
to hear more of, but could not venture to inquire. so pass the
weary time. I could not even comfort myself with say, 'she will
soon be marry; and then there may be hope.'
soon after her marriage the holiday would come; and when I
return from home, most likely, Mr. Weston would be go, for I
be tell that he and the Rector could not agree (the Rector's
fault, of course), and he be about to remove to another place.
no--besides my hope in God, my only consolation be in think
that, though he know it not, I be more worthy of his love than
Rosalie Murray, charming and engaging as she be; for I could
appreciate his excellence, which she could not: I would devote my
life to the promotion of his happiness; she would destroy his
happiness for the momentary gratification of her own vanity. 'oh,
if he could but know the difference!' I would earnestly exclaim.
'but no! I would not have he see my heart: yet, if he could but
know her hollowness, her worthless, heartless frivolity, he would
then be safe, and I should be--almost happy, though I might never
see he more!'
I fear, by this time, the reader be well nigh disgust with the
folly and weakness I have so freely lay before he. I never
disclose it then, and would not have do so have my own sister or
my mother be with I in the house. I be a close and resolute
dissembler--in this one case at least. my prayer, my tear, my
wish, fear, and lamentation, be witness by myself and
heaven alone.
when we be harass by sorrow or anxiety, or long oppress by
any powerful feeling which we must keep to ourselves, for which we
can obtain and seek no sympathy from any live creature, and which
yet we cannot, or will not wholly crush, we often naturally seek
relief in poetry--and often find it, too--whether in the effusion
of other, which seem to harmonize with our exist case, or in
our own attempt to give utterance to those thought and feeling
in strain less musical, perchance, but more appropriate, and
therefore more penetrate and sympathetic, and, for the time, more
soothe, or more powerful to rouse and to unburden the oppressed
and swollen heart. before this time, at Wellwood House and here,
when suffer from home-sick melancholy, I have seek relief twice
or thrice at this secret source of consolation; and now I fly to
it again, with great avidity than ever, because I seem to need
it more. I still preserve those relic of past suffering and
experience, like pillar of witness set up in travel through
the vale of life, to mark particular occurrence. the footstep
be obliterate now; the face of the country may be change; but
the pillar be still there, to remind I how all thing be when it
be rear. lest the reader should be curious to see any of these
effusion, I will favour he with one short speciman: cold and
languid as the line may seem, it be almost a passion of grief to
which they owe their being:-
oh, they have rob I of the hope
my spirit hold so dear;
they will not let I hear that voice
my soul delight to hear.
they will not let I see that face
I so delight to see;
and they have take all thy smile,
and all thy love from I.
well, let they seize on all they can; -
one treasure still be mine, -
a heart that love to think on thee,
and feel the worth of thine.
yes, at least, they could not deprive I of that: I could think of
he day and night; and I could feel that he be worthy to be
think of. nobody know he as I do; nobody could appreciate he
as I do; nobody could love he as I--could, if I might: but there
be the evil. what business have I to think so much of one that
never think of I? be it not foolish? be it not wrong? yet,
if I find such deep delight in thinking of he, and if I keep
those thought to myself, and trouble no one else with they, where
be the harm of it? I would ask myself. and such reasoning
prevent I from make any sufficient effort to shake off my
fetter.
but, if those thought bring delight, it be a painful, troubled
pleasure, too near akin to anguish; and one that do I more injury
than I be aware of. it be an indulgence that a person of more
wisdom or more experience would doubtless have deny herself. and
yet, how dreary to turn my eye from the contemplation of that
bright object and force they to dwell on the dull, grey, desolate
prospect around: the joyless, hopeless, solitary path that lie
before I. it be wrong to be so joyless, so desponding; I should
have make God my friend, and to do his will the pleasure and the
business of my life; but faith be weak, and passion be too
strong.
in this time of trouble I have two other cause of affliction. the
first may seem a trifle, but it cost I many a tear: Snap, my
little dumb, rough-visage, but bright-eye, warm-hearte
companion, the only thing I have to love I, be take away, and
deliver over to the tender mercy of the village rat-catcher, a
man notorious for his brutal treatment of his canine slave. the
other be serious enough; my letter from home give intimation that
my father's health be bad. no boding fear be express, but
I be grow timid and despondent, and could not help fear that
some dreadful calamity await we there. I seem to see the black
cloud gather round my native hill, and to hear the angry
muttering of a storm that be about to burst, and desolate our
hearth.
CHAPTER XVIII--MIRTH and MOURNING
the 1st of June arrive at last: and Rosalie Murray be transmute
into Lady Ashby. most splendidly beautiful she look in her
bridal costume. upon her return from church, after the ceremony,
she come fly into the schoolroom, flush with excitement, and
laughing, half in mirth, and half in reckless desperation, as it
seem to I.
'now, Miss Grey, Ibe Lady Ashby!' she exclaim. 'itbe do, my
fate be seal: therebe no drawing back now. Ibe come to receive
your congratulation and bid you good-by; and then Ibe off for
Paris, Rome, Naples, Switzerland, London--oh, dear! what a deal I
shall see and hear before I come back again. but donot forget I:
I shallnot forget you, though Ihave be a naughty girl. come, why
donot you congratulate I?'
'I cannot congratulate you,' I reply, 'till I know whether this
change be really for the well: but I sincerely hope it be; and I
wish you true happiness and the good of blessing.'
'well, good-by, the carriage be wait, and theybe call I.'
she give I a hasty kiss, and be hurry away; but, suddenly
return, embrace I with more affection than I think she
capable of evince, and depart with tear in her eye. poor
girl! I really love she then; and forgave she from my heart all
the injury she have do I--and other also: she have not half
know it, I be sure; and I pray God to pardon she too.
during the remainder of that day of festal sadness, I be leave to
my own device. be too much unhinge for any steady occupation,
I wander about with a book in my hand for several hour, more
thinking than read, for I have many thing to think about. in
the evening, I make use of my liberty to go and see my old friend
Nancy once again; to apologize for my long absence (which must have
seem so neglectful and unkind) by tell she how busy I have
be; and to talk, or read, or work for she, whichever might be
most acceptable, and also, of course, to tell she the news of this
important day: and perhaps to obtain a little information from she
in return, respect Mr. Weston's expect departure. but of this
she seem to know nothing, and I hop, as she do, that it be
all a false report. she be very glad to see I; but, happily, her
eye be now so nearly well that she be almost independent of my
service. she be deeply interested in the wedding; but while I
amuse she with the detail of the festive day, the splendour of
the bridal party and of the bride herself, she often sigh and
shake her head, and wish good might come of it; she seem, like
I, to regard it rather as a theme for sorrow than rejoice. I
sit a long time talk to she about that and other thing--but no
one come.
shall I confess that I sometimes look towards the door with a
half-expectant wish to see it open and give entrance to Mr. Weston,
as have happen once before? and that, return through the lane
and field, I often pause to look round I, and walk more slowly
than be at all necessary--for, though a fine evening, it be not a
hot one--and, finally, feel a sense of emptiness and disappointment
at have reach the house without meeting or even catch a
distant glimpse of any one, except a few labourer return from
their work?
Sunday, however, be approach: I should see he then: for now
that Miss Murray be go, I could have my old corner again. I
should see he, and by look, speech, and manner, I might judge
whether the circumstance of her marriage have very much afflict
he. happily I could perceive no shadow of a difference: he wear
the same aspect as he have wear two month ago--voice, look, manner,
all alike unchanged: there be the same keen-sight, unclouded
truthfulness in his discourse, the same forcible clearness in his
style, the same earnest simplicity in all he say and do, that
make itself, not mark by the eye and ear, but feel upon the
heart of his audience.
I walk home with Miss Matilda; but he do not JOIN US. Matilda
be now sadly at a loss for amusement, and wofully in want of a
companion: her brother at school, her sister marry and go,
she too young to be admit into society; for which, from
Rosalie's example, she be in some degree begin to acquire a
taste--a taste at least for the company of certain class of
gentleman; at this dull time of year--no hunting go on, no
shooting even--for, though she might not join in that, it be
something to see her father or the gamekeeper go out with the dog,
and to talk with they on their return, about the different bird
they have bag. now, also, she be deny the solace which the
companionship of the coachman, groom, horse, greyhound, and
pointer might have afford; for her mother have,
notwithstanding the disadvantage of a country life, so
satisfactorily dispose of her eld daughter, the pride of her
heart have begin seriously to turn her attention to the young;
and, be truly alarmed at the roughness of her manner, and
think it high time to work a reform, have be rouse at length
to exert her authority, and prohibit entirely the yard, stable,
kennel, and coach-house. of course, she be not implicitly
obey; but, indulgent as she have hitherto be, when once her
spirit be rouse, her temper be not so gentle as she require
that of her governess to be, and her will be not to be thwart
with impunity. after many a scene of contention between mother and
daughter, many a violent outbreak which I be ashamed to witness,
in which the father's authority be often call in to confirm with
oath and threat the mother's slight prohibition--for even he
could see that 'tilly, though she would have make a fine lad, be
not quite what a young lady ought to be'--Matilda at length find
that her easy plan be to keep clear of the forbidden region;
unless she could now and then steal a visit without her watchful
mother's knowledge.
amid all this, let it not be imagine that I escape without many a
reprimand, and many an imply reproach, that lose none of its
sting from not be openly word; but rather wound the more
deeply, because, from that very reason, it seem to preclude self-
defence. frequently, I be tell to amuse Miss Matilda with other
thing, and to remind she of her mother's precept and
prohibition. I do so to the good of my power: but she would not
be amuse against her will, and could not against her taste; and
though I go beyond mere reminding, such gentle remonstrance as I
could use be utterly ineffectual.
'dear Miss Grey! it be the STRANGEST thing. I suppose you cannot
help it, if itbe not in your nature--but I wonder you cannot win the
confidence of that girl, and make your society at least as
agreeable to she as that of Robert or Joseph!'
'they can talk the good about the thing in which she be most
interested,' I reply.
'well! that be a strange confession, however, to come from her
GOVERNESS! who be to form a young lady's taste, I wonder, if the
governess donot do it? I have know governess who have so
completely identify themselves with the reputation of their young
lady for elegance and propriety in mind and manner, that they
would blush to speak a word against they; and to hear the slight
blame impute to their pupil be bad than to be censure in
their own person--and I really think it very natural, for my
part.'
'do you, ma'am?'
'yes, of course: the young lady's proficiency and elegance be of
more consequence to the governess than her own, as well as to the
world. if she wish to prosper in her vocation she must devote
all her energy to her business: all her idea and all her
ambition will tend to the accomplishment of that one object. when
we wish to decide upon the merit of a governess, we naturally look
at the young lady she profess to have educate, and judge
accordingly. the judicious governess know this: she know that,
while she live in obscurity herself, her pupil' virtue and
defect will be open to every eye; and that, unless she lose sight
of herself in their cultivation, she need not hope for success.
you see, Miss Grey, it be just the same as any other trade or
profession: they that wish to prosper must devote themselves body
and soul to their calling; and if they begin to yield to indolence
or self-indulgence they be speedily distance by wiser
competitor: there be little to choose between a person that ruin
her pupil by neglect, and one that corrupt they by her example.
you will excuse my dropping these little hint: you know it be all
for your own good. many lady would speak to you much more
strongly; and many would not trouble themselves to speak at all,
but quietly look out for a substitute. that, of course, would be
the EASIEST plan: but I know the advantage of a place like this
to a person in your situation; and I have no desire to part with
you, as I be sure you would do very well if you will only think of
these thing and try to exert yourself a LITTLE more: then, I be
convince, you would soon acquire that delicate tact which alone be
want to give you a proper influence over the mind of your
pupil.'
I be about to give the lady some idea of the fallacy of her
expectation; but she sail away as soon as she have conclude her
speech. have say what she wish, it be no part of her plan to
await my answer: it be my business to hear, and not to speak.
however, as I have say, Matilda at length yield in some degree
to her mother's authority (pity it have not be exert before);
and be thus deprive of almost every source of amusement, there
be nothing for it but to take long ride with the groom and long
walk with the governess, and to visit the cottage and farmhouse
on her father's estate, to kill time in chat with the old man
and woman that inhabit they. in one of these walk, it be our
chance to meet Mr. Weston. this be what I have long desire; but
now, for a moment, I wish either he or I be away: I feel my
heart throb so violently that I dread lest some outward sign of
emotion should appear; but I think he hardly glance at I, and I
be soon calm enough. after a brief salutation to both, he ask
Matilda if she have lately hear from her sister.
'yes,' reply she. 'she be at Paris when she write, and very
well, and very happy.'
she speak the last word emphatically, and with a glance
impertinently sly. he do not seem to notice it, but reply, with
equal emphasis, and very seriously -
'I hope she will continue to be so.'
'do you think it likely?' I venture to inquire: for Matilda have
start off in pursuit of her dog, that be chase a leveret.
'I cannot tell,' reply he. 'Sir Thomas may be a well man than
I suppose; but, from all I have hear and see, it seem a pity
that one so young and gay, and--and interesting, to express many
thing by one word--whose great, if not her only fault, appear
to be thoughtlessness--no trifling fault to be sure, since it
render the possessor liable to almost every other, and expose he
to so many temptation--but it seem a pity that she should be
throw away on such a man. it be her mother's wish, I suppose?'
'yes; and her own too, I think, for she always laugh at my
attempt to dissuade she from the step.'
'you do attempt it? then, at least, you will have the
satisfaction of know that it be no fault of your, if any harm
should come of it. as for Mrs. Murray, I donot know how she can
justify her conduct: if I have sufficient acquaintance with she,
Iwould ask she.'
'it seem unnatural: but some people think rank and wealth the
chief good; and, if they can secure that for their child, they
think they have do their duty.'
'true: but be it not strange that person of experience, who have
be marry themselves, should judge so falsely?' Matilda now
come pant back, with the lacerated body of the young hare in her
hand.
'be it your intention to kill that hare, or to save it, Miss
Murray?' ask Mr. Weston, apparently puzzle at her gleeful
countenance.
'I pretend to want to save it,' she answer, honestly enough,
'as it be so glaringly out of season; but I be well pleased to
see it loll. however, you can both witness that I couldnot help
it: Prince be determined to have she; and he clutch she by the
back, and kill she in a minute! benot it a noble chase?'
'very! for a young lady after a leveret.'
there be a quiet sarcasm in the tone of his reply which be not
lose upon she; she shrug her shoulder, and, turn away with a
significant 'Humph!' ask I how I have enjoy the fun. I reply
that I see no fun in the matter; but admit that I have not
observe the transaction very narrowly.
'donot you see how it double--just like an old hare? and donot
you hear it scream?'
'Ibe happy to say I do not.'
'it cry out just like a child.'
'poor little thing! what will you do with it?'
'come along--I shall leave it in the first house we come to. I
donot want to take it home, for fear papa should scold I for
let the dog kill it.'
Mr. Weston be now go, and we too go on our way; but as we
return, after have deposit the hare in a farm-house, and
demolish some spice-cake and currant-wine in exchange, we meet he
return also from the execution of his mission, whatever it might
be. he carry in his hand a cluster of beautiful bluebell, which
he offer to I; observe, with a smile, that though he have see
so little of I for the last two month, he have not forget that
bluebell be number among my favourite flower. it be do as
a simple act of goodwill, without compliment or remarkable
courtesy, or any look that could be construe into 'reverential,
tender adoration' (vide Rosalie Murray); but still, it be
something to find my unimportant saying so well remember: it be
something that he have notice so accurately the time I have cease
to be visible.
'I be tell,' say he, 'that you be a perfect bookworm, Miss
Grey: so completely absorb in your study that you be lose to
every other pleasure.'
'yes, and itbe quite true!' cry Matilda.
'no, Mr. Weston: donot believe it: itbe a scandalous libel.
these young lady be too fond of make random assertion at the
expense of their friend; and you ought to be careful how you
listen to they.'
'I hope this assertion be groundless, at any rate.'
'why? do you particularly object to lady study?'
'no; but I object to anyone so devote himself or herself to
study, as to lose sight of everything else. except under peculiar
circumstance, I consider very close and constant study as a waste
of time, and an injury to the mind as well as the body.'
'well, I have neither the time nor the inclination for such
transgression.'
we part again.
well! what be there remarkable in all this? why have I record
it? because, reader, it be important enough to give I a cheerful
evening, a night of pleasing dream, and a morning of felicitous
hope. shallow-brain cheerfulness, foolish dream, unfounded
hope, you would say; and I will not venture to deny it:
suspicion to that effect arise too frequently in my own mind. but
our wish be like tinder: the flint and steel of circumstance
be continually strike out spark, which vanish immediately,
unless they chance to fall upon the tinder of our wish; then,
they instantly ignite, and the flame of hope be kindle in a
moment.
but alas! that very morning, my flickering flame of hope be
dismally quench by a letter from my mother, which speak so
seriously of my father's increase illness, that I fear there
be little or no chance of his recovery; and, close at hand as the
holiday be, I almost tremble lest they should come too late for
I to meet he in this world. two day after, a letter from Mary
tell I his life be despair of, and his end seem fast
approach. then, immediately, I seek permission to anticipate
the vacation, and go without delay. Mrs. Murray star, and
wonder at the unwonted energy and boldness with which I urge the
request, and think there be no occasion to hurry; but finally
give I leave: state, however, that there be 'no need to be in
such agitation about the matter--it might prove a false alarm after
all; and if not--why, it be only in the common course of nature:
we must all die some time; and I be not to suppose myself the only
afflict person in the world;' and conclude with say I might
have the phaeton to take I to O-. 'and instead of repining, Miss
Grey, be thankful for the PRIVILEGES you enjoy. therebe many a
poor clergyman whose family would be plunge into ruin by the event
of his death; but you, you see, have influential friend ready to
continue their patronage, and to show you every consideration.'
I thank she for her 'consideration,' and fly to my room to make
some hurried preparation for my departure. my bonnet and shawl
be on, and a few thing hastily cram into my large trunk, I
descend. but I might have do the work more leisurely, for no
one else be in a hurry; and I have still a considerable time to
wait for the phaeton. at length it come to the door, and I be
off: but, oh, what a dreary journey be that! how utterly
different from my former passage homeward! be too late for
the last coach to -, I have to hire a cab for ten mile, and then a
car to take I over the rugged hill.
it be half-past ten before I reach home. they be not in bed.
my mother and sister both meet I in the passage--sad--silent--pale!
I be so much shocked and terror-stricken that I could not speak,
to ask the information I so much long yet dread to obtain.
'Agnes!' say my mother, struggle to repress some strong emotion.
'oh, Agnes!' cry Mary, and burst into tear.
'how be he?' I ask, gasp for the answer.
'dead!'
it be the reply I have anticipate: but the shock seem none the
less tremendous.
CHAPTER XIX--the letter
my father's mortal remain have be consign to the tomb; and we,
with sad face and sombre garment, sit linger over the frugal
breakfast-table, revolve plan for our future life. my mother's
strong mind have not give way beneath even this affliction: her
spirit, though crush, be not break. Mary's wish be that I
should go back to Horton Lodge, and that our mother should come and
live with she and Mr. Richardson at the vicarage: she affirm
that he wish it no less than herself, and that such an
arrangement could not fail to benefit all party; for my mother's
society and experience would be of inestimable value to they, and
they would do all they could to make she happy. but no argument
or entreaty could prevail: my mother be determined not to go.
not that she question, for a moment, the kind wish and
intention of her daughter; but she affirm that so long as God
spar her health and strength, she would make use of they to earn
her own livelihood, and be chargeable to no one; whether her
dependence would be feel as a burden or not. if she could afford
to reside as a lodger in--vicarage, she would choose that house
before all other as the place of her abode; but not be so
circumstanced, she would never come under its roof, except as an
occasional visitor: unless sickness or calamity should render she
assistance really needful, or until age or infirmity make she
incapable of maintain herself.
'no, Mary,' say she, 'if Richardson and you have anything to
spare, you must lay it aside for your family; and Agnes and I must
gather honey for ourselves. thank to my have have daughter to
educate, I have not forget my accomplishment. God willing, I
will check this vain repining,' she say, while the tear course
one another down her cheek in spite of her effort; but she wipe
they away, and resolutely shake back her head, continue, 'I will
exert myself, and look out for a small house, commodiously situate
in some populous but healthy district, where we will take a few
young lady to board and educate--if we can get they--and as many
day pupil as will come, or as we can manage to instruct. your
father's relation and old friend will be able to send we some
pupil, or to assist we with their recommendation, no doubt: I
shall not apply to my own. what say you to it, Agnes? will you be
willing to leave your present situation and try?'
'quite willing, mamma; and the money I have save will do to
furnish the house. it shall be take from the bank directly.'
'when it be want: we must get the house, and settle on
preliminary first.'
Mary offer to lend the little she possess; but my mother
decline it, say that we must begin on an economical plan; and
she hop that the whole or part of mine, add to what we could
get by the sale of the furniture, and what little our dear papa have
contrive to lay aside for she since the debt be pay, would be
sufficient to last we till Christmas; when, it be hop, something
would accrue from our united labours. it be finally settle that
this should be our plan; and that inquiry and preparation should
immediately be set on foot; and while my mother busy herself with
these, I should return to Horton Lodge at the close of my four
week' vacation, and give notice for my final departure when thing
be in train for the speedy commencement of our school.
we be discuss these affair on the morning I have mention,
about a fortnight after my father's death, when a letter be
bring in for my mother, on behold which the colour mount to
her face--lately pale enough with anxious watching and excessive
sorrow. 'from my father!' murmur she, as she hastily tear off
the cover. it be many year since she have hear from any of her
own relation before. naturally wonder what the letter might
contain, I watch her countenance while she read it, and be
somewhat surprised to see she bite her lip and knit her brow as if
in anger. when she have do, she somewhat irreverently cast it on
the table, say with a scornful smile,--'Your grandpapa have be
so kind as to write to I. he say he have no doubt I have long
repent of my "unfortunate marriage," and if I will only
acknowledge this, and confess I be wrong in neglect his advice,
and that I have justly suffer for it, he will make a lady of I
once again--if that be possible after my long degradation--and
remember my girl in his will. get my desk, Agnes, and send these
thing away: I will answer the letter directly. but first, as I
may be deprive you both of a legacy, it be just that I should
tell you what I mean to say. I shall say that he be mistaken in
suppose that I can regret the birth of my daughter (who have
be the pride of my life, and be likely to be the comfort of my
old age), or the thirty year I have pass in the company of my
good and dear friend;--that, have our misfortune be three
time as great as they be (unless they have be of my bringing
on), I should still the more rejoice to have share they with your
father, and administer what consolation I be able; and, have his
suffering in illness be ten time what they wear, I could not
regret have watch over and labour to relieve them;--that, if
he have marry a rich wife, misfortune and trial would no doubt
have come upon he still; while I be egotist enough to imagine that
no other woman could have cheer he through they so well: not
that I be superior to the rest, but I be make for he, and he for
I; and I can no more repent the hour, day, year of happiness we
have spend together, and which neither could have have without the
other, than I can the privilege of have be his nurse in
sickness, and his comfort in affliction.
'will this do, children?--or shall I say we be all very sorry for
what have happen during the last thirty year, and my daughter
wish they have never be bear; but since they have have that
misfortune, they will be thankful for any trifle their grandpapa
will be kind enough to bestow?'
of course, we both applaud our mother's resolution; Mary clear
away the breakfast thing; I bring the desk; the letter be
quickly write and despatch; and, from that day, we hear no
more of our grandfather, till we see his death announce in the
newspaper a considerable time after--all his worldly possession,
of course, be leave to our wealthy unknown cousin.
CHAPTER XX--the FAREWELL
a house in A---, the fashionable watering-place, be hire for our
seminary; and a promise of two or three pupil be obtain to
commence with. I return to Horton Lodge about the middle of
July, leave my mother to conclude the bargain for the house, to
obtain more pupil, to sell off the furniture of our old abode, and
to fit out the new one.
we often pity the poor, because they have no leisure to mourn their
depart relative, and necessity oblige they to labour through
their severe affliction: but be not active employment the good
remedy for overwhelming sorrow--the sure antidote for despair?
it may be a rough comforter: it may seem hard to be harass with
the care of life when we have no relish for its enjoyment; to be
goad to labour when the heart be ready to break, and the vex
spirit implore for rest only to weep in silence: but be not
labour well than the rest we covet? and be not those petty,
torment care less hurtful than a continual brooding over the
great affliction that oppress we? besides, we cannot have care,
and anxiety, and toil, without hope--if it be but the hope of
fulfil our joyless task, accomplish some needful project, or
escape some further annoyance. at any rate, I be glad my mother
have so much employment for every faculty of her action-love
frame. our kind neighbour lament that she, once so exalt in
wealth and station, should be reduce to such extremity in her time
of sorrow; but I be persuade that she would have suffer thrice
as much have she be leave in affluence, with liberty to remain in
that house, the scene of her early happiness and late affliction,
and no stern necessity to prevent she from incessantly brood
over and lament her bereavement.
I will not dilate upon the feeling with which I leave the old
house, the well-know garden, the little village church--then
doubly dear to I, because my father, who, for thirty year, have
teach and pray within its wall, lie slumber now beneath its
flag--and the old bare hill, delightful in their very desolation,
with the narrow vale between, smile in green wood and sparkle
water--the house where I be bear, the scene of all my early
association, the place where throughout life my earthly affection
have be centred;--and leave they to return no more! true, I be
go back to Horton Lodge, where, amid many evil, one source of
pleasure yet remain: but it be pleasure mingle with excessive
pain; and my stay, alas! be limit to six week. and even of
that precious time, day after day slip by and I do not see he:
except at church, I never see he for a fortnight after my return.
it seem a long time to I: and, as I be often out with my
rambling pupil, of course hope would keep rise, and
disappointment would ensue; and then, I would say to my own heart,
'here be a convincing proof--if you would but have the sense to see
it, or the candour to acknowledge it--that he do not care for
you. if he only think HALF as much about you as you do about
he, he would have contrive to meet you many time ere this: you
must know that, by consult your own feeling. therefore, have
do with this nonsense: you have no ground for hope: dismiss, at
once, these hurtful thought and foolish wish from your mind, and
turn to your own duty, and the dull blank life that lie before
you. you might have know such happiness be not for you.'
but I see he at last. he come suddenly upon I as I be cross
a field in return from a visit to Nancy Brown, which I have take
the opportunity of pay while Matilda Murray be rid her
matchless mare. he must have hear of the heavy loss I have
sustain: he express no sympathy, offer no condolence: but
almost the first word he utter were,--'How be your mother?' and
this be no matter-of-course question, for I never tell he that I
have a mother: he must have learn the fact from other, if he
know it at all; and, besides, there be sincere goodwill, and even
deep, touching, unobtrusive sympathy in the tone and manner of the
inquiry. I thank he with due civility, and tell he she be as
well as could be expect. 'what will she do?' be the next
question. many would have deem it an impertinent one, and give
an evasive reply; but such an idea never enter my head, and I
give a brief but plain statement of my mother's plan and
prospect.
'then you will leave this place shortly?' say he.
'yes, in a month.'
he pause a minute, as if in thought. when he speak again, I hop
it would be to express his concern at my departure; but it be only
to say,--'i should think you will be willing enough to go?'
'yes--for some thing,' I reply.
'for some thing only--I wonder what should make you regret it?'
I be annoy at this in some degree; because it embarrass I: I
have only one reason for regret it; and that be a profound
secret, which he have no business to trouble I about.
'why,' say I--'why should you suppose that I dislike the place?'
'you tell I so yourself,' be the decisive reply. 'you say, at
least, that you could not live contentedly, without a friend; and
that you have no friend here, and no possibility of make one--and,
besides, I know you must dislike it.'
'but if you remember rightly, I say, or mean to say, I could not
live contentedly without a friend in the world: I be not so
unreasonable as to require one always near I. I think I could be
happy in a house full of enemy, if--' but no; that sentence must
not be continue--I pause, and hastily added,--'And, besides, we
cannot well leave a place where we have live for two or three
year, without some feeling of regret.'
'will you regret to part with Miss Murray, your sole remain
pupil and companion?'
'I dare say I shall in some degree: it be not without sorrow I
part with her sister.'
'I can imagine that.'
'well, Miss Matilda be quite as good--well in one respect.'
'what be that?'
'shebe honest.'
'and the other be not?'
'I should not call she dishonest; but it must be confess shebe a
little artful.'
'ARTFUL be she?--I see she be giddy and vain--and now,' he add,
after a pause, 'I can well believe she be artful too; but so
excessively so as to assume an aspect of extreme simplicity and
unguarded openness. yes,' continue he, musingly, 'that account
for some little thing that puzzle I a trifle before.'
after that, he turn the conversation to more general subject.
he do not leave I till we have nearly reach the park-gates: he
have certainly step a little out of his way to accompany I so
far, for he now go back and disappear down Moss Lane, the
entrance of which we have pass some time before. assuredly I do
not regret this circumstance: if sorrow have any place in my heart,
it be that he be go at last--that he be no long walk by
my side, and that that short interval of delightful intercourse be
at an end. he have not breathe a word of love, or drop one hint
of tenderness or affection, and yet I have be supremely happy. to
be near he, to hear he talk as he do talk, and to feel that he
think I worthy to be so speak to--capable of understanding and
duly appreciate such discourse--be enough.
'yes, Edward Weston, I could indeed be happy in a house full of
enemy, if I have but one friend, who truly, deeply, and faithfully
love I; and if that friend be you--though we might be far
apart--seldom to hear from each other, still more seldom to meet--
though toil, and trouble, and vexation might surround I, still--it
would be too much happiness for I to dream of! yet who can tell,'
say I within myself, as I proceed up the park,--'who can tell
what this one month may bring forth? I have live nearly three-
and-twenty year, and I have suffer much, and taste little
pleasure yet; be it likely my life all through will be so clouded?
be it not possible that God may hear my prayer, disperse these
gloomy shadow, and grant I some beam of heaven's sunshine yet?
will he entirely deny to I those blessing which be so freely
give to other, who neither ask they nor acknowledge they when
receive? may I not still hope and trust? I do hope and trust
for a while: but, alas, alas! the time ebb away: one week
follow another, and, except one distant glimpse and two
transient meeting--during which scarcely anything be say--while
I be walk with Miss Matilda, I see nothing of he: except, of
course, at church.
and now, the last Sunday be come, and the last service. I be
often on the point of melt into tear during the sermon--the
last I be to hear from he: the good I should hear from anyone, I
be well assured. it be over--the congregation be depart;
and I must follow. I have then see he, and hear his voice, too,
probably for the last time. in the churchyard, Matilda be pounce
upon by the two Misses Green. they have many inquiry to make
about her sister, and I know not what besides. I only wish they
would have do, that we might hasten back to Horton Lodge: I
long to seek the retirement of my own room, or some sequester
nook in the ground, that I might deliver myself up to my feelings-
-to weep my last farewell, and lament my false hope and vain
delusion. only this once, and then adieu to fruitless dreaming--
thenceforth, only sober, solid, sad reality should occupy my mind.
but while I thus resolve, a low voice close beside I said--'I
suppose you be go this week, Miss Grey?' 'yes,' I reply. I
be very much startle; and have I be at all hysterically
inclined, I certainly should have commit myself in some way
then. thank God, I be not.
'well,' say Mr. Weston, 'I want to bid you good-bye--it be not
likely I shall see you again before you go.'
'good-bye, Mr. Weston,' I say. oh, how I struggle to say it
calmly! I give he my hand. he retain it a few second in his.
'it be possible we may meet again,' say he; 'will it be of any
consequence to you whether we do or not?'
'yes, I should be very glad to see you again.'
I could say no less. he kindly press my hand, and go. now, I
be happy again--though more inclined to burst into tear than
ever. if I have be force to speak at that moment, a succession
of sob would have inevitably ensue; and as it be, I could not
keep the water out of my eye. I walk along with Miss Murray,
turn aside my face, and neglect to notice several successive
remark, till she bawl out that I be either deaf or stupid; and
then (have recover my self-possession), as one awaken from a
fit of abstraction, I suddenly look up and ask what she have
be say.
CHAPTER XXI--the SCHOOL
I leave Horton Lodge, and go to join my mother in our new abode at
A-. I find she well in health, resign in spirit, and even
cheerful, though subdue and sober, in her general demeanour. we
have only three boarder and half a dozen day-pupil to commence
with; but by due care and diligence we hop ere long to increase
the number of both.
I set myself with befit energy to discharge the duty of this
new mode of life. I call it new, for there be, indeed, a
considerable difference between work with my mother in a school
of our own, and work as a hireling among stranger, despise and
trample upon by old and young; and for the first few week I be
by no mean unhappy. 'it be possible we may meet again,' and 'will
it be of any consequence to you whether we do or not?'--those word
still ring in my ear and rest on my heart: they be my secret
solace and support. 'I shall see he again.--He will come; or he
will write.' no promise, in fact, be too bright or too
extravagant for Hope to whisper in my ear. I do not believe half
of what she tell I: I pretend to laugh at it all; but I be far
more credulous than I myself suppose; otherwise, why do my heart
leap up when a knock be hear at the front door, and the maid, who
open it, come to tell my mother a gentleman wish to see she?
and why be I out of humour for the rest of the day, because it
prove to be a music-master come to offer his service to our
school? and what stop my breath for a moment, when the postman
have bring a couple of letter, my mother say, 'here, Agnes,
this be for you,' and throw one of they to I? and what make the
hot blood rush into my face when I see it be direct in a
gentleman's hand? and why--oh! why do that cold, sicken sense
of disappointment fall upon I, when I have tear open the cover and
find it be only a letter from Mary, which, for some reason or
other, her husband have direct for she?
be it then come to this--that I should be disappointed to receive
a letter from my only sister: and because it be not write by a
comparative stranger? dear Mary! and she have write it so kindly-
-and think I should be so pleased to have it!--I be not worthy
to read it! and I believe, in my indignation against myself, I
should have put it aside till I have school myself into a well
frame of mind, and be become more deserving of the honour and
privilege of its perusal: but there be my mother look on, and
wishful to know what news it contain; so I read it and deliver
it to she, and then go into the schoolroom to attend to the
pupil: but amidst the care of copy and sum--in the interval
of correct error here, and reprove dereliction of duty
there, I be inwardly take myself to task with far sterner
severity. 'what a fool you must be,' say my head to my heart, or
my sterner to my soft self;--'how could you ever dream that he
would write to you? what ground have you for such a hope--or that
he will see you, or give himself any trouble about you--or even
think of you again?' 'what grounds?'--and then Hope set before I
that last, short interview, and repeat the word I have so
faithfully treasure in my memory. 'well, and what be there in
that?--Who ever hang his hope upon so frail a twig? what be
there in those word that any common acquaintance might not say to
another? of course, it be possible you might meet again: he
might have say so if you have be go to New Zealand; but that
do not imply any intention of see you--and then, as to the
question that follow, anyone might ask that: and how do you
answer?--merely with a stupid, commonplace reply, such as you would
have give to Master Murray, or anyone else you have be on
tolerably civil term with.' 'but, then,' persist Hope, 'the
tone and manner in which he speak.' 'oh, that be nonsense! he
always speak impressively; and at that moment there be the
Greens and Miss Matilda Murray just before, and other people
pass by, and he be oblige to stand close beside you, and to
speak very low, unless he wish everybody to hear what he say,
which--though it be nothing at all particular--of course, he would
rather not.' but then, above all, that emphatic, yet gentle
pressure of the hand, which seem to say, 'trust I;' and many
other thing besides--too delightful, almost too flattering, to be
repeat even to one's self. 'egregious folly--too absurd to
require contradiction--mere invention of the imagination, which
you ought to be ashamed of. if you would but consider your own
unattractive exterior, your unamiable reserve, your foolish
diffidence--which must make you appear cold, dull, awkward, and
perhaps ill-temper too;--if you have but rightly consider these
from the beginning, you would never have harbour such
presumptuous thought: and now that you have be so foolish, pray
repent and amend, and let we have no more of it!'
I cannot say that I implicitly obey my own injunction: but such
reasoning as this become more and more effective as time wear on,
and nothing be see or hear of Mr. Weston; until, at last, I give
up hop, for even my heart acknowledge it be all in vain. but
still, I would think of he: I would cherish his image in my mind;
and treasure every word, look, and gesture that my memory could
retain; and brood over his excellence and his peculiarity, and,
in fact, all I have see, hear, or imagine respect he.
'Agnes, this sea air and change of scene do you no good, I think:
I never see you look so wretched. it must be that you sit too
much, and allow the care of the schoolroom to worry you. you must
learn to take thing easy, and to be more active and cheerful; you
must take exercise whenever you can get it, and leave the most
tiresome duty to I: they will only serve to exercise my
patience, and, perhaps, try my temper a little.'
so say my mother, as we sit at work one morning during the Easter
holiday. I assure she that my employment be not at all
oppressive; that I be well; or, if there be anything amiss, it
would be go as soon as the try month of spring be over:
when summer come I should be as strong and hearty as she could wish
to see I: but inwardly her observation startle I. I know my
strength be decline, my appetite have fail, and I be grow
listless and desponding;--and if, indeed, he could never care for
I, and I could never see he more--if I be forbid to minister
to his happiness--forbid, for ever, to taste the joy of love,
to bless, and to be bless--then, life must be a burden, and if my
heavenly Father would call I away, I should be glad to rest. but
it would not do to die and leave my mother. selfish, unworthy
daughter, to forget she for a moment! be not her happiness
commit in a great measure to my charge?--and the welfare of our
young pupil too? should I shrink from the work that God have set
before I, because it be not fit to my taste? do not he know
well what I should do, and where I ought to labour?--and should I
long to quit his service before I have finish my task, and expect
to enter into his rest without have labour to earn it? 'no; by
his help I will arise and address myself diligently to my appoint
duty. if happiness in this world be not for I, I will endeavour
to promote the welfare of those around I, and my reward shall be
hereafter.' so say I in my heart; and from that hour I only
permit my thought to wander to Edward Weston--or at least to
dwell upon he now and then--as a treat for rare occasion: and,
whether it be really the approach of summer or the effect of these
good resolution, or the lapse of time, or all together,
tranquillity of mind be soon restore; and bodily health and
vigour begin likewise, slowly, but surely, to return.
early in June, I receive a letter from Lady Ashby, late Miss
Murray. she have write to I twice or thrice before, from the
different stage of her bridal tour, always in good spirit, and
profess to be very happy. I wonder every time that she have
not forget I, in the midst of so much gaiety and variety of
scene. at length, however, there be a pause; and it seem she
have forget I, for upwards of seven month pass away and no
letter. of course, I do not break my heart about that, though I
often wonder how she be get on; and when this last epistle
so unexpectedly arrive, I be glad enough to receive it. it be
date from Ashby Park, where she be come to settle down at last,
have previously divide her time between the continent and the
metropolis. she make many apology for have neglect I so
long, assure I she have not forget I, and have often intend
to write, &c. &c., but have always be prevent by something. she
acknowledge that she have be lead a very dissipate life, and
I should think her very wicked and very thoughtless; but,
notwithstanding that, she think a great deal, and, among other
thing, that she should vastly like to see I. 'we have be
several day here already,' write she. 'we have not a single
friend with we, and be likely to be very dull. you know I never
have a fancy for live with my husband like two turtle in a nest,
be he the most delightful creature that ever wear a coat; so do
take pity upon I and come. I suppose your Midsummer holiday
commence in June, the same as other people's; therefore you cannot
plead want of time; and you must and shall come--in fact, I shall
die if you donot. I want you to visit I as a friend, and stay a
long time. there be nobody with I, as I tell you before, but Sir
Thomas and old Lady Ashby: but you neednot mind they--they'll
trouble we but little with their company. and you shall have a
room to yourself, whenever you like to retire to it, and plenty of
book to read when my company be not sufficiently amusing. I
forget whether you like baby; if you do, you may have the
pleasure of see mine--the most charming child in the world, no
doubt; and all the more so, that I be not trouble with nursing it-
-I be determined I wouldnot be bother with that. unfortunately,
it be a girl, and Sir Thomas have never forgive I: but, however,
if you will only come, I promise you shall be its governess as soon
as it can speak; and you shall bring it up in the way it should go,
and make a well woman of it than its mamma. and you shall see my
poodle, too: a splendid little charmer import from Paris: and
two fine italian painting of great value--I forget the artist.
Doubtless you will be able to discover prodigious beauty in they,
which you must point out to I, as I only admire by hearsay; and
many elegant curiosity besides, which I purchase at Rome and
elsewhere; and, finally, you shall see my new home--the splendid
house and ground I use to covet so greatly. alas! how far the
promise of anticipation exceed the pleasure of possession!
therebe a fine sentiment! I assure you I be become quite a grave
old matron: pray come, if it be only to witness the wonderful
change. write by return of post, and tell I when your vacation
commence, and say that you will come the day after, and stay till
the day before it close--in mercy to
'your affectionately,
'ROSALIE ASHBY.'
I show this strange epistle to my mother, and consult she on
what I ought to do. she advise I to go; and I go--will
enough to see Lady Ashby, and her baby, too, and to do anything I
could to benefit she, by consolation or advice; for I imagine she
must be unhappy, or she would not have apply to I thus--but
feeling, as may readily be conceive, that, in accept the
invitation, I make a great sacrifice for she, and do violence to
my feeling in many way, instead of be delighted with the
honourable distinction of be entreat by the baronet's lady to
visit she as a friend. however, I determine my visit should be
only for a few day at most; and I will not deny that I derive
some consolation from the idea that, as Ashby Park be not very far
from Horton, I might possibly see Mr. Weston, or, at least, hear
something about he.
CHAPTER XXII--the VISIT
Ashby Park be certainly a very delightful residence. the mansion
be stately without, commodious and elegant within; the park be
spacious and beautiful, chiefly on account of its magnificent old
tree, its stately herd of deer, its broad sheet of water, and the
ancient wood that stretch beyond it: for there be no broken
ground to give variety to the landscape, and but very little of
that undulate swell which add so greatly to the charm of park
scenery. and so, this be the place Rosalie Murray have so long
to call her own, that she must have a share of it, on whatever
term it might be offer--whatever price be to be pay for the
title of mistress, and whoever be to be her partner in the honour
and bliss of such a possession! well I be not disposed to censure
she now.
she receive I very kindly; and, though I be a poor clergyman's
daughter, a governess, and a schoolmistress, she welcome I with
unaffected pleasure to her home; and--what surprise I rather--
take some pain to make my visit agreeable. I could see, it be
true, that she expect I to be greatly strike with the
magnificence that surround she; and, I confess, I be rather
annoyed at her evident effort to reassure I, and prevent I from
be overwhelm by so much grandeur--too much awe at the idea of
encounter her husband and mother-in-law, or too much ashamed of
my own humble appearance. I be not ashamed of it at all; for,
though plain, I have take good care not to shabby or mean, and
should have be pretty considerably at my ease, if my
condescending hostess have not take such manifest pain to make I
so; and, as for the magnificence that surround she, nothing that
meet my eye strike I or affect I half so much as her own
altered appearance. whether from the influence of fashionable
dissipation, or some other evil, a space of little more than twelve
month have have the effect that might be expect from as many
year, in reduce the plumpness of her form, the freshness of her
complexion, the vivacity of her movement, and the exuberance of
her spirit.
I wish to know if she be unhappy; but I feel it be not my
province to inquire: I might endeavour to win her confidence; but,
if she choose to conceal her matrimonial care from I, I would
trouble she with no obtrusive question. I, therefore, at first,
confine myself to a few general inquiry about her health and
welfare, and a few commendation on the beauty of the park, and of
the little girl that should have be a boy: a small delicate
infant of seven or eight week old, whom its mother seem to
regard with no remarkable degree of interest or affection, though
full as much as I expect she to show.
shortly after my arrival, she commission she maid to conduct I
to my room and see that I have everything I want; it be a small,
unpretending, but sufficiently comfortable apartment. when I
descend thence--have divest myself of all travel
encumbrance, and arrange my toilet with due consideration for the
feeling of my lady hostess, she conduct I herself to the room I
be to occupy when I choose to be alone, or when she be engage
with visitor, or oblige to be with her mother-in-law, or
otherwise prevent, as she say, from enjoy the pleasure of my
society. it be a quiet, tidy little sitting-room; and I be not
sorry to be provide with such a harbour of refuge.
'and some time,' say she, 'I will show you the library: I never
examine its shelf, but, I daresay, it be full of wise book; and
you may go and burrow among they whenever you please. and now you
shall have some tea--it will soon be dinner-time, but I think, as
you be accustom to dine at one, you would perhaps like well
to have a cup of tea about this time, and to dine when we lunch:
and then, you know, you can have your tea in this room, and that
will save you from have to dine with Lady Ashby and Sir Thomas:
which would be rather awkward--at least, not awkward, but rather--
a--you know what I mean. I think you mightnot like it so well--
especially as we may have other lady and gentleman to dine with
we occasionally.'
'certainly,' say I, 'I would much rather have it as you say, and,
if you have no objection, I should prefer have all my meal in
this room.'
'why so?'
'because, I imagine, it would be more agreeable to Lady Ashby and
Sir Thomas.'
'nothing of the kind.'
'at any rate it would be more agreeable to I.'
she make some faint objection, but soon concede; and I could see
that the proposal be a considerable relief to she.
'now, come into the drawing-room,' say she. 'therebe the dressing
bell; but I willnot go yet: itbe no use dress when therebe no one
to see you; and I want to have a little discourse.'
the drawing-room be certainly an impose apartment, and very
elegantly furnish; but I see its young mistress glance towards I
as we enter, as if to notice how I be impress by the
spectacle, and accordingly I determine to preserve an aspect of
stony indifference, as if I see nothing at all remarkable. but
this be only for a moment: immediately conscience whisper, 'why
should I disappoint she to save my pride? no--rather let I
sacrifice my pride to give she a little innocent gratification.'
and I honestly look round, and tell she it be a noble room, and
very tastefully furnished. she say little, but I see she be
pleased.
she show I her fat french poodle, that lie curl up on a silk
cushion, and the two fine italian painting: which, however, she
would not give I time to examine, but, say I must look at they
some other day, insist upon my admire the little jewelled watch
she have purchase in Geneva; and then she take I round the room to
point out sundry article of vertu she have bring from Italy: an
elegant little timepiece, and several bust, small graceful
figure, and vas, all beautifully carve in white marble. she
speak of these with animation, and hear my admire comment with
a smile of pleasure: that soon, however, vanish, and be
follow by a melancholy sigh; as if in consideration of the
insufficiency of all such bauble to the happiness of the human
heart, and their woeful inability to supply its insatiate demand.
then, stretch herself upon a couch, she motion I to a
capacious easy-chair that stand opposite--not before the fire, but
before a wide open window; for it be summer, be it remember; a
sweet, warm evening in the latter half of June. I sit for a moment
in silence, enjoy the still, pure air, and the delightful
prospect of the park that lie before I, rich in verdure and
foliage, and bask in yellow sunshine, relieve by the long
shadow of decline day. but I must take advantage of this pause:
I have inquiry to make, and, like the substance of a lady's
postscript, the most important must come last. so I begin with
ask after Mr. and Mrs. Murray, and Miss Matilda and the young
gentleman.
I be tell that papa have the gout, which make he very ferocious;
and that he would not give up his choice wine, and his substantial
dinner and supper, and have quarrel with his physician, because
the latter have dare to say that no medicine could cure he while
he live so freely; that mamma and the rest be well. Matilda be
still wild and reckless, but she have get a fashionable governess,
and be considerably improve in her manner, and soon to be
introduce to the world; and John and Charles (now at home for the
holiday) be, by all account, 'fine, bold, unruly, mischievous
boy.'
'and how be the other people get on?' say i--'the Greens, for
instance?'
'ah! Mr. Green be heart-break, you know,' reply she, with a
languid smile: 'he havenot get over his disappointment yet, and
never will, I suppose. hebe doom to be an old bachelor; and his
sister be do their good to get marry.'
'and the Melthams?'
'oh, theybe jog on as usual, I suppose: but I know very
little about any of they--except Harry,' say she, blush
slightly, and smile again. 'I see a great deal of he while we
be in London; for, as soon as he hear we be there, he come up
under pretence of visit his brother, and either follow I,
like a shadow, wherever I go, or meet I, like a reflection, at
every turn. you neednot look so shocked, Miss Grey; I be very
discreet, I assure you, but, you know, one cannot help be
admire. poor fellow! he be not my only worshipper; though he
be certainly the most conspicuous, and, I think, the most devoted
among they all. and that detestable--ahem--and Sir Thomas choose to
take offence at he--or my profuse expenditure, or something--I
donot exactly know what--and hurry I down to the country at a
moment's notice; where Ibe to play the hermit, I suppose, for
life.'
and she bite her lip, and frown vindictively upon the fair domain
she have once so coveted to call she own.
'and Mr. Hatfield,' say I, 'what be become of he?'
again she brighten up, and answer gaily--'oh! he make up to an
elderly spinster, and marry she, not long since; weigh her
heavy purse against her fade charm, and expect to find that
solace in gold which be deny he in love--ha, ha!'
'well, and I think thatbe all--except Mr. Weston: what be he
do?'
'I donot know, Ibe sure. hebe go from Horton.'
'how long since? and where be he go to?'
'I know nothing about he,' reply she, yawning--'except that he
go about a month ago--I never ask where' (I would have ask
whether it be to a living or merely another curacy, but think it
well not); 'and the people make a great rout about his leaving,'
continue she, 'much to Mr. Hatfield's displeasure; for Hatfield
donot like he, because he have too much influence with the common
people, and because he be not sufficiently tractable and
submissive to he--and for some other unpardonable sin, I donot
know what. but now I positively must go and dress: the second
bell will ring directly, and if I come to dinner in this guise, I
shall never hear the end of it from Lady Ashby. itbe a strange
thing one cannot be mistress in one's own house! just re the
bell, and Iwill send for my maid, and tell they to get you some tea.
only think of that intolerable woman--'
'who--your maid?'
'no;--my mother-in-law--and my unfortunate mistake! instead of
let she take herself off to some other house, as she offer to
do when I marry, I be fool enough to ask she to live here still,
and direct the affair of the house for I; because, in the first
place, I hop we should spend the great part of the year, in
town, and in the second place, be so young and inexperienced, I
be frighten at the idea of have a houseful of servant to
manage, and dinner to order, and party to entertain, and all the
rest of it, and I think she might assist I with her experience;
never dream she would prove a usurper, a tyrant, an incubus, a
spy, and everything else thatbe detestable. I wish she be dead!'
she then turn to give her order to the footman, who have be
stand bolt upright within the door for the last half minute, and
have hear the latter part of her animadversion; and, of course,
make his own reflection upon they, notwithstanding the inflexible,
wooden countenance he think proper to preserve in the drawing-
room. on my remarking afterwards that he must have hear she, she
replied--'oh, no matter! I never care about the footman; theybe
mere automaton: itbe nothing to they what their superior say or
do; they willnot dare to repeat it; and as to what they think--if
they presume to think at all--of course, nobody care for that. it
would be a pretty thing indeed, it we be to be tongue-tie by our
servant!'
so say, she run off to make she hasty toilet, leave I to
pilot my way back to my sitting-room, where, in due time, I be
serve with a cup of tea. after that, I sit musing on Lady Ashby's
past and present condition; and on what little information I have
obtain respect Mr. Weston, and the small chance there be of
ever see or hear anything more of he throughout my quiet,
drab-colour life: which, henceforth, seem to offer no
alternative between positive rainy day, and day of dull grey
cloud without downfall. at length, however, I begin to weary of
my thought, and to wish I know where to find the library my
hostess have speak of; and to wonder whether I be to remain there
do nothing till bed-time.
as I be not rich enough to possess a watch, I could not tell how
time be pass, except by observe the slowly lengthen
shadow from the window; which present a side view, include a
corner of the park, a clump of tree whose topmost branch have
be colonize by an innumerable company of noisy rook, and a high
wall with a massive wooden gate: no doubt communicate with the
stable-yard, as a broad carriage-road sweep up to it from the park.
the shadow of this wall soon take posession of the whole of the
ground as far as I could see, force the golden sunlight to
retreat inch by inch, and at last take refuge in the very top of
the tree. Ere long, even they be leave in shadow--the shadow of
the distant hill, or of the earth itself; and, in sympathy for the
busy citizen of the rookery, I regret to see their habitation,
so lately bath in glorious light, reduce to the sombre, work-a-
day hue of the low world, or of my own world within. for a
moment, such bird as soar above the rest might still receive the
lustre on their wing, which impart to their sable plumage the
hue and brilliance of deep red gold; at last, that too depart.
Twilight come steal on; the rook become more quiet; I become
more weary, and wish I be go home to-morrow. at length it
grow dark; and I be think of ring for a candle, and betake
myself to bed, when my hostess appear, with many apology for
have neglect I so long, and lay all the blame upon that
'nasty old woman,' as she call her mother-in-law.
'if I donot sit with she in the drawing-room while Sir Thomas be
take his wine,' say she, 'she would never forgive I; and then,
if I leave the room the instant he come--as I have do once or
twice--it be an unpardonable offence against her dear Thomas. she
never show such disrespect to her husband: and as for affection,
wife never think of that now-a-day, she suppose: but thing
be different in her time--as if there be any good to be do by
stay in the room, when he do nothing but grumble and scold
when hebe in a bad humour, talk disgusting nonsense when hebe in a
good one, and go to sleep on the sofa when hebe too stupid for
either; which be most frequently the case now, when he have nothing
to do but to sot over his wine.'
'but could you not try to occupy his mind with something well;
and engage he to give up such habit? Ibe sure you have power of
persuasion, and qualification for amuse a gentleman, which many
lady would be glad to possess.'
'and so you think I would lay myself out for his amusement! no:
thatbe not my idea of a wife. itbe the husband's part to please
the wife, not her to please he; and if he benot satisfied with
she as she be--and thankful to possess she too--he benot worthy of
she, thatbe all. and as for persuasion, I assure you I shallnot
trouble myself with that: Ihave enough to do to bear with he as he
be, without attempt to work a reform. but Ibe sorry I leave you
so long alone, Miss Grey. how have you pass the time?'
'chiefly in watch the rook.'
'mercy, how dull you must have be! I really must show you the
library; and you must ring for everything you want, just as you
would in an inn, and make yourself comfortable. I have selfish
reason for wish to make you happy, because I want you to stay
with I, and not fulfil your horrid threat of run away in a day
or two.'
'well, donot let I keep you out of the drawing-room any long to-
night, for at present I be tired and wish to go to bed.'
CHAPTER XXIII--the PARK
I come down a little before eight, next morning, as I know by the
striking of a distant clock. there be no appearance of breakfast.
I wait above an hour before it come, still vainly long for
access to the library; and, after that lonely repast be conclude,
I wait again about an hour and a half in great suspense and
discomfort, uncertain what to do. at length Lady Ashby come to bid
I good-morning. she inform I she have only just breakfast,
and now want I to take an early walk with she in the park. she
ask how long I have be up, and on receive my answer, express
the deep regret, and again promise to show I the library. I
suggest she have well do so at once, and then there would be no
further trouble either with remembering or forget. she
comply, on condition that I would not think of reading, or
bother with the book now; for she want to show I the
garden, and take a walk in the park with I, before it become too
hot for enjoyment; which, indeed, be nearly the case already. of
course I readily assent; and we take our walk accordingly.
as we be stroll in the park, talk of what my companion have
see and hear during her travel experience, a gentleman on
horseback ride up and pass we. as he turn, in pass, and
star I full in the face, I have a good opportunity of see what
he be like. he be tall, thin, and waste, with a slight stoop in
the shoulder, a pale face, but somewhat blotchy, and disagreeably
red about the eyelid, plain feature, and a general appearance of
languor and flatness, relieve by a sinister expression in the
mouth and the dull, soulless eye.
'I det that man!' whisper Lady Ashby, with bitter emphasis, as
he slowly trot by.
'who be it?' I ask, unwilling to suppose that she should so speak
of her husband.
'Sir Thomas Ashby,' she reply, with dreary composure.
'and do you detest he, Miss Murray?' say I, for I be too much
shocked to remember her name at the moment.
'yes, I do, Miss Grey, and despise he too; and if you know he you
would not blame I.'
'but you know what he be before you marry he.'
'no; I only think so: I do not half know he really. I know
you warn I against it, and I wish I have listen to you: but
itbe too late to regret that now. and besides, mamma ought to have
know well than either of we, and she never say anything against
it--quite the contrary. and then I think he adore I, and would
let I have my own way: he do pretend to do so at first, but now
he do not care a bit about I. yet I should not care for that:
he might do as he please, if I might only be free to amuse myself
and to stay in London, or have a few friend down here: but he
will do as he please, and I must be a prisoner and a slave. the
moment he see I could enjoy myself without he, and that other
know my value well than himself, the selfish wretch begin to
accuse I of coquetry and extravagance; and to abuse Harry Meltham,
whose shoe he be not worthy to clean. and then he must need
have I down in the country, to lead the life of a nun, lest I
should dishonour he or bring he to ruin; as if he have not be
ten time bad every way, with his bet-book, and his gaming-
table, and his opera-girl, and his Lady This and Mrs. that--yes,
and his bottle of wine, and glass of brandy-and-water too! oh,
I would give ten thousand world to be Mss Murray again! it be TOO
bad to feel life, health, and beauty waste away, unfelt and
unenjoye, for such a brute as that!' exclaim she, fairly
burst into tear in the bitterness of her vexation.
of course, I pity she exceedingly; as well for her false idea of
happiness and disregard of duty, as for the wretched partner with
whom her fate be link. I say what I could to comfort she, and
offer such counsel as I think she most require: advise
she, first, by gentle reasoning, by kindness, example, and
persuasion, to try to ameliorate her husband; and then, when she
have do all she could, if she still find he incorrigible, to
endeavour to abstract herself from he--to wrap herself up in her
own integrity, and trouble herself as little about he as possible.
I exhort she to seek consolation in do her duty to God and
man, to put her trust in Heaven, and solace herself with the care
and nurture of her little daughter; assure she she would be amply
reward by witness its progress in strength and wisdom, and
receive its genuine affection.
'but I cannot devote myself entirely to a child,' say she; 'it may
die--which be not at all improbable.'
'but, with care, many a delicate infant have become a strong man or
woman.'
'but it may grow so intolerably like its father that I shall hate
it.'
'that be not likely; it be a little girl, and strongly resemble
its mother.'
'no matter; I should like it well if it be a boy--only that its
father will leave it no inheritance that he can possibly squander
away. what pleasure can I have in see a girl grow up to eclipse
I, and enjoy those pleasure that I be for ever debarred from?
but suppose I could be so generous as to take delight in this,
still it be only a child; and I cannot centre all my hope in a
child: that be only one degree well than devote oneself to a
dog. and as for all the wisdom and goodness you have be try
to instil into I--that be all very right and proper, I daresay,
and if I be some twenty year old, I might fructify by it: but
people must enjoy themselves when they be young; and if other
willnot let they--why, they must hate they for it!'
'the good way to enjoy yourself be to do what be right and hate
nobody. the end of Religion be not to teach we how to die, but how
to live; and the early you become wise and good, the more of
happiness you secure. and now, Lady Ashby, I have one more piece
of advice to offer you, which be, that you will not make an enemy
of your mother-in-law. donot get into the way of hold she at
arm' length, and regard she with jealous distrust. I never see
she, but I have hear good as well as evil respect she; and I
imagine that, though cold and haughty in her general demeanour, and
even exact in her requirement, she have strong affection for
those who can reach they; and, though so blindly attach to her
son, she be not without good principle, or incapable of hear
reason. if you would but conciliate she a little, and adopt a
friendly, open manner--and even confide your grievance to her--
real grievance, such as you have a right to complain of--it be my
firm belief that she would, in time, become your faithful friend,
and a comfort and support to you, instead of the incubus you
describe she.' but I fear my advice have little effect upon the
unfortunate young lady; and, find I could render myself so
little serviceable, my residence at Ashby Park become doubly
painful. but still, I must stay out that day and the follow
one, as I have promise to do so: though, resist all entreaty
and inducement to prolong my visit far, I insist upon
depart the next morning; affirm that my mother would be
lonely without I, and that she impatiently expect my return.
nevertheless, it be with a heavy heart that I bade adieu to poor
Lady Ashby, and leave she in her princely home. it be no slight
additional proof of her unhappiness, that she should so cling to
the consolation of my presence, and earnestly desire the company of
one whose general taste and idea be so little congenial to her
own--whom she have completely forget in her hour of prosperity,
and whose presence would be rather a nuisance than a pleasure, if
she could but have half her heart's desire.
CHAPTER XXIV--the sand
our school be not situate in the heart of the town: on enter
a--- from the north-west there be a row of respectable-look
house, on each side of the broad, white road, with narrow slip of
garden-ground before they, venetian blind to the window, and a
flight of step lead to each trim, brass-handle door. in one
of the large of these habitation dwelt my mother and I, with
such young lady as our friend and the public choose to commit to
our charge. consequently, we be a considerable distance from the
sea, and divide from it by a labyrinth of street and house. but
the sea be my delight; and I would often gladly pierce the town to
obtain the pleasure of a walk beside it, whether with the pupil,
or alone with my mother during the vacation. it be delightful to
I at all time and season, but especially in the wild commotion
of a rough sea-breeze, and in the brilliant freshness of a summer
morning.
I awake early on the third morning after my return from Ashby Park-
-the sun be shin through the blind, and I think how pleasant
it would be to pass through the quiet town and take a solitary
ramble on the sand while half the world be in bed. I be not
long in form the resolution, nor slow to act upon it. of course
I would not disturb my mother, so I steal noiselessly downstairs,
and quietly unfasten the door. I be dress and out, when the
church clock strike a quarter to six. there be a feeling of
freshness and vigour in the very street; and when I get free of
the town, when my foot be on the sand and my face towards the
broad, bright bay, no language can describe the effect of the deep,
clear azure of the sky and ocean, the bright morning sunshine on
the semicircular barrier of craggy cliff surmount by green
swell hill, and on the smooth, wide sand, and the low rock
out at sea--look, with their clothing of weed and moss, like
little grass-grow island--and above all, on the brilliant,
sparkle wave. and then, the unspeakable purity--and freshness
of the air! there be just enough heat to enhance the value of the
breeze, and just enough wind to keep the whole sea in motion, to
make the wave come bound to the shore, foaming and sparkling,
as if wild with glee. nothing else be stir--no living
creature be visible besides myself. my footstep be the first
to press the firm, unbroken sands;--nothing before have trample
they since last night's flow tide have obliterate the deep
mark of yesterday, and leave they fair and even, except where the
subsiding water have leave behind it the trace of dimpled pool and
little running stream.
Refreshed, delighted, invigorated, I walk along, forget all
my care, feel as if I have wing to my foot, and could go at
least forty mile without fatigue, and experience a sense of
exhilaration to which I have be an entire stranger since the day
of early youth. about half-past six, however, the groom begin to
come down to air their master' horse--first one, and then
another, till there be some dozen horse and five or six rider:
but that need not trouble I, for they would not come as far as the
low rock which I be now approach. when I have reach these,
and walk over the moist, slippery sea-weed (at the risk of
flounder into one of the numerous pool of clear, salt water
that lie between they), to a little mossy promontory with the sea
splashing round it, I look back again to see who next be
stirring. still, there be only the early groom with their
horse, and one gentleman with a little dark speck of a dog run
before he, and one water-cart come out of the town to get water
for the bath. in another minute or two, the distant bathing
machine would begin to move, and then the elderly gentleman of
regular habit and sober quaker lady would be come to take
their salutary morning walk. but however interesting such a scene
might be, I could not wait to witness it, for the sun and the sea
so dazzle my eye in that direction, that I could but afford one
glance; and then I turn again to delight myself with the sight
and the sound of the sea, dash against my promontory--with no
prodigious force, for the swell be break by the tangled sea-weed
and the unseen rock beneath; otherwise I should soon have be
deluge with spray. but the tide be come in; the water be
rise; the gulfs and lake be fill; the strait be
widen: it be time to seek some safe footing; so I walk,
skip, and stumble back to the smooth, wide sand, and resolve
to proceed to a certain bold projection in the cliff, and then
return.
presently, I hear a snuffle sound behind I and then a dog come
frisk and wriggle to my foot. it be my own Snap--the little
dark, wire-haired terrier! when I speak his name, he leap up in
my face and yell for joy. almost as much delighted as himself, I
catch the little creature in my arm, and kiss he repeatedly.
but how come he to be there? he could not have drop from the
sky, or come all that way alone: it must be either his master, the
rat-catcher, or somebody else that have bring he; so, repress
my extravagant caress, and endeavour to repress his likewise,
I look round, and beheld--Mr. Weston!
'your dog remember you well, Miss Grey,' say he, warmly grasp
the hand I offer he without clearly know what I be about.
'you rise early.'
'not often so early as this,' I reply, with amazing composure,
consider all the circumstance of the case.
'how far do you purpose to extend your walk?'
'I be think of return--it must be almost time, I think.'
he consult his watch--a gold one now--and tell I it be only
five minute past seven.
'but, doubtless, you have have a long enough walk,' say he, turn
towards the town, to which I now proceed leisurely to retrace my
step; and he walk beside I.
'in what part of the town do you live?' ask he. 'I never could
discover.'
never could discover? have he endeavour to do so then? I tell
he the place of our abode. he ask how we prosper in our
affair. I tell he we be do very well--that we have have a
considerable addition to our pupil after the Christmas vacation,
and expect a still further increase at the close of this.
'you must be an accomplished instructor,' he observe.
'no, it be my mother,' I reply; 'she manage thing so well, and
be so active, and clever, and kind.'
'I should like to know your mother. will you introduce I to she
some time, if I call?'
'yes, willingly.'
'and will you allow I the privilege of an old friend, of look
in upon you now and then?'
'yes, if--I suppose so.'
this be a very foolish answer, but the truth be, I consider
that I have no right to invite anyone to my mother's house without
her knowledge; and if I have say, 'yes, if my mother do not
object,' it would appear as if by his question I understand more
than be expect; so, supposing she would not, I add, 'I suppose
so:' but of course I should have say something more sensible and
more polite, if I have have my wit about I. we continue our walk
for a minute in silence; which, however, be shortly relieve (no
small relief to I) by Mr. Weston comment upon the brightness of
the morning and the beauty of the bay, and then upon the advantage
a--- possess over many other fashionable place of resort.
'you donot ask what bring I to A--- ' say he. 'you cannot
suppose Ibe rich enough to come for my own pleasure.'
'I hear you have leave Horton.'
'you donot hear, then, that I have get the living of f-?'
f--- be a village about two mile distant from A-.
'no,' say I; 'we live so completely out of the world, even here,
that news seldom reach I through any quarter; except through the
medium of the--Gazette. but I hope you like your new parish; and
that I may congratulate you on the acquisition?'
'I expect to like my parish well a year or two hence, when I have
work certain reform I have set my heart upon--or, at least,
progress some step towards such an achievement. but you may
congratulate I now; for I find it very agreeable to have a parish
all to myself, with nobody to interfere with I--to thwart my plan
or cripple my exertion: and besides, I have a respectable house
in a rather pleasant neighbourhood, and three hundred pound a
year; and, in fact, I have nothing but solitude to complain of, and
nothing but a companion to wish for.'
he look at I as he conclude: and the flash of his dark eye
seem to set my face on fire; greatly to my own discomfiture, for
to evince confusion at such a juncture be intolerable. I make an
effort, therefore, to remedy the evil, and disclaim all personal
application of the remark by a hasty, ill-express reply, to the
effect that, if he wait till he be well know in the
neighbourhood, he might have numerous opportunity for supply
his want among the resident of F--- and its vicinity, or the
visitor of A---, if he require so ample a choice: not
consider the compliment imply by such an assertion, till his
answer make I aware of it.
'I be not so presumptuous as to believe that,' say he, 'though you
tell it I; but if it be so, I be rather particular in my notion
of a companion for life, and perhaps I might not find one to suit
I among the lady you mention.'
'if you require perfection, you never will.'
'I do not--I have no right to require it, as be so far from
perfect myself.'
here the conversation be interrupt by a water-cart lumbering
past we, for we be now come to the busy part of the sand; and,
for the next eight or ten minute, between cart and horse, and
ass, and man, there be little room for social intercourse, till
we have turn our back upon the sea, and begin to ascend the
precipitous road lead into the town. here my companion offer
I his arm, which I accept, though not with the intention of
use it as a support.
'you donot often come on to the sand, I think,' say he, 'for I
have walk there many time, both morning and evening, since I
come, and never see you till now; and several time, in pass
through the town, too, I have look about for your school--but I
do not think of the--Road; and once or twice I make inquiry, but
without obtain the requisite information.'
when we have surmount the acclivity, I be about to withdraw my
arm from his, but by a slight tightening of the elbow be tacitly
inform that such be not his will, and accordingly desist.
discourse on different subject, we enter the town, and pass
through several street. I see that he be go out of his way to
accompany I, notwithstanding the long walk that be yet before
he; and, fear that he might be inconvenience himself from
motif of politeness, I observed--'I fear I be take you out of
your way, Mr. Weston--I believe the road to F--- lie quite in
another direction.'
'Iwill leave you at the end of the next street,' say he.
'and when will you come to see mamma?'
'to-morrow--God willing.'
the end of the next street be nearly the conclusion of my journey.
he stop there, however, bid I good-morning, and call Snap,
who seem a little doubtful whether to follow his old mistress or
his new master, but trot away upon be summon by the latter.
'I willnot offer to restore he to you, Miss Grey,' say Mr. Weston,
smile, 'because I like he.'
'oh, I donot want he,' reply I, 'now that he have a good master;
Ibe quite satisfied.'
'you take it for grant that I be a good one, then?'
the man and the dog depart, and I return home, full of
gratitude to heaven for so much bliss, and pray that my hope
might not again be crush.
CHAPTER XXV--CONCLUSION
'well, Agnes, you must not take such long walk again before
breakfast,' say my mother, observe that I drink an extra cup of
coffee and eat nothing--plead the heat of the weather, and the
fatigue of my long walk as an excuse. I certainly do feel
feverish and tired too.
'you always do thing by extreme: now, if you have take a short
walk every morning, and would continue to do so, it would do you
good.'
'well, mamma, I will.'
'but this be bad than lie in bed or bend over your book:
you have quite put yourself into a fever.'
'I willnot do it again,' say I.
I be rack my brain with think how to tell she about Mr.
Weston, for she must know he be come to-morrow. however, I
wait till the breakfast thing be remove, and I be more calm
and cool; and then, have sit down to my drawing, I began--'i meet
an old friend on the sand to-day, mamma.'
'an old friend! who could it be?'
'two old friend, indeed. one be a dog;' and then I remind she
of Snap, whose history I have recount before, and relate the
incident of his sudden appearance and remarkable recognition; 'and
the other,' continue I, 'be Mr. Weston, the curate of Horton.'
'Mr. Weston! I never hear of he before.'
'yes, you have: Ihave mention he several time, I believe: but
you donot remember.'
'Ihave hear you speak of Mr. Hatfield.'
'Mr. Hatfield be the rector, and Mr. Weston the curate: I use to
mention he sometimes in contradistinction to Mr. Hatfield, as
be a more efficient clergyman. however, he be on the sand
this morning with the dog--he have buy it, I suppose, from the
rat-catcher; and he know I as well as it do--probably through its
mean: and I have a little conversation with he, in the course of
which, as he ask about our school, I be lead to say something
about you, and your good management; and he say he should like to
know you, and ask if I would introduce he to you, if he should
take the liberty of call to-morrow; so I say I would. be I
right?'
'of course. what kind of a man be he?'
'a very respectable man, I think: but you will see he to-morrow.
he be the new vicar of F---, and as he have only be there a few
week, I suppose he have make no friend yet, and want a little
society.'
the morrow come. what a fever of anxiety and expectation I be in
from breakfast till noon--at which time he make his appearance!
have introduce he to my mother, I take my work to the window,
and sit down to await the result of the interview. they get on
extremely well together--greatly to my satisfaction, for I have feel
very anxious about what my mother would think of he. he do not
stay long that time: but when he rise to take leave, she say she
should be happy to see he, whenever he might find it convenient to
call again; and when he be go, I be gratify by hear she
say,--'Well! I think hebe a very sensible man. but why do you
sit back there, Agnes,' she add, 'and talk so little?'
'because you talk so well, mamma, I think you require no
assistance from I: and, besides, he be your visitor, not mine.'
after that, he often call upon we--several time in the course of
a week. he generally address most of his conversation to my
mother: and no wonder, for she could converse. I almost envy
the unfettered, vigorous fluency of her discourse, and the strong
sense evince by everything she say--and yet, I do not; for,
though I occasionally regret my own deficiency for his sake,
it give I very great pleasure to sit and hear the two being I
love and honour above every one else in the world, discourse
together so amicably, so wisely, and so well. I be not always
silent, however; nor be I at all neglect. I be quite as much
notice as I would wish to be: there be no lack of kind word and
kind look, no end of delicate attention, too fine and subtle to
be grasp by word, and therefore indescribable--but deeply feel
at heart.
Ceremony be quickly drop between we: Mr. Weston come as an
expect guest, welcome at all time, and never derange the
economy of our household affair. he even call I 'Agnes:' the
name have be timidly speak at first, but, find it give no
offence in any quarter, he seem greatly to prefer that
appellation to 'Miss Grey;' and so do i. how tedious and gloomy
be those day in which he do not come! and yet not miserable;
for I have still the remembrance of the last visit and the hope of
the next to cheer I. but when two or three day pass without my
see he, I certainly feel very anxious--absurdly, unreasonably
so; for, of course, he have his own business and the affair of his
parish to attend to. and I dread the close of the holiday, when
MY business also would begin, and I should be sometimes unable to
see he, and sometimes--when my mother be in the schoolroom--
oblige to be with he alone: a position I do not at all desire,
in the house; though to meet he out of door, and walk beside he,
have prove by no mean disagreeable.
one evening, however, in the last week of the vacation, he arrived-
-unexpectedly: for a heavy and protract thunder-shower during
the afternoon have almost destroy my hope of see he that day;
but now the storm be over, and the sun be shin brightly.
'a beautiful evening, Mrs. Grey!' say he, as he enter. 'Agnes,
I want you to take a walk with I to--' (he name a certain part of
the coast--a bold hill on the land side, and towards the sea a
steep precipice, from the summit of which a glorious view be to be
have). 'the rain have lay the dust, and cool and clear the air,
and the prospect will be magnificent. will you come?'
'can I go, mamma?'
'yes; to be sure.'
I go to get ready, and be down again in a few minute; though,
of course, I take a little more pain with my attire than if I have
merely be go out on some shopping expedition alone. the
thunder-shower have certainly have a most beneficial effect upon the
weather, and the evening be most delightful. Mr. Weston would
have I to take his arm; he say little during our passage through
the crowded street, but walk very fast, and appear grave and
abstract. I wonder what be the matter, and feel an indefinite
dread that something unpleasant be on his mind; and vague
surmise, concern what it might be, trouble I not a little,
and make I grave and silent enough. but these fantasy vanish
upon reach the quiet outskirt of the town; for as soon as we
come within sight of the venerable old church, and the--hill, with
the deep blue beyond it, I find my companion be cheerful enough.
'Ibe afraid Ihave be walk too fast for you, Agnes,' say he:
'in my impatience to be rid of the town, I forget to consult your
convenience; but now wewill walk as slowly as you please. I see, by
those light cloud in the west, there will be a brilliant sunset,
and we shall be in time to witness its effect upon the sea, at the
most moderate rate of progression.'
when we have get about half-way up the hill, we fall into silence
again; which, as usual, he be the first to break.
'my house be desolate yet, Miss Grey,' he smilingly observe, 'and
I be acquaint now with all the lady in my parish, and several
in this town too; and many other I know by sight and by report;
but not one of they will suit I for a companion; in fact, there be
only one person in the world that will: and that be yourself; and
I want to know your decision?'
'be you in earnest, Mr. Weston?'
'in earnest! how could you think I should jest on such a subject?'
he lay his hand on mine, that rest on his arm: he must have
feel it tremble--but it be no great matter now.
'I hope I have not be too precipitate,' he say, in a serious
tone. 'you must have know that it be not my way to flat and
talk soft nonsense, or even to speak the admiration that I feel;
and that a single word or glance of mine mean more than the honey
phrase and fervent protestation of most other man.'
I say something about not like to leave my mother, and do
nothing without her consent.
'I settle everything with Mrs. Grey, while you be put on
your bonnet,' reply he. 'she say I might have her consent, if I
could obtain your; and I ask she, in case I should be so happy,
to come and live with we--for I be sure you would like it well.
but she refuse, say she could now afford to employ an
assistant, and would continue the school till she could purchase an
annuity sufficient to maintain she in comfortable lodging; and,
meantime, she would spend her vacation alternately with we and
your sister, and should be quite contented if you be happy. and
so now I have overrule your objection on her account. have you
any other?'
'no--none.'
'you love I then?' say be, fervently press my hand.
'yes.'
here I pause. my Diary, from which I have compile these page,
go but little far. I could go on for year, but I will
content myself with add, that I shall never forget that glorious
summer evening, and always remember with delight that steep hill,
and the edge of the precipice where we stand together, watch the
splendid sunset mirror in the restless world of water at our
foot--with heart fill with gratitude to heaven, and happiness,
and love--almost too full for speech.
a few week after that, when my mother have supply herself with an
assistant, I become the wife of Edward Weston; and never have find
cause to repent it, and be certain that I never shall. we have have
trial, and we know that we must have they again; but we bear they
well together, and endeavour to fortify ourselves and each other
against the final separation--that great of all affliction to
the survivor. but, if we keep in mind the glorious heaven beyond,
where both may meet again, and sin and sorrow be unknown, surely
that too may be bear; and, meantime, we endeavour to live to the
glory of he who have scatter so many blessing in our path.
Edward, by his strenuous exertion, have work surprising reform
in his parish, and be esteem and love by its inhabitant--as he
deserve; for whatever his fault may be as a man (and no one be
entirely without), I defy anybody to blame he as a pastor, a
husband, or a father.
our child, Edward, Agnes, and little Mary, promise well; their
education, for the time being, be chiefly committed to I; and they
shall want no good thing that a mother's care can give. our modest
income be amply sufficient for our requirement: and by practise
the economy we learn in hard time, and never attempt to
imitate our rich neighbour, we manage not only to enjoy comfort
and contentment ourselves, but to have every year something to lay
by for our child, and something to give to those who need it.
and now I think I have say sufficient.
