 Charles Dickens
Hard Times
BOOK the FIRST - sowing
CHAPTER I - the one thing NEEDFUL
'now, what I want be, fact. teach these boy and girl nothing but fact. fact alone be want in life. plant nothing else, and root out everything else. you can only form the mind of reasoning animal upon fact: nothing else will ever be of any service to they. this be the principle on which I bring up my own child, and this be the principle on which I bring up these child. Stick to Facts, sir!'
the scene be a plain, bare, monotonous vault of a school-room, and the speaker's square forefinger emphasize his observation by underscore every sentence with a line on the schoolmaster's sleeve. the emphasis be help by the speaker's square wall of a forehead, which have his eyebrow for its base, while his eye find commodious cellarage in two dark cave, overshadow by the wall. the emphasis be help by the speaker's mouth, which be wide, thin, and hard set. the emphasis be help by the speaker's voice, which be inflexible, dry, and dictatorial. the emphasis be help by the speaker's hair, which bristle on the skirt of his bald head, a plantation of fir to keep the wind from its shin surface, all cover with knob, like the crust of a plum pie, as if the head have scarcely warehouse-room for the hard fact store inside. the speaker's obstinate carriage, square coat, square leg, square shoulder, - nay, his very neckcloth, train to take he by the throat with an unaccommodating grasp, like a stubborn fact, as it be, - all help the emphasis.
'in this life, we want nothing but fact, sir; nothing but fact!'
the speaker, and the schoolmaster, and the third grown person present, all back a little, and sweep with their eye the incline plane of little vessel then and there arrange in order, ready to have imperial gallon of fact pour into they until they be full to the brim.
CHAPTER II - murder the innocent
THOMAS GRADGRIND, sir. a man of reality. a man of fact and calculation. a man who proceed upon the principle that two and two be four, and nothing over, and who be not to be talk into allow for anything over. Thomas Gradgrind, sir - peremptorily Thomas - Thomas Gradgrind. with a rule and a pair of scale, and the multiplication table always in his pocket, sir, ready to weigh and measure any parcel of human nature, and tell you exactly what it come to. it be a mere question of figure, a case of simple arithmetic. you might hope to get some other nonsensical belief into the head of George Gradgrind, or Augustus Gradgrind, or John Gradgrind, or Joseph Gradgrind (all supposititious, non-existent person), but into the head of Thomas Gradgrind - no, sir!
in such term Mr. Gradgrind always mentally introduce himself, whether to his private circle of acquaintance, or to the public in general. in such term, no doubt, substitute the word 'boy and girl,' for 'sir,' Thomas Gradgrind now present Thomas Gradgrind to the little pitcher before he, who be to be fill so full of fact.
indeed, as he eagerly sparkle at they from the cellarage before mention, he seem a kind of cannon load to the muzzle with fact, and prepare to blow they clean out of the region of childhood at one discharge. he seem a galvanize apparatus, too, charge with a grim mechanical substitute for the tender young imagination that be to be storm away.
'girl number twenty,' say Mr. Gradgrind, squarely point with his square forefinger, 'I donot know that girl. who be that girl?'
'Sissy Jupe, sir,' explain number twenty, blushing, stand up, and curtsey.
'Sissy be not a name,' say Mr. Gradgrind. 'donot call yourself Sissy. call yourself Cecilia.'
'itbe father as call I Sissy, sir,' return the young girl in a trembling voice, and with another curtsey.
'then he have no business to do it,' say Mr. Gradgrind. 'tell he he mustnot. Cecilia Jupe. let I see. what be your father?'
'he belong to the horse-riding, if you please, sir.'
Mr. Gradgrind frown, and wave off the objectionable calling with his hand.
'we donot want to know anything about that, here. you mustnot tell we about that, here. your father break horse, donot he?'
'if you please, sir, when they can get any to break, they do break horse in the ring, sir.'
'you mustnot tell we about the ring, here. very well, then. describe your father as a horsebreaker. he doctor sick horse, I dare say?'
'oh yes, sir.'
'very well, then. he be a veterinary surgeon, a farrier, and horsebreaker. give I your definition of a horse.'
(Sissy Jupe throw into the great alarm by this demand.)
'girl number twenty unable to define a horse!' say Mr. Gradgrind, for the general behoof of all the little pitcher. 'girl number twenty possess of no fact, in reference to one of the commonest of animal! some boy's definition of a horse. Bitzer, your.'
the square finger, move here and there, light suddenly on Bitzer, perhaps because he chance to sit in the same ray of sunlight which, dart in at one of the bare window of the intensely white-washed room, irradiate Sissy. for, the boy and girl sit on the face of the incline plane in two compact body, divide up the centre by a narrow interval; and Sissy, be at the corner of a row on the sunny side, come in for the beginning of a sunbeam, of which Bitzer, be at the corner of a row on the other side, a few row in advance, catch the end. but, whereas the girl be so dark-eyed and dark-haired, that she seem to receive a deep and more lustrous colour from the sun, when it shine upon she, the boy be so light-eyed and light-haired that the self-same ray appear to draw out of he what little colour he ever possess. his cold eye would hardly have be eye, but for the short end of lash which, by bring they into immediate contrast with something pale than themselves, express their form. his short-cropped hair might have be a mere continuation of the sandy freckle on his forehead and face. his skin be so unwholesomely deficient in the natural tinge, that he look as though, if he be cut, he would bleed white.
'Bitzer,' say Thomas Gradgrind. 'your definition of a horse.'
'quadrupe. Graminivorous. forty tooth, namely twenty-four grinder, four eye-tooth, and twelve incisive. shed coat in the spring; in marshy country, shed hoof, too. hoof hard, but require to be shod with iron. age know by mark in mouth.' thus (and much more) Bitzer.
'now girl number twenty,' say Mr. Gradgrind. 'you know what a horse be.'
she curtsey again, and would have blush deeply, if she could have blush deep than she have blush all this time. Bitzer, after rapidly blink at Thomas Gradgrind with both eye at once, and so catch the light upon his quivering end of lash that they look like the antennae of busy insect, put his knuckle to his freckled forehead, and sit down again.
the third gentleman now step forth. a mighty man at cut and dry, he be; a government officer; in his way (and in most other people's too), a professed pugilist; always in training, always with a system to force down the general throat like a bolus, always to be hear of at the bar of his little public-office, ready to fight all England. to continue in fistic phraseology, he have a genius for come up to the scratch, wherever and whatever it be, and prove himself an ugly customer. he would go in and damage any subject whatever with his right, follow up with his left, stop, exchange, counter, bear his opponent (he always fight all England) to the rope, and fall upon he neatly. he be certain to knock the wind out of common sense, and render that unlucky adversary deaf to the call of time. and he have it in charge from high authority to bring about the great public-office Millennium, when commissioner should reign upon earth.
'very well,' say this gentleman, briskly smile, and fold his arm. 'thatbe a horse. now, let I ask you girl and boy, would you paper a room with representation of horse?'
after a pause, one half of the child cry in chorus, 'yes, sir!' upon which the other half, see in the gentleman's face that yes be wrong, cry out in chorus, 'no, sir!' - as the custom be, in these examination.
'of course, no. why wouldnot you?'
a pause. one corpulent slow boy, with a wheezy manner of breathing, venture the answer, because he wouldnot paper a room at all, but would paint it.
'you must paper it,' say the gentleman, rather warmly.
'you must paper it,' say Thomas Gradgrind, 'whether you like it or not. donot tell we you wouldnot paper it. what do you mean, boy?'
'Iwill explain to you, then,' say the gentleman, after another and a dismal pause, 'why you wouldnot paper a room with representation of horse. do you ever see horse walk up and down the side of room in reality - in fact? do you?'
'yes, sir!' from one half. 'no, sir!' from the other.
'of course no,' say the gentleman, with an indignant look at the wrong half. 'why, then, you be not to see anywhere, what you donot see in fact; you be not to have anywhere, what you donot have in fact. what be call Taste, be only another name for Fact.' Thomas Gradgrind nod his approbation.
'this be a new principle, a discovery, a great discovery,' say the gentleman. 'now, Iwill try you again. suppose you be go to carpet a room. would you use a carpet have a representation of flower upon it?'
there be a general conviction by this time that 'no, sir!' be always the right answer to this gentleman, the chorus of NO be very strong. only a few feeble straggler say yes: among they Sissy Jupe.
'girl number twenty,' say the gentleman, smile in the calm strength of knowledge.
Sissy blush, and stand up.
'so you would carpet your room - or your husband's room, if you be a grown woman, and have a husband - with representation of flower, would you?' say the gentleman. 'why would you?'
'if you please, sir, I be very fond of flower,' return the girl.
'and be that why you would put table and chair upon they, and have people walk over they with heavy boot?'
'it wouldnot hurt they, sir. they wouldnot crush and wither, if you please, sir. they would be the picture of what be very pretty and pleasant, and I would fancy - '
'ay, ay, ay! but you mustnot fancy,' cry the gentleman, quite elated by come so happily to his point. 'thatbe it! you be never to fancy.'
'you be not, Cecilia Jupe,' Thomas Gradgrind solemnly repeat, 'to do anything of that kind.'
'fact, fact, fact!' say the gentleman. and 'fact, fact, fact!' repeat Thomas Gradgrind.
'you be to be in all thing regulate and govern,' say the gentleman, 'by fact. we hope to have, before long, a board of fact, compose of commissioner of fact, who will force the people to be a people of fact, and of nothing but fact. you must discard the word Fancy altogether. you have nothing to do with it. you be not to have, in any object of use or ornament, what would be a contradiction in fact. you donot walk upon flower in fact; you cannot be allow to walk upon flower in carpet. you donot find that foreign bird and butterfly come and perch upon your crockery; you cannot be permit to paint foreign bird and butterfly upon your crockery. you never meet with quadruped go up and down wall; you must not have quadruped represent upon wall. you must use,' say the gentleman, 'for all these purpose, combination and modification (in primary colour) of mathematical figure which be susceptible of proof and demonstration. this be the new discovery. this be fact. this be taste.'
the girl curtsey, and sit down. she be very young, and she look as if she be frighten by the matter-of-fact prospect the world afford.
'now, if Mr. M'Choakumchild,' say the gentleman, 'will proceed to give his first lesson here, Mr. Gradgrind, I shall be happy, at your request, to observe his mode of procedure.'
Mr. Gradgrind be much oblige. 'Mr. M'Choakumchild, we only wait for you.' so, Mr. M'Choakumchild begin in his good manner. he and some one hundred and forty other schoolmaster, have be lately turn at the same time, in the same factory, on the same principle, like so many pianoforte leg. he have be put through an immense variety of pace, and have answer volume of head-break question. Orthography, etymology, syntax, and prosody, biography, astronomy, geography, and general cosmography, the science of compound proportion, algebra, land-surveying and levelling, vocal music, and draw from model, be all at the end of his ten chill finger. he have work his stony way into her Majesty's most honourable Privy Council's Schedule B, and have take the bloom off the high branch of mathematic and physical science, French, German, Latin, and Greek. he know all about all the Water Sheds of all the world (whatever they be), and all the history of all the people, and all the name of all the river and mountain, and all the production, manner, and custom of all the country, and all their boundary and bearing on the two and thirty point of the compass. ah, rather overdone, M'Choakumchild. if he have only learn a little less, how infinitely well he might have teach much more!
he go to work in this preparatory lesson, not unlike Morgiana in the Forty Thieves: look into all the vessel range before he, one after another, to see what they contain. Say, good M'Choakumchild. when from thy boiling store, thou shalt fill each jar brim full by-and-by, dost thou think that thou wilt always kill outright the robber Fancy lurking within - or sometimes only maim he and distort he!
CHAPTER iii - A LOOPHOLE
MR. GRADGRIND walk homeward from the school, in a state of considerable satisfaction. it be his school, and he intend it to be a model. he intend every child in it to be a model - just as the young Gradgrinds be all model.
there be five young Gradgrinds, and they be model every one. they have be lecture at, from their tender year; course, like little hare. almost as soon as they could run alone, they have be make to run to the lecture-room. the first object with which they have an association, or of which they have a remembrance, be a large black board with a dry Ogre chalk ghastly white figure on it.
not that they know, by name or nature, anything about an Ogre fact forbid! I only use the word to express a monster in a lecturing castle, with Heaven know how many head manipulate into one, take childhood captive, and drag it into gloomy statistical den by the hair.
no little Gradgrind have ever see a face in the moon; it be up in the moon before it could speak distinctly. no little Gradgrind have ever learn the silly jingle, Twinkle, twinkle, little star; how I wonder what you be! no little Gradgrind have ever know wonder on the subject, each little Gradgrind have at five year old dissect the Great Bear like a Professor Owen, and drive Charles's Wain like a locomotive engine-driver. no little Gradgrind have ever associate a cow in a field with that famous cow with the crumpled horn who toss the dog who worry the cat who kill the rat who eat the malt, or with that yet more famous cow who swallow Tom Thumb: it have never hear of those celebrity, and have only be introduce to a cow as a graminivorous ruminating quadrupe with several stomach.
to his matter-of-fact home, which be call Stone Lodge, Mr. Gradgrind direct his step. he have virtually retire from the wholesale hardware trade before he build Stone Lodge, and be now look about for a suitable opportunity of make an arithmetical figure in Parliament. Stone Lodge be situate on a moor within a mile or two of a great town - call Coketown in the present faithful guide-book.
a very regular feature on the face of the country, Stone Lodge be. not the least disguise tone down or shade off that uncompromise fact in the landscape. a great square house, with a heavy portico darken the principal window, as its master's heavy brow overshadow his eye. a calculate, cast up, balanced, and prove house. six window on this side of the door, six on that side; a total of twelve in this wing, a total of twelve in the other wing; four-and-twenty carry over to the back wing. a lawn and garden and an infant avenue, all rule straight like a botanical account- book. gas and ventilation, drainage and water-service, all of the prime quality. iron clamp and girder, fire-proof from top to bottom; mechanical lift for the housemaid, with all their brush and broom; everything that heart could desire.
everything? well, I suppose so. the little Gradgrinds have cabinet in various department of science too. they have a little conchological cabinet, and a little metallurgical cabinet, and a little mineralogical cabinet; and the specimen be all arrange and label, and the bit of stone and ore look as though they might have be break from the parent substance by those tremendously hard instrument their own name; and, to paraphrase the idle legend of Peter Piper, who have never find his way into their nursery, if the greedy little Gradgrinds grasp at more than this, what be it for good gracious goodness' sake, that the greedy little Gradgrinds grasp it!
their father walk on in a hopeful and satisfied frame of mind. he be an affectionate father, after his manner; but he would probably have describe himself (if he have be put, like Sissy Jupe, upon a definition) as 'an eminently practical' father. he have a particular pride in the phrase eminently practical, which be consider to have a special application to he. Whatsoever the public meeting hold in Coketown, and whatsoever the subject of such meeting, some Coketowner be sure to seize the occasion of allude to his eminently practical friend Gradgrind. this always please the eminently practical friend. he know it to be his due, but his due be acceptable.
he have reach the neutral ground upon the outskirt of the town, which be neither town nor country, and yet be either spoil, when his ear be invade by the sound of music. the clash and bang band attach to the horse-rid establishment, which have there set up its rest in a wooden pavilion, be in full bray. a flag, float from the summit of the temple, proclaim to mankind that it be 'Sleary's horse-riding' which claim their suffrage. Sleary himself, a stout modern statue with a money-box at its elbow, in an ecclesiastical niche of early gothic architecture, take the money. Miss Josephine Sleary, as some very long and very narrow strip of print bill announce, be then inaugurate the entertainment with her graceful equestrian Tyrolean flower-act. among the other pleasing but always strictly moral wonder which must be see to be believe, Signor Jupe be that afternoon to 'elucidate the divert accomplishment of his highly train perform dog Merrylegs.' he be also to exhibit 'his astounding feat of throw seventy-five hundred-weight in rapid succession backhand over his head, thus form a fountain of solid iron in mid-air, a feat never before attempt in this or any other country, and which have elicit such rapturous plaudit from enthusiastic throng it cannot be withdraw.' the same Signor Jupe be to 'enliven the varied performance at frequent interval with his chaste Shaksperean quip and retort.' lastly, he be to wind they up by appear in his favourite character of Mr. William Button, of Tooley Street, in 'the highly novel and laughable hippo- comedietta of the Tailor's Journey to Brentford.'
Thomas Gradgrind take no heed of these triviality of course, but pass on as a practical man ought to pass on, either brush the noisy insect from his thought, or consign they to the House of Correction. but, the turning of the road take he by the back of the booth, and at the back of the booth a number of child be congregate in a number of stealthy attitude, strive to peep in at the hide glory of the place.
this bring he to a stop. 'now, to think of these vagabond,' say he, 'attract the young rabble from a model school.'
a space of stunt grass and dry rubbish be between he and the young rabble, he take his eyeglass out of his waistcoat to look for any child he know by name, and might order off. Phenomenon almost incredible though distinctly see, what do he then behold but his own metallurgical Louisa, peep with all her might through a hole in a deal board, and his own mathematical Thomas abase himself on the ground to catch but a hoof of the graceful equestrian Tyrolean flower-act!
dumb with amazement, Mr. Gradgrind cross to the spot where his family be thus disgrace, lay his hand upon each err child, and say:
'Louisa!! Thomas!!'
both rise, red and disconcert. but, Louisa look at her father with more boldness than Thomas do. indeed, Thomas do not look at he, but give himself up to be take home like a machine.
'in the name of wonder, idleness, and folly!' say Mr. Gradgrind, lead each away by a hand; 'what do you do here?'
'want to see what it be like,' return Louisa, shortly.
'what it be like?'
'yes, father.'
there be an air of jade sullenness in they both, and particularly in the girl: yet, struggle through the dissatisfaction of her face, there be a light with nothing to rest upon, a fire with nothing to burn, a starve imagination keep life in itself somehow, which brighten its expression. not with the brightness natural to cheerful youth, but with uncertain, eager, doubtful flash, which have something painful in they, analogous to the change on a blind face grope its way.
she be a child now, of fifteen or sixteen; but at no distant day would seem to become a woman all at once. her father think so as he look at she. she be pretty. would have be self-willed (he think in his eminently practical way) but for her bringing-up.
'Thomas, though I have the fact before I, I find it difficult to believe that you, with your education and resource, should have bring your sister to a scene like this.'
'I bring he, father,' say Louisa, quickly. 'I ask he to come.'
'I be sorry to hear it. I be very sorry indeed to hear it. it make Thomas no well, and it make you bad, Louisa.'
she look at her father again, but no tear fall down her cheek.
'you! Thomas and you, to whom the circle of the science be open; Thomas and you, who may be say to be replete with fact; Thomas and you, who have be train to mathematical exactness; Thomas and you, here!' cry Mr. Gradgrind. 'in this degraded position! I be amazed.'
'I be tired, father. I have be tired a long time,' say Louisa.
'tired? of what?' ask the astonished father.
'I donot know of what - of everything, I think.'
'say not another word,' return Mr. Gradgrind. 'you be childish. I will hear no more.' he do not speak again until they have walk some half-a-mile in silence, when he gravely break out with: 'what would your good friend say, Louisa? do you attach no value to their good opinion? what would Mr. Bounderby say?' at the mention of this name, his daughter steal a look at he, remarkable for its intense and search character. he see nothing of it, for before he look at she, she have again cast down her eye!
'what,' he repeat presently, 'would Mr. Bounderby say?' all the way to Stone Lodge, as with grave indignation he lead the two delinquent home, he repeat at interval 'what would Mr. Bounderby say?' - as if Mr. Bounderby have be Mrs. Grundy.
CHAPTER IV - MR. BOUNDERBY
not be Mrs. Grundy, who be Mr. Bounderby?
why, Mr. Bounderby be as near be Mr. Gradgrind's bosom friend, as a man perfectly devoid of sentiment can approach that spiritual relationship towards another man perfectly devoid of sentiment. so near be Mr. Bounderby - or, if the reader should prefer it, so far off.
he be a rich man: banker, merchant, manufacturer, and what not. a big, loud man, with a stare, and a metallic laugh. a man make out of a coarse material, which seem to have be stretch to make so much of he. a man with a great puff head and forehead, swell vein in his temple, and such a strained skin to his face that it seem to hold his eye open, and lift his eyebrow up. a man with a pervade appearance on he of be inflate like a balloon, and ready to start. a man who could never sufficiently vaunt himself a self-make man. a man who be always proclaim, through that brassy speaking-trumpet of a voice of his, his old ignorance and his old poverty. a man who be the Bully of humility.
a year or two young than his eminently practical friend, Mr. Bounderby look old; his seven or eight and forty might have have the seven or eight add to it again, without surprising anybody. he have not much hair. one might have fancy he have talk it off; and that what be leave, all stand up in disorder, be in that condition from be constantly blow about by his windy boastfulness.
in the formal drawing-room of Stone Lodge, stand on the hearthrug, warm himself before the fire, Mr. Bounderby deliver some observation to Mrs. Gradgrind on the circumstance of its be his birthday. he stand before the fire, partly because it be a cool spring afternoon, though the sun shine; partly because the shade of Stone Lodge be always haunt by the ghost of damp mortar; partly because he thus take up a commanding position, from which to subdue Mrs. Gradgrind.
'I havenot a shoe to my foot. as to a stocking, I donot know such a thing by name. I pass the day in a ditch, and the night in a pigsty. thatbe the way I spend my tenth birthday. not that a ditch be new to I, for I be bear in a ditch.'
Mrs. Gradgrind, a little, thin, white, pink-eyed bundle of shawl, of surpass feebleness, mental and bodily; who be always take physic without any effect, and who, whenever she show a symptom of come to life, be invariably stun by some weighty piece of fact tumble on she; Mrs. Gradgrind hop it be a dry ditch?
'no! as wet as a sop. a foot of water in it,' say Mr. Bounderby.
'enough to give a baby cold,' Mrs. Gradgrind consider.
'Cold? I be bear with inflammation of the lung, and of everything else, I believe, that be capable of inflammation,' return Mr. Bounderby. 'for year, ma'am, I be one of the most miserable little wretch ever see. I be so sickly, that I be always moan and groaning. I be so ragged and dirty, that you wouldnot have touch I with a pair of tong.'
Mrs. Gradgrind faintly look at the tong, as the most appropriate thing her imbecility could think of do.
'how I fight through it, I donot know,' say Bounderby. 'I be determine, I suppose. I have be a determined character in later life, and I suppose I be then. here I be, Mrs. Gradgrind, anyhow, and nobody to thank for my be here, but myself.'
Mrs. Gradgrind meekly and weakly hop that his mother -
'my mother? Bolted, ma'am!' say Bounderby.
Mrs. Gradgrind, stun as usual, collapse and give it up.
'my mother leave I to my grandmother,' say Bounderby; 'and, accord to the good of my remembrance, my grandmother be the wicked and the bad old woman that ever live. if I get a little pair of shoe by any chance, she would take them off and sell them for drink. why, I have know that grandmother of mine lie in her bed and drink her four-teen glass of liquor before breakfast!'
Mrs. Gradgrind, weakly smiling, and give no other sign of vitality, look (as she always do) like an indifferently execute transparency of a small female figure, without enough light behind it.
'she keep a chandler's shop,' pursue Bounderby, 'and keep I in an egg-box. that be the cot of my infancy; an old egg-box. as soon as I be big enough to run away, of course I run away. then I become a young vagabond; and instead of one old woman knock I about and starve I, everybody of all age knock I about and starve I. they be right; they have no business to do anything else. I be a nuisance, an incumbrance, and a pest. I know that very well.'
his pride in have at any time of his life achieve such a great social distinction as to be a nuisance, an incumbrance, and a pest, be only to be satisfied by three sonorous repetition of the boast.
'I be to pull through it, I suppose, Mrs. Gradgrind. whether I be to do it or not, ma'am, I do it. I pull through it, though nobody throw I out a rope. Vagabond, errand-boy, vagabond, labourer, porter, clerk, chief manager, small partner, Josiah Bounderby of Coketown. those be the antecedent, and the culmination. Josiah Bounderby of Coketown learn his letter from the outside of the shop, Mrs. Gradgrind, and be first able to tell the time upon a dial-plate, from study the steeple clock of St. Giles's Church, London, under the direction of a drunken cripple, who be a convict thief, and an incorrigible vagrant. tell Josiah Bounderby of Coketown, of your district school and your model school, and your training school, and your whole kettle-of-fish of school; and Josiah Bounderby of Coketown, tell you plainly, all right, all correct - he havenot such advantage - but let we have hard-head, solid-fiste people - the education that make he willnot do for everybody, he know well - such and such his education be, however, and you may force he to swallow boiling fat, but you shall never force he to suppress the fact of his life.'
be heat when he arrive at this climax, Josiah Bounderby of Coketown stop. he stop just as his eminently practical friend, still accompany by the two young culprit, enter the room. his eminently practical friend, on see he, stop also, and give Louisa a reproachful look that plainly say, 'behold your Bounderby!'
'well!' bluster Mr. Bounderby, 'whatbe the matter? what be young Thomas in the dump about?'
he speak of young Thomas, but he look at Louisa.
'we be peep at the circus,' muttered Louisa, haughtily, without lift up her eye, 'and father catch we.'
'and, Mrs. Gradgrind,' say her husband in a lofty manner, 'I should as soon have expect to find my child read poetry.'
'dear I,' whimper Mrs. Gradgrind. 'how can you, Louisa and Thomas! I wonder at you. I declare yoube enough to make one regret ever have have a family at all. I have a great mind to say I wish I havenot. then what would you have do, I should like to know?'
Mr. Gradgrind do not seem favourably impress by these cogent remark. he frown impatiently.
'as if, with my head in its present throbbing state, you couldnot go and look at the shell and mineral and thing provide for you, instead of circus!' say Mrs. Gradgrind. 'you know, as well as I do, no young people have circus master, or keep circus in cabinet, or attend lecture about circus. what can you possibly want to know of circus then? I be sure you have enough to do, if thatbe what you want. with my head in its present state, I couldnot remember the mere name of half the fact you have get to attend to.'
'thatbe the reason!' pout Louisa.
'donot tell I thatbe the reason, because it cannot be nothing of the sort,' say Mrs. Gradgrind. 'go and be somethingological directly.' Mrs. Gradgrind be not a scientific character, and usually dismiss her child to their study with this general injunction to choose their pursuit.
in truth, Mrs. Gradgrind's stock of fact in general be woefully defective; but Mr. Gradgrind in raise she to her high matrimonial position, have be influence by two reason. firstly, she be most satisfactory as a question of figure; and, secondly, she have 'no nonsense' about she. by nonsense he mean fancy; and truly it be probable she be as free from any alloy of that nature, as any human be not arrive at the perfection of an absolute idiot, ever be.
the simple circumstance of be leave alone with her husband and Mr. Bounderby, be sufficient to stun this admirable lady again without collision between herself and any other fact. so, she once more die away, and nobody mind she.
'Bounderby,' say Mr. Gradgrind, draw a chair to the fireside, 'you be always so interested in my young people - particularly in Louisa - that I make no apology for say to you, I be very much vex by this discovery. I have systematically devote myself (as you know) to the education of the reason of my family. the reason be (as you know) the only faculty to which education should be address. 'and yet, Bounderby, it would appear from this unexpected circumstance of to-day, though in itself a trifling one, as if something have creep into Thomas's and Louisa's mind which be - or rather, which be not - I donot know that I can express myself well than by say - which have never be intend to be develop, and in which their reason have no part.'
'there certainly be no reason in look with interest at a parcel of vagabond,' return Bounderby. 'when I be a vagabond myself, nobody look with any interest at I; I know that.'
'then come the question; say the eminently practical father, with his eye on the fire, 'in what have this vulgar curiosity its rise?'
'Iwill tell you in what. in idle imagination.'
'I hope not,' say the eminently practical; 'I confess, however, that the misgiving have cross I on my way home.'
'in idle imagination, gradgrind,' repeat Bounderby. 'a very bad thing for anybody, but a cursed bad thing for a girl like Louisa. I should ask Mrs. Gradgrind's pardon for strong expression, but that she know very well I be not a refined character. whoever expect refinement in I will be disappoint. I havenot a refined bringing up.'
'whether,' say Gradgrind, ponder with his hand in his pocket, and his cavernous eye on the fire, 'whether any instructor or servant can have suggest anything? whether Louisa or Thomas can have be read anything? whether, in spite of all precaution, any idle story-book can have get into the house? because, in mind that have be practically form by rule and line, from the cradle upwards, this be so curious, so incomprehensible.'
'stop a bit!' cry Bounderby, who all this time have be stand, as before, on the hearth, burst at the very furniture of the room with explosive humility. 'you have one of those stroller' child in the school.'
'Cecilia Jupe, by name,' say Mr. Gradgrind, with something of a stricken look at his friend.
'now, stop a bit!' cry Bounderby again. 'how do she come there?'
'why, the fact be, I see the girl myself, for the first time, only just now. she specially apply here at the house to be admit, as not regularly belong to our town, and - yes, you be right, Bounderby, you be right.'
'now, stop a bit!' cry Bounderby, once more. 'louisa see she when she come?'
'louisa certainly do see she, for she mention the application to I. but Louisa see she, I have no doubt, in Mrs. Gradgrind's presence.'
'pray, Mrs. Gradgrind,' say Bounderby, 'what pass?'
'oh, my poor health!' return Mrs. Gradgrind. 'the girl want to come to the school, and Mr. Gradgrind want girl to come to the school, and Louisa and Thomas both say that the girl want to come, and that Mr. Gradgrind want girl to come, and how be it possible to contradict they when such be the fact!'
'now I tell you what, Gradgrind!' say Mr. Bounderby. 'turn this girl to the right about, and therebe an end of it.'
'I be much of your opinion.'
'do it at once,' say Bounderby, 'have always be my motto from a child. when I think I would run away from my egg-box and my grandmother, I do it at once. do you the same. do this at once!'
'be you walk?' ask his friend. 'I have the father's address. perhaps you would not mind walk to town with I?'
'not the least in the world,' say Mr. Bounderby, 'as long as you do it at once!'
so, Mr. Bounderby throw on his hat - he always throw it on, as express a man who have be far too busily employ in make himself, to acquire any fashion of wear his hat - and with his hand in his pocket, saunter out into the hall. 'I never wear glove,' it be his custom to say. 'I donot climb up the ladder in they. - shouldnot be so high up, if I have.'
be leave to saunter in the hall a minute or two while Mr. Gradgrind go up-stair for the address, he open the door of the child's study and look into that serene floor-clothe apartment, which, notwithstanding its book-case and its cabinet and its variety of learn and philosophical appliance, have much of the genial aspect of a room devote to hair-cutting. louisa languidly lean upon the window look out, without look at anything, while young Thomas stand sniff revengefully at the fire. Adam Smith and Malthus, two young Gradgrinds, be out at lecture in custody; and little Jane, after manufacture a good deal of moist pipe-clay on her face with slate-pencil and tear, have fall asleep over vulgar fraction.
'itbe all right now, Louisa: itbe all right, young Thomas,' say Mr. Bounderby; 'you willnot do so any more. Iwill answer for itbe be all over with father. well, Louisa, thatbe worth a kiss, benot it?'
'you can take one, Mr. Bounderby,' return Louisa, when she have coldly pause, and slowly walk across the room, and ungraciously raise her cheek towards he, with her face turn away.
'always my pet; benot you, Louisa?' say Mr. Bounderby. 'good-bye, Louisa!'
he go his way, but she stand on the same spot, rub the cheek he have kiss, with her handkerchief, until it be burn red. she be still do this, five minute afterwards.
'what be you about, Loo?' her brother sulkily remonstrate. 'youwill rub a hole in your face.'
'you may cut the piece out with your penknife if you like, Tom. I wouldnot cry!'
CHAPTER V - THE KEYNOTE
COKETOWN, to which Messrs. Bounderby and Gradgrind now walk, be a triumph of fact; it have no great taint of fancy in it than Mrs. Gradgrind herself. let we strike the key-note, Coketown, before pursue our tune.
it be a town of red brick, or of brick that would have be red if the smoke and ash have allow it; but as matter stand, it be a town of unnatural red and black like the paint face of a savage. it be a town of machinery and tall chimney, out of which interminable serpent of smoke trail themselves for ever and ever, and never get uncoil. it have a black canal in it, and a river that run purple with ill-smell dye, and vast pile of build full of window where there be a rattle and a trembling all day long, and where the piston of the steam-engine work monotonously up and down, like the head of an elephant in a state of melancholy madness. it contain several large street all very like one another, and many small street still more like one another, inhabit by people equally like one another, who all go in and out at the same hour, with the same sound upon the same pavement, to do the same work, and to whom every day be the same as yesterday and to-morrow, and every year the counterpart of the last and the next.
these attribute of Coketown be in the main inseparable from the work by which it be sustain; against they be to be set off, comfort of life which find their way all over the world, and elegancie of life which make, we will not ask how much of the fine lady, who could scarcely bear to hear the place mention. the rest of its feature be voluntary, and they be these.
you see nothing in Coketown but what be severely workful. if the member of a religious persuasion build a chapel there - as the member of eighteen religious persuasion have do - they make it a pious warehouse of red brick, with sometimes (but this be only in highly ornamental example) a bell in a birdcage on the top of it. the solitary exception be the New Church; a stuccoed edifice with a square steeple over the door, terminate in four short pinnacle like florid wooden leg. all the public inscription in the town be paint alike, in severe character of black and white. the jail might have be the infirmary, the infirmary might have be the jail, the town-hall might have be either, or both, or anything else, for anything that appear to the contrary in the grace of their construction. fact, fact, fact, everywhere in the material aspect of the town; fact, fact, fact, everywhere in the immaterial. the M'Choakumchild school be all fact, and the school of design be all fact, and the relation between master and man be all fact, and everything be fact between the lie-in hospital and the cemetery, and what you couldnot state in figure, or show to be purchaseable in the cheap market and saleable in the dearest, be not, and never should be, world without end, amen.
a town so sacred to fact, and so triumphant in its assertion, of course get on well? why no, not quite well. no? dear I!
no. Coketown do not come out of its own furnace, in all respect like gold that have stand the fire. first, the perplexing mystery of the place be, who belong to the eighteen denomination? because, whoever do, the labour people do not. it be very strange to walk through the street on a Sunday morning, and note how few of they the barbarous jangling of bell that be drive the sick and nervous mad, call away from their own quarter, from their own close room, from the corner of their own street, where they lounge listlessly, gaze at all the church and chapel going, as at a thing with which they have no manner of concern. nor be it merely the stranger who notice this, because there be a native organization in Coketown itself, whose member be to be hear of in the House of Commons every session, indignantly petition for act of parliament that should make these people religious by main force. then come the Teetotal Society, who complain that these same people would get drunk, and show in tabular statement that they do get drunk, and prove at tea party that no inducement, human or Divine (except a medal), would induce they to forego their custom of get drunk. then come the chemist and druggist, with other tabular statement, show that when they donot get drunk, they take opium. then come the experienced chaplain of the jail, with more tabular statement, outdo all the previous tabular statement, and show that the same people would resort to low haunt, hide from the public eye, where they hear low singing and see low dancing, and mayhap join in it; and where A. B., age twenty-four next birthday, and commit for eighteen month' solitary, have himself say (not that he have ever show himself particularly worthy of belief) his ruin begin, as he be perfectly sure and confident that otherwise he would have be a tip-top moral speciman. then come Mr. Gradgrind and Mr. Bounderby, the two gentleman at this present moment walk through Coketown, and both eminently practical, who could, on occasion, furnish more tabular statement derive from their own personal experience, and illustrate by case they have know and see, from which it clearly appear - in short, it be the only clear thing in the case - that these same people be a bad lot altogether, gentleman; that do what you would for they they be never thankful for it, gentleman; that they be restless, gentleman; that they never know what they want; that they live upon the good, and buy fresh butter; and insist on Mocha coffee, and reject all but prime part of meat, and yet be eternally dissatisfied and unmanageable. in short, it be the moral of the old nursery fable:
there be an old woman, and what do you think? she live upon nothing but victual and drink; victual and drink be the whole of her diet, and yet this old woman would never be quiet.
be it possible, I wonder, that there be any analogy between the case of the Coketown population and the case of the little Gradgrinds? surely, none of we in our sober sens and acquaint with figure, be to be tell at this time of day, that one of the foremost element in the existence of the Coketown working-people have be for score of year, deliberately set at nought? that there be any Fancy in they demand to be bring into healthy existence instead of struggle on in convulsion? that exactly in the ratio as they work long and monotonously, the craving grow within they for some physical relief - some relaxation, encourage good humour and good spirit, and give they a vent - some recognize holiday, though it be but for an honest dance to a stirring band of music - some occasional light pie in which even M'Choakumchild have no finger - which craving must and would be satisfied aright, or must and would inevitably go wrong, until the law of the Creation be repeal?
'this man live at Pod's end, and I donot quite know Pod's end,' say Mr. Gradgrind. 'which be it, Bounderby?'
Mr. Bounderby know it be somewhere down town, but know no more respect it. so they stop for a moment, look about.
almost as they do so, there come run round the corner of the street at a quick pace and with a frightened look, a girl whom Mr. Gradgrind recognize. 'Halloa!' say he. 'stop! where be you go! stop!' girl number twenty stop then, palpitating, and make he a curtsey. 'why be you tear about the street,' say Mr. Gradgrind, 'in this improper manner?'
'I be - I be run after, sir,' the girl pant, 'and I want to get away.'
'run after?' repeat Mr. Gradgrind. 'who would run after you?'
the question be unexpectedly and suddenly answer for she, by the colourless boy, Bitzer, who come round the corner with such blind speed and so little anticipate a stoppage on the pavement, that he bring himself up against Mr. Gradgrind's waistcoat and rebound into the road.
'what do you mean, boy?' say Mr. Gradgrind. 'what be you do? how dare you dash against - everybody - in this manner?' Bitzer pick up his cap, which the concussion have knock off; and backing, and knuckle his forehead, plead that it be an accident.
'be this boy run after you, Jupe?' ask Mr. Gradgrind.
'yes, sir,' say the girl reluctantly.
'no, I benot, sir!' cry Bitzer. 'not till she run away from I. but the horse-rider never mind what they say, sir; theybe famous for it. you know the horse-rider be famous for never mind what they say,' address Sissy. 'itbe as well know in the town as - please, sir, as the multiplication table benot know to the horse-rider.' Bitzer try Mr. Bounderby with this.
'he frighten I so,' say the girl, 'with his cruel face!'
'oh!' cry Bitzer. 'oh! an't you one of the rest! An't you a horse-rider! I never look at she, sir. I ask she if she would know how to define a horse to-morrow, and offer to tell she again, and she run away, and I run after she, sir, that she might know how to answer when she be ask. you wouldnot have think of say such mischief if you havenot be a horse-rider?'
'her calling seem to be pretty well know among them,' observe Mr. Bounderby. 'youwould have have the whole school peeping in a row, in a week.'
'truly, I think so,' return his friend. 'Bitzer, turn you about and take yourself home. Jupe, stay here a moment. let I hear of your run in this manner any more, boy, and you will hear of I through the master of the school. you understand what I mean. go along.'
the boy stop in his rapid blinking, knuckle his forehead again, glance at Sissy, turn about, and retreat.
'now, girl,' say Mr. Gradgrind, 'take this gentleman and I to your father's; we be go there. what have you get in that bottle you be carry?'
'Gin,' say Mr. Bounderby.
'dear, no, sir! itbe the nine oil.'
'the what?' cry Mr. Bounderby.
'the nine oil, sir, to rub father with.'
'then,' say Mr. Bounderby, with a loud short laugh, 'what the devil do you rub your father with nine oil for?'
'itbe what our people away use, sir, when they get any hurt in the ring,' reply the girl, look over her shoulder, to assure herself that her pursuer be go. 'they bruise themselves very bad sometimes.'
'serve them right,' say Mr. Bounderby, 'for be idle.' she glance up at his face, with mingled astonishment and dread.
'by George!' say Mr. Bounderby, 'when I be four or five year young than you, I have bad bruise upon I than ten oil, twenty oil, forty oil, would have rub off. I donot get them by posture-making, but by be bang about. there be no rope- dancing for I; I dance on the bare ground and be larrup with the rope.'
Mr. Gradgrind, though hard enough, be by no mean so rough a man as Mr. Bounderby. his character be not unkind, all thing consider; it might have be a very kind one indeed, if he have only make some round mistake in the arithmetic that balance it, year ago. he say, in what he mean for a reassuring tone, as they turn down a narrow road, 'and this be Pod's end; be it, Jupe?'
'this be it, sir, and - if you wouldnot mind, sir - this be the house.'
she stop, at twilight, at the door of a mean little public- house, with dim red light in it. as haggard and as shabby, as if, for want of custom, it have itself take to drinking, and have go the way all drunkard go, and be very near the end of it.
'itbe only cross the bar, sir, and up the stair, if you wouldnot mind, and wait there for a moment till I get a candle. if you should hear a dog, sir, itbe only Merrylegs, and he only bark.'
'merryleg and nine oil, eh!' say Mr. Bounderby, enter last with his metallic laugh. 'pretty well this, for a self-make man!'
CHAPTER VI - SLEARY'S HORSEMANSHIP
the name of the public-house be the Pegasus's arm. the Pegasus's leg might have be more to the purpose; but, underneath the wing horse upon the sign-board, the Pegasus's arm be inscribe in roman letter. beneath that inscription again, in a flow scroll, the painter have touch off the line:
good malt make good beer, Walk in, and theywill draw it here; good wine make good brandy, give we a call, and youwill find it handy.
Framed and glaze upon the wall behind the dingy little bar, be another Pegasus - a theatrical one - with real gauze let in for his wing, golden star stick on all over he, and his ethereal harness make of red silk.
as it have grow too dusky without, to see the sign, and as it have not grow light enough within to see the picture, Mr. Gradgrind and Mr. Bounderby receive no offence from these ideality. they follow the girl up some steep corner-stair without meet any one, and stop in the dark while she go on for a candle. they expect every moment to hear Merrylegs give tongue, but the highly train perform dog have not bark when the girl and the candle appear together.
'Father be not in our room, sir,' she say, with a face of great surprise. 'if you wouldnot mind walk in, Iwill find he directly.' they walk in; and Sissy, have set two chair for they, speed away with a quick light step. it be a mean, shabbily furnish room, with a bed in it. the white night-cap, embellish with two peacock's feather and a pigtail bolt upright, in which Signor Jupe have that very afternoon enliven the varied performance with his chaste Shaksperean quip and retort, hang upon a nail; but no other portion of his wardrobe, or other token of himself or his pursuit, be to be see anywhere. as to Merrylegs, that respectable ancestor of the highly train animal who go aboard the ark, might have be accidentally shut out of it, for any sign of a dog that be manifest to eye or ear in the Pegasus's arm.
they hear the door of room above, open and shutting as Sissy go from one to another in quest of her father; and presently they hear voice express surprise. she come bound down again in a great hurry, open a battered and mangy old hair trunk, find it empty, and look round with her hand clasp and her face full of terror.
'Father must have go down to the Booth, sir. I donot know why he should go there, but he must be there; Iwill bring he in a minute!' she be go directly, without her bonnet; with her long, dark, childish hair stream behind she.
'what do she mean!' say Mr. Gradgrind. 'back in a minute? itbe more than a mile off.'
before Mr. Bounderby could reply, a young man appear at the door, and introduce himself with the word, 'by your leaf, gentleman!' walk in with his hand in his pocket. his face, close-shaven, thin, and sallow, be shade by a great quantity of dark hair, brush into a roll all round his head, and part up the centre. his leg be very robust, but shorter than leg of good proportion should have be. his chest and back be as much too broad, as his leg be too short. he be dress in a Newmarket coat and tight-fit trouser; wear a shawl round his neck; smell of lamp-oil, straw, orange-peel, horse' provender, and sawdust; and look a most remarkable sort of Centaur, compound of the stable and the play-house. where the one begin, and the other end, nobody could have tell with any precision. this gentleman be mention in the bill of the day as Mr. E. W. B. Childers, so justly celebrate for his daring vault act as the Wild Huntsman of the North American Prairies; in which popular performance, a diminutive boy with an old face, who now accompany he, assist as his infant son: be carry upside down over his father's shoulder, by one foot, and hold by the crown of his head, heel upwards, in the palm of his father's hand, accord to the violent paternal manner in which wild huntsman may be observe to fondle their offspring. make up with curl, wreath, wing, white bismuth, and carmine, this hopeful young person soar into so pleasing a Cupid as to constitute the chief delight of the maternal part of the spectator; but in private, where his characteristic be a precocious cutaway coat and an extremely gruff voice, he become of the Turf, turfy.
'by your leaf, gentleman,' say Mr. E. W. B. Childers, glance round the room. 'it be you, I believe, that be wish to see Jupe!'
'it be,' say Mr. Gradgrind. 'his daughter have go to fetch he, but I cannot wait; therefore, if you please, I will leave a message for he with you.'
'you see, my friend,' Mr. Bounderby put in, 'we be the kind of people who know the value of time, and you be the kind of people who donot know the value of time.'
'I have not,' retort Mr. Childers, after survey he from head to foot, 'the honour of know you, - but if you mean that you can make more money of your time than I can of mine, I should judge from your appearance, that you be about right.'
'and when you have make it, you can keep it too, I should think,' say Cupid.
'Kidderminster, stow that!' say Mr. Childers. (Master Kidderminster be Cupid's mortal name.)
'what do he come here cheek we for, then?' cry Master Kidderminster, show a very irascible temperament. 'if you want to cheek we, pay your ochre at the door and take it out.'
'Kidderminster,' say Mr. Childers, raise his voice, 'stow that! - Sir,' to Mr. Gradgrind, 'I be address myself to you. you may or you may not be aware (for perhaps you have not be much in the audience), that Jupe have miss his tip very often, lately.'
'have - what have he miss?' ask Mr. Gradgrind, glance at the potent Bounderby for assistance.
'miss his tip.'
'offer at the Garters four time last night, and never do them once,' say Master Kidderminster. 'miss his tip at the banner, too, and be loose in his ponging.'
'donot do what he ought to do. be short in his leap and bad in his tumbling,' Mr. Childers interpret.
'oh!' say Mr. Gradgrind, 'that be tip, be it?'
'in a general way thatbe miss his tip,' Mr. E. W. B. Childers answer.
'nine oil, Merrylegs, miss tip, garter, banner, and Ponging, eh!' ejaculate Bounderby, with his laugh of laugh. 'queer sort of company, too, for a man who have raise himself!'
'low yourself, then,' retort Cupid. 'oh Lord! if youhave raise yourself so high as all that come to, let yourself down a bit.'
'this be a very obtrusive lad!' say Mr. Gradgrind, turning, and knit his brow on he.
'wewould have have a young gentleman to meet you, if we have know you be come,' retort Master Kidderminster, nothing abash. 'itbe a pity you donot have a bespeak, be so particular. yoube on the Tight-Jeff, benot you?'
'what do this unmannerly boy mean,' ask Mr. Gradgrind, eye he in a sort of desperation, 'by Tight-Jeff?'
'there! get out, get out!' say Mr. Childers, thrust his young friend from the room, rather in the prairie manner. 'Tight-Jeff or Slack-Jeff, it donot much signify: itbe only tight-rope and slack- rope. you be go to give I a message for Jupe?'
'yes, I be.'
'then,' continue Mr. Childers, quickly, 'my opinion be, he will never receive it. do you know much of he?'
'I never see the man in my life.'
'I doubt if you ever will see he now. itbe pretty plain to I, hebe off.'
'do you mean that he have desert his daughter?'
'ay! I mean,' say Mr. Childers, with a nod, 'that he have cut. he be goose last night, he be goose the night before last, he be goose to-day. he have lately get in the way of be always goose, and he cannot stand it.'
'why have he be - so very much - goose?' ask Mr. Gradgrind, force the word out of himself, with great solemnity and reluctance.
'his joint be turn stiff, and he be get use up,' say Childers. 'he have his point as a Cackler still, but he cannot get a living out of they.'
'a cackler!' Bounderby repeat. 'here we go again!'
'a speaker, if the gentleman like it well,' say Mr. E. W. B. Childers, superciliously throw the interpretation over his shoulder, and accompany it with a shake of his long hair - which all shake at once. 'now, itbe a remarkable fact, sir, that it cut that man deeply, to know that his daughter know of his be goose, than to go through with it.'
'good!' interrupt Mr. Bounderby. 'this be good, gradgrind! a man so fond of his daughter, that he run away from she! this be devilish good! ha! ha! now, Iwill tell you what, young man. I havenot always occupy my present station of life. I know what these thing be. you may be astonish to hear it, but my mother - run away from I.'
E. W. B. Childers reply pointedly, that he be not at all astonish to hear it.
'very well,' say Bounderby. 'I be bear in a ditch, and my mother run away from I. do I excuse she for it? no. have I ever excuse she for it? not i. what do I call she for it? I call she probably the very bad woman that ever live in the world, except my drunken grandmother. therebe no family pride about I, therebe no imaginative sentimental humbug about I. I call a spade a spade; and I call the mother of Josiah Bounderby of Coketown, without any fear or any favour, what I should call she if she have be the mother of Dick Jones of Wapping. so, with this man. he be a runaway rogue and a vagabond, thatbe what he be, in English.'
'itbe all the same to I what he be or what he be not, whether in English or whether in French,' retort Mr. E. W. B. Childers, face about. 'I be tell your friend whatbe the fact; if you donot like to hear it, you can avail yourself of the open air. you give it mouth enough, you do; but give it mouth in your own building at least,' remonstrate E. W. B. with stern irony. 'donot give it mouth in this building, till yoube call upon. you have get some building of your own I dare say, now?'
'perhaps so,' reply Mr. Bounderby, rattle his money and laugh.
'then give it mouth in your own building, will you, if you please?' say Childers. 'because this benot a strong building, and too much of you might bring it down!'
eye Mr. Bounderby from head to foot again, he turn from he, as from a man finally dispose of, to Mr. Gradgrind.
'Jupe send his daughter out on an errand not an hour ago, and then be see to slip out himself, with his hat over his eye, and a bundle tie up in a handkerchief under his arm. she will never believe it of he, but he have cut away and leave she.'
'pray,' say Mr. Gradgrind, 'why will she never believe it of he?'
'because those two be one. because they be never asunder. because, up to this time, he seem to dote upon she,' say Childers, take a step or two to look into the empty trunk. both Mr. Childers and Master Kidderminster walk in a curious manner; with their leg wider apart than the general run of man, and with a very knowing assumption of be stiff in the knee. this walk be common to all the male member of Sleary's company, and be understand to express, that they be always on horseback.
'poor Sissy! he have well have apprentice she,' say Childers, give his hair another shake, as he look up from the empty box. 'now, he leave she without anything to take to.'
'it be creditable to you, who have never be apprentice, to express that opinion,' return Mr. Gradgrind, approvingly.
'I never apprentice? I be apprentice when I be seven year old.'
'oh! indeed?' say Mr. Gradgrind, rather resentfully, as have be defraud of his good opinion. 'I be not aware of its be the custom to apprentice young person to - '
'idleness,' Mr. Bounderby put in with a loud laugh. 'no, by the Lord Harry! nor I!'
'her father always have it in his head,' resume Childers, feign unconsciousness of Mr. Bounderby's existence, 'that she be to be teach the deuce-and-all of education. how it get into his head, I cannot say; I can only say that it never get out. he have be pick up a bit of reading for she, here - and a bit of writing for she, there - and a bit of cipher for she, somewhere else - these seven year.'
Mr. E. W. B. Childers take one of his hand out of his pocket, stroke his face and chin, and look, with a good deal of doubt and a little hope, at Mr. Gradgrind. from the first he have seek to conciliate that gentleman, for the sake of the deserted girl.
'when Sissy get into the school here,' he pursue, 'her father be as pleased as Punch. I couldnot altogether make out why, myself, as we be not stationary here, be but comer and goer anywhere. I suppose, however, he have this move in his mind - he be always half-crack - and then consider she provide for. if you should happen to have look in to-night, for the purpose of tell he that you be go to do she any little service,' say Mr. Childers, stroke his face again, and repeat his look, 'it would be very fortunate and well-time; very fortunate and well- time.'
'on the contrary,' return Mr. Gradgrind. 'I come to tell he that her connection make she not an object for the school, and that she must not attend any more. still, if her father really have leave she, without any connivance on her part - Bounderby, let I have a word with you.'
upon this, Mr. Childers politely betake himself, with his equestrian walk, to the landing outside the door, and there stand stroke his face, and softly whistle. while thus engage, he overhear such phrase in Mr. Bounderby's voice as 'no. I say no. I advise you not. I say by no mean.' while, from Mr. Gradgrind, he hear in his much low tone the word, 'but even as an example to Louisa, of what this pursuit which have be the subject of a vulgar curiosity, lead to and end in. think of it, Bounderby, in that point of view.'
meanwhile, the various member of Sleary's company gradually gather together from the upper region, where they be quarter, and, from stand about, talk in low voice to one another and to Mr. Childers, gradually insinuate themselves and he into the room. there be two or three handsome young woman among they, with their two or three husband, and their two or three mother, and their eight or nine little child, who do the fairy business when require. the father of one of the family be in the habit of balance the father of another of the family on the top of a great pole; the father of a third family often make a pyramid of both those father, with Master Kidderminster for the apex, and himself for the base; all the father could dance upon rolling cask, stand upon bottle, catch knife and ball, twirl hand-basin, ride upon anything, jump over everything, and stick at nothing. all the mother could (and do) dance, upon the slack wire and the tight-rope, and perform rapid act on bare-back steed; none of they be at all particular in respect of show their leg; and one of they, alone in a greek chariot, drive six in hand into every town they come to. they all assume to be mighty rakish and know, they be not very tidy in their private dress, they be not at all orderly in their domestic arrangement, and the combine literature of the whole company would have produce but a poor letter on any subject. yet there be a remarkable gentleness and childishness about these people, a special inaptitude for any kind of sharp practice, and an untiring readiness to help and pity one another, deserve often of as much respect, and always of as much generous construction, as the every- day virtue of any class of people in the world.
last of all appear Mr. Sleary: a stout man as already mention, with one fix eye, and one loose eye, a voice (if it can be call so) like the effort of a break old pair of bellow, a flabby surface, and a muddled head which be never sober and never drunk.
'Thquire!' say Mr. Sleary, who be trouble with asthma, and whose breath come far too thick and heavy for the letter s, 'your thervant! Thith ith a bad piethe of bithnith, thith ith. youhave hear of my Clown and hith dog be thuppothe to have morrithe?'
he address Mr. Gradgrind, who answer 'yes.'
'well, Thquire,' he return, take off his hat, and rub the lining with his pocket-handkerchief, which he keep inside for the purpose. 'ith it your intenthion to do anything for the poor girl, Thquire?'
'I shall have something to propose to she when she come back,' say Mr. Gradgrind.
'glad to hear it, Thquire. not that I want to get rid of the child, any more than I want to thtand in her way. Ibe willing to take she prentith, though at her age ith late. my voithe ith a little huthky, Thquire, and not eathy hear by they ath donot know I; but if youhave be chill and heat, heated and chill, chilled and heat in the ring when you wath young, ath often ath I have be, your voithe wouldnot have lathte out, Thquire, no more than mine.'
'I dare say not,' say Mr. Gradgrind.
'what thall it be, Thquire, while you wait? thall it be Therry? give it a name, Thquire!' say Mr. Sleary, with hospitable ease.
'nothing for I, I thank you,' say Mr. Gradgrind.
'donot thay nothing, Thquire. what doth your friend thay? if you havenot take your feed yet, have a glath of bitterth.'
here his daughter Josephine - a pretty fair-haired girl of eighteen, who have be tie on a horse at two year old, and have make a will at twelve, which she always carry about with she, expressive of her die desire to be draw to the grave by the two piebald pony - cry, 'Father, hush! she have come back!' then come Sissy Jupe, run into the room as she have run out of it. and when she see they all assemble, and see their look, and see no father there, she break into a most deplorable cry, and take refuge on the bosom of the most accomplished tight-rope lady (herself in the family-way), who kneel down on the floor to nurse she, and to weep over she.
'ith an internal thame, upon my thoul it ith,' say Sleary.
'o my dear father, my good kind father, where be you go? you be go to try to do I some good, I know! you be go away for my sake, I be sure! and how miserable and helpless you will be without I, poor, poor father, until you come back!' it be so pathetic to hear she say many thing of this kind, with her face turn upward, and her arm stretch out as if she be try to stop his depart shadow and embrace it, that no one speak a word until Mr. Bounderby (grow impatient) take the case in hand.
'now, good people all,' say he, 'this be wanton waste of time. let the girl understand the fact. let she take it from I, if you like, who have be run away from, myself. here, whatbe your name! your father have abscond - desert you - and you mustnot expect to see he again as long as you live.'
they care so little for plain fact, these people, and be in that advanced state of degeneracy on the subject, that instead of be impress by the speaker's strong common sense, they take it in extraordinary dudgeon. the man mutter 'Shame!' and the woman 'Brute!' and Sleary, in some haste, communicate the following hint, apart to Mr. Bounderby.
'I tell you what, Thquire. to thpeak plain to you, my opinion ith that you have well cut it thort, and drop it. theybe a very good natur'd people, my people, but theybe accuthtome to be quick in their movementh; and if you donot act upon my advithe, Ibe damned if I donot believe theywill pith you out o' winder.'
Mr. Bounderby be restrain by this mild suggestion, Mr. Gradgrind find an opening for his eminently practical exposition of the subject.
'it be of no moment,' say he, 'whether this person be to be expect back at any time, or the contrary. he be go away, and there be no present expectation of his return. that, I believe, be agree on all hand.'
'Thath agree, Thquire. thick to that!' from Sleary.
'well then. I, who come here to inform the father of the poor girl, Jupe, that she could not be receive at the school any more, in consequence of there be practical objection, into which I need not enter, to the reception there of the child of person so employ, be prepare in these altered circumstance to make a proposal. I be willing to take charge of you, Jupe, and to educate you, and provide for you. the only condition (over and above your good behaviour) I make be, that you decide now, at once, whether to accompany I or remain here. also, that if you accompany I now, it be understand that you communicate no more with any of your friend who be here present. these observation comprise the whole of the case.'
'at the thame time,' say Sleary, 'I mutht put in my word, Thquire, tho that both thide of the banner may be equally theen. if you like, Thethilia, to be prentitht, you know the natur of the work and you know your companionth. Emma Gordon, in whothe lap yoube a lying at prethent, would be a mother to you, and Joth'phine would be a thithter to you. I donot pretend to be of the angel bree myself, and I donot thay but what, when you mith'd your tip, youwould find I cut up rough, and thwear an oath or two at you. but what I thay, Thquire, ith, that good temper or bad temper, I never do a horthe a injury yet, no more than thweare at he go, and that I donot expect I thall begin otherwithe at my time of life, with a rider. I never wath much of a Cackler, Thquire, and I have the my thay.'
the latter part of this speech be address to Mr. Gradgrind, who receive it with a grave inclination of his head, and then remark:
'the only observation I will make to you, Jupe, in the way of influence your decision, be, that it be highly desirable to have a sound practical education, and that even your father himself (from what I understand) appear, on your behalf, to have know and feel that much.'
the last word have a visible effect upon she. she stop in her wild crying, a little detach herself from Emma Gordon, and turn her face full upon her patron. the whole company perceive the force of the change, and draw a long breath together, that plainly say, 'she will go!'
'be sure you know your own mind, Jupe,' Mr. Gradgrind caution she; 'I say no more. be sure you know your own mind!'
'when father come back,' cry the girl, burst into tear again after a minute's silence, 'how will he ever find I if I go away!'
'you may be quite at ease,' say Mr. Gradgrind, calmly; he work out the whole matter like a sum: 'you may be quite at ease, Jupe, on that score. in such a case, your father, I apprehend, must find out Mr. - '
'Thleary. thath my name, Thquire. not athame of it. know all over England, and alwayth paythe ith way.'
'must find out Mr. Sleary, who would then let he know where you go. I should have no power of keep you against his wish, and he would have no difficulty, at any time, in find Mr. Thomas Gradgrind of Coketown. I be well know.'
'well know,' assent Mr. Sleary, roll his loose eye. 'yoube one of the thort, Thquire, that keepth a prethiouth thight of money out of the houthe. but never mind that at prethent.'
there be another silence; and then she exclaim, sob with her hand before her face, 'oh, give I my clothe, give I my clothe, and let I go away before I break my heart!'
the woman sadly bestir themselves to get the clothe together - it be soon do, for they be not many - and to pack they in a basket which have often travel with they. Sissy sit all the time upon the ground, still sob, and cover her eye. Mr. Gradgrind and his friend Bounderby stand near the door, ready to take she away. Mr. Sleary stand in the middle of the room, with the male member of the company about he, exactly as he would have stand in the centre of the ring during his daughter Josephine's performance. he want nothing but his whip.
the basket pack in silence, they bring her bonnet to she, and smooth her disorder hair, and put it on. then they press about she, and bent over she in very natural attitude, kiss and embrace she: and bring the child to take leave of she; and be a tender-hearted, simple, foolish set of woman altogether.
'now, Jupe,' say Mr. Gradgrind. 'if you be quite determined, come!'
but she have to take her farewell of the male part of the company yet, and every one of they have to unfold his arm (for they all assume the professional attitude when they find themselves near Sleary), and give she a parting kiss - Master Kidderminster except, in whose young nature there be an original flavour of the misanthrope, who be also know to have harbour matrimonial view, and who moodily withdraw. Mr. Sleary be reserve until the last. open his arm wide he take she by both her hand, and would have spring she up and down, after the riding-master manner of congratulate young lady on their dismounting from a rapid act; but there be no rebound in Sissy, and she only stand before he cry.
'good-bye, my dear!' say Sleary. 'youwill make your fortun, I hope, and none of our poor folkth will ever trouble you, Iwill pound it. I with your father havenot take hith dog with he; ith a ill- conwenienth to have the dog out of the billth. but on thecond thoughth, he wouldnot have perform without hith mathter, tho ith ath broad ath ith long!'
with that he regard she attentively with his fixed eye, survey his company with his loose one, kiss she, shake his head, and hand she to Mr. Gradgrind as to a horse.
'there the ith, Thquire,' he say, sweep she with a professional glance as if she be be adjust in her seat, 'and the'll do you juthtithe. good-bye, Thethilia!'
'good-bye, Cecilia!' 'good-bye, Sissy!' 'God bless you, dear!' in a variety of voice from all the room.
but the riding-master eye have observe the bottle of the nine oil in her bosom, and he now interpose with 'leave the bottle, my dear; ith large to carry; it will be of no uthe to you now. give it to I!'
'no, no!' she say, in another burst of tear. 'oh, no! pray let I keep it for father till he come back! he will want it when he come back. he have never think of go away, when he send I for it. I must keep it for he, if you please!'
'tho be it, my dear. (you thee how it ith, Thquire!) Farewell, Thethilia! my latht wordth to you ith thith, Thtick to the termth of your engagement, be obedient to the Thquire, and forget uth. but if, when yoube grow up and married and well off, you come upon any horthe-riding ever, donot be hard upon it, donot be croth with it, give it a bethpeak if you can, and think you might do wurth. People mutht be amuthe, Thquire, thomehow,' continue Sleary, render more pursy than ever, by so much talk; 'they cannot be alwayth a working, nor yet they cannot be alwayth a learning. make the betht of uth; not the wurtht. Ihave get my living out of the horthe-rid all my life, I know; but I conthider that I lie down the philothophy of the thubject when I thay to you, Thquire, make the betht of uth: not the wurtht!'
the sleary philosophy be propound as they go downstairs and the fixed eye of philosophy - and its rolling eye, too - soon lose the three figure and the basket in the darkness of the street.
CHAPTER VII - MRS. SPARSIT
MR. BOUNDERBY be a bachelor, an elderly lady preside over his establishment, in consideration of a certain annual stipend. Mrs. Sparsit be this lady's name; and she be a prominent figure in attendance on Mr. Bounderby's car, as it roll along in triumph with the Bully of humility inside.
for, Mrs. Sparsit have not only see different day, but be highly connected. she have a great aunt live in these very time call Lady Scadgers. Mr. Sparsit, deceased, of whom she be the relict, have be by the mother's side what Mrs. Sparsit still call 'a Powler.' stranger of limited information and dull apprehension be sometimes observe not to know what a Powler be, and even to appear uncertain whether it might be a business, or a political party, or a profession of faith. the well class of mind, however, do not need to be inform that the Powlers be an ancient stock, who could trace themselves so exceedingly far back that it be not surprising if they sometimes lose themselves - which they have rather frequently do, as respected horse-flesh, blind-hookey, hebrew monetary transaction, and the Insolvent Debtors' Court.
the late Mr. Sparsit, be by the mother's side a Powler, marry this lady, be by the father's side a scadger. Lady Scadgers (an immensely fat old woman, with an inordinate appetite for butcher's meat, and a mysterious leg which have now refuse to get out of bed for fourteen year) contrive the marriage, at a period when Sparsit be just of age, and chiefly noticeable for a slender body, weakly support on two long slim prop, and surmount by no head worth mention. he inherit a fair fortune from his uncle, but owe it all before he come into it, and spend it twice over immediately afterwards. thus, when he die, at twenty-four (the scene of his decease, Calais, and the cause, brandy), he do not leave his widow, from whom he have be separate soon after the honeymoon, in affluent circumstance. that bereaved lady, fifteen year old than he, fall presently at deadly feud with her only relative, Lady Scadgers; and, partly to spite her ladyship, and partly to maintain herself, go out at a salary. and here she be now, in her elderly day, with the coriolanian style of nose and the dense black eyebrow which have captivate Sparsit, make Mr. Bounderby's tea as he take his breakfast.
if Bounderby have be a Conqueror, and Mrs. Sparsit a captive Princess whom he take about as a feature in his state-procession, he could not have make a great flourish with she than he habitually do. just as it belong to his boastfulness to depreciate his own extraction, so it belong to it to exalt Mrs. Sparsit's. in the measure that he would not allow his own youth to have be attend by a single favourable circumstance, he brighten Mrs. Sparsit's juvenile career with every possible advantage, and shower waggon-load of early rose all over that lady's path. 'and yet, sir,' he would say, 'how do it turn out after all? why here she be at a hundred a year (I give she a hundred, which she be pleased to term handsome), keep the house of Josiah Bounderby of Coketown!'
Nay, he make this foil of his so very widely know, that third party take it up, and handle it on some occasion with considerable briskness. it be one of the most exasperating attribute of Bounderby, that he not only sing his own praise but stimulate other man to sing they. there be a moral infection of clap-trap in he. stranger, modest enough elsewhere, start up at dinner in Coketown, and boast, in quite a rampant way, of Bounderby. they make he out to be the royal arm, the Union-Jack, Magna Charta, John Bull, Habeas Corpus, the Bill of Rights, an Englishman's house be his castle, Church and State, and God save the Queen, all put together. and as often (and it be very often) as an orator of this kind bring into his peroration,
'prince and lord may flourish or may fade, a breath can make they, as a breath have make,'
- it be, for certain, more or less understand among the company that he have hear of Mrs. Sparsit.
'Mr. Bounderby,' say Mrs. Sparsit, 'you be unusually slow, sir, with your breakfast this morning.'
'why, ma'am,' he return, 'I be think about Tom Gradgrind's whim;' Tom Gradgrind, for a bluff independent manner of speak - as if somebody be always endeavour to bribe he with immense sum to say Thomas, and he wouldnot; 'Tom Gradgrind's whim, ma'am, of bring up the tumble-girl.'
'the girl be now wait to know,' say Mrs. Sparsit, 'whether she be to go straight to the school, or up to the Lodge.'
'she must wait, ma'am,' answer Bounderby, 'till I know myself. we shall have Tom Gradgrind down here presently, I suppose. if he should wish she to remain here a day or two long, of course she can, ma'am.'
'of course she can if you wish it, Mr. Bounderby.'
'I tell he I would give she a shake-down here, last night, in order that he might sleep on it before he decide to let she have any association with Louisa.'
'indeed, Mr. Bounderby? very thoughtful of you!' Mrs. Sparsit's coriolanian nose undergo a slight expansion of the nostril, and her black eyebrow contract as she take a sip of tea.
'itbe tolerably clear to I,' say Bounderby, 'that the little puss can get small good out of such companionship.'
'be you speak of young Miss Gradgrind, Mr. Bounderby?'
'yes, ma'am, Ibe speak of Louisa.'
'your observation be limit to "little puss,"' say Mrs. Sparsit, 'and there be two little girl in question, I do not know which might be indicate by that expression.'
'Louisa,' repeat Mr. Bounderby. 'Louisa, Louisa.'
'you be quite another father to Louisa, sir.' Mrs. Sparsit take a little more tea; and, as she bend she again contract eyebrow over her steaming cup, rather look as if her classical countenance be invoke the infernal god.
'if you have say I be another father to Tom - young Tom, I mean, not my friend Tom Gradgrind - you might have be near the mark. I be go to take young Tom into my office. go to have he under my wing, ma'am.'
'indeed? rather young for that, be he not, sir?' Mrs. Spirit's 'sir,' in address Mr. Bounderby, be a word of ceremony, rather exact consideration for herself in the use, than honour he.
'Ibe not go to take he at once; he be to finish his educational cramming before then,' say Bounderby. 'by the Lord Harry, hewill have enough of it, first and last! hewould open his eye, that boy would, if he know how empty of learn my young maw be, at his time of life.' which, by the by, he probably do know, for he have hear of it often enough. 'but itbe extraordinary the difficulty I have on score of such subject, in speak to any one on equal term. here, for example, I have be speak to you this morning about tumbler. why, what do you know about tumbler? at the time when, to have be a tumbler in the mud of the street, would have be a godsend to I, a prize in the lottery to I, you be at the italian Opera. you be come out of the Italian Opera, ma'am, in white satin and jewel, a blaze of splendour, when I havenot a penny to buy a link to light you.'
'I certainly, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit, with a dignity serenely mournful, 'be familiar with the Italian Opera at a very early age.'
'Egad, ma'am, so be I,' say Bounderby, ' - with the wrong side of it. a hard bed the pavement of its Arcade use to make, I assure you. People like you, ma'am, accustom from infancy to lie on Down feather, have no idea how hard a paving-stone be, without try it. no, no, itbe of no use my talking to you about tumbler. I should speak of foreign dancer, and the West end of London, and May Fair, and lord and lady and honourable.'
'I trust, sir,' rejoin Mrs. Sparsit, with decent resignation, 'it be not necessary that you should do anything of that kind. I hope I have learn how to accommodate myself to the change of life. if I have acquire an interest in hearing of your instructive experience, and can scarcely hear enough of they, I claim no merit for that, since I believe it be a general sentiment.'
'well, ma'am,' say her patron, 'perhaps some people may be pleased to say that they do like to hear, in his own unpolished way, what Josiah Bounderby, of Coketown, have go through. but you must confess that you be bear in the lap of luxury, yourself. Come, ma'am, you know you be bear in the lap of luxury.'
'I do not, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit with a shake of her head, 'deny it.'
Mr. Bounderby be oblige to get up from table, and stand with his back to the fire, look at she; she be such an enhancement of his position.
'and you be in crack society. devilish high society,' he say, warm his leg.
'it be true, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit, with an affectation of humility the very opposite of his, and therefore in no danger of jostle it.
'you be in the tiptop fashion, and all the rest of it,' say Mr. Bounderby.
'yes, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit, with a kind of social widowhood upon she. 'it be unquestionably true.'
Mr. Bounderby, bend himself at the knee, literally embrace his leg in his great satisfaction and laugh aloud. Mr. and Miss Gradgrind be then announce, he receive the former with a shake of the hand, and the latter with a kiss.
'can Jupe be send here, Bounderby?' ask Mr. Gradgrind.
certainly. so Jupe be send there. on come in, she curtsey to Mr. Bounderby, and to his friend Tom Gradgrind, and also to Louisa; but in her confusion unluckily omit Mrs. Sparsit. observe this, the blustrous Bounderby have the follow remark to make:
'now, I tell you what, my girl. the name of that lady by the teapot, be Mrs. Sparsit. that lady act as mistress of this house, and she be a highly connect lady. consequently, if ever you come again into any room in this house, you will make a short stay in it if you donot behave towards that lady in your most respectful manner. now, I donot care a button what you do to I, because I donot affect to be anybody. so far from have high connection I have no connection at all, and I come of the scum of the earth. but towards that lady, I do care what you do; and you shall do what be deferential and respectful, or you shall not come here.'
'I hope, Bounderby,' say Mr. Gradgrind, in a conciliatory voice, 'that this be merely an oversight.'
'my friend Tom Gradgrind suggest, Mrs. Sparsit,' say Bounderby, 'that this be merely an oversight. very likely. however, as you be aware, ma'am, I donot allow of even oversight towards you.'
'you be very good indeed, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit, shake her head with her State humility. 'it be not worth speak of.'
Sissy, who all this time have be faintly excuse herself with tear in her eye, be now wave over by the master of the house to Mr. Gradgrind. she stand look intently at he, and Louisa stand coldly by, with her eye upon the ground, while he proceed thus:
'Jupe, I have make up my mind to take you into my house; and, when you be not in attendance at the school, to employ you about Mrs. Gradgrind, who be rather an invalid. I have explain to Miss Louisa - this be Miss Louisa - the miserable but natural end of your late career; and you be to expressly understand that the whole of that subject be past, and be not to be refer to any more. from this time you begin your history. you be, at present, ignorant, I know.'
'yes, sir, very,' she answer, curtsey.
'I shall have the satisfaction of cause you to be strictly educate; and you will be a live proof to all who come into communication with you, of the advantage of the training you will receive. you will be reclaim and form. you have be in the habit now of read to your father, and those people I find you among, I dare say?' say Mr. Gradgrind, beckon she nearer to he before he say so, and drop his voice.
'only to father and Merrylegs, sir. at least I mean to father, when Merrylegs be always there.'
'never mind Merrylegs, Jupe,' say Mr. Gradgrind, with a pass frown. 'I donot ask about he. I understand you to have be in the habit of read to your father?'
'o, yes, sir, thousand of time. they be the happy - o, of all the happy time we have together, sir!'
it be only now when her sorrow break out, that Louisa look at she.
'and what,' ask Mr. Gradgrind, in a still low voice, 'do you read to your father, Jupe?'
'about the Fairies, sir, and the Dwarf, and the Hunchback, and the Genies,' she sob out; 'and about - '
'hush!' say Mr. Gradgrind, 'that be enough. never breathe a word of such destructive nonsense any more. Bounderby, this be a case for rigid training, and I shall observe it with interest.'
'well,' return Mr. Bounderby, 'I have give you my opinion already, and I shouldnot do as you do. but, very well, very well. since you be bent upon it, very well!'
so, Mr. Gradgrind and his daughter take Cecilia Jupe off with they to Stone Lodge, and on the way Louisa never speak one word, good or bad. and Mr. Bounderby go about his daily pursuit. and Mrs. Sparsit get behind her eyebrow and meditate in the gloom of that retreat, all the evening.
CHAPTER VIII - NEVER WONDER
LET we strike the key-note again, before pursue the tune.
when she be half a dozen year young, Louisa have be overhear to begin a conversation with her brother one day, by say 'Tom, I wonder' - upon which Mr. Gradgrind, who be the person overhear, step forth into the light and say, 'louisa, never wonder!'
Herein lie the spring of the mechanical art and mystery of educate the reason without stoop to the cultivation of the sentiment and affection. never wonder. by mean of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, settle everything somehow, and never wonder. bring to I, say M'Choakumchild, yonder baby just able to walk, and I will engage that it shall never wonder.
now, besides very many baby just able to walk, there happen to be in Coketown a considerable population of baby who have be walk against time towards the infinite world, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty year and more. these portentous infant be alarm creature to stalk about in any human society, the eighteen denomination incessantly scratch one another's face and pull one another's hair by way of agree on the step to be take for their improvement - which they never do; a surprising circumstance, when the happy adaptation of the mean to the end be consider. still, although they differ in every other particular, conceivable and inconceivable (especially inconceivable), they be pretty well united on the point that these unlucky infant be never to wonder. body number one, say they must take everything on trust. body number two, say they must take everything on political economy. body number three, write leaden little book for they, show how the good grow-up baby invariably get to the Savings-bank, and the bad grow-up baby invariably get transport. body number four, under dreary pretence of be droll (when it be very melancholy indeed), make the shallow pretence of conceal pitfall of knowledge, into which it be the duty of these baby to be smuggle and inveigle. but, all the body agree that they be never to wonder.
there be a library in Coketown, to which general access be easy. Mr. Gradgrind greatly torment his mind about what the people read in this library: a point whereon little river of tabular statement periodically flow into the howl ocean of tabular statement, which no diver ever get to any depth in and come up sane. it be a disheartening circumstance, but a melancholy fact, that even these reader persist in wonder. they wonder about human nature, human passion, human hope and fear, the struggle, triumph and defeat, the care and joy and sorrow, the life and death of common man and woman! they sometimes, after fifteen hour' work, sit down to read mere fable about man and woman, more or less like themselves, and about child, more or less like their own. they take De Foe to their bosom, instead of Euclid, and seem to be on the whole more comfort by Goldsmith than by Cocker. Mr. Gradgrind be for ever work, in print and out of print, at this eccentric sum, and he never could make out how it yield this unaccountable product.
'I be sick of my life, Loo. I, hate it altogether, and I hate everybody except you,' say the unnatural young Thomas Gradgrind in the hair-cut chamber at twilight.
'you donot hate Sissy, Tom?'
'I hate to be oblige to call her Jupe. and she hat I,' say Tom, moodily.
'no, she do not, Tom, I be sure!'
'she must,' say Tom. 'she must just hate and detest the whole set-out of we. theywill bother her head off, I think, before they have do with she. already shebe get as pale as wax, and as heavy as - I be.'
Young Thomas express these sentiment sit astride of a chair before the fire, with his arm on the back, and his sulky face on his arm. his sister sit in the dark corner by the fireside, now look at he, now look at the bright spark as they drop upon the hearth.
'as to I,' say Tom, tumble his hair all manner of way with his sulky hand, 'I be a Donkey, thatbe what I be. I be as obstinate as one, I be more stupid than one, I get as much pleasure as one, and I should like to kick like one.'
'not I, I hope, Tom?'
'no, Loo; I wouldnot hurt you. I make an exception of you at first. I donot know what this - jolly old - jaundice jail,' Tom have pause to find a sufficiently complimentary and expressive name for the parental roof, and seem to relieve his mind for a moment by the strong alliteration of this one, 'would be without you.'
'indeed, Tom? do you really and truly say so?'
'why, of course I do. whatbe the use of talk about it!' return Tom, chafe his face on his coat-sleeve, as if to mortify his flesh, and have it in unison with his spirit.
'because, Tom,' say his sister, after silently watch the spark awhile, 'as I get old, and nearer grow up, I often sit wonder here, and think how unfortunate it be for I that I cannot reconcile you to home well than I be able to do. I donot know what other girl know. I cannot play to you, or sing to you. I cannot talk to you so as to lighten your mind, for I never see any amusing sight or read any amusing book that it would be a pleasure or a relief to you to talk about, when you be tired.'
'well, no more do I. I be as bad as you in that respect; and I be a Mule too, which yoube not. if father be determined to make I either a Prig or a Mule, and I be not a Prig, why, it stand to reason, I must be a Mule. and so I be,' say Tom, desperately.
'itbe a great pity,' say Louisa, after another pause, and speak thoughtfully out of her dark corner: 'itbe a great pity, Tom. itbe very unfortunate for both of we.'
'oh! you,' say Tom; 'you be a girl, Loo, and a girl come out of it well than a boy do. I donot miss anything in you. you be the only pleasure I have - you can brighten even this place - and you can always lead I as you like.'
'you be a dear brother, Tom; and while you think I can do such thing, I donot so much mind know well. though I do know well, Tom, and be very sorry for it.' she come and kiss he, and go back into her corner again.
'I wish I could collect all the fact we hear so much about,' say Tom, spitefully set his tooth, 'and all the figure, and all the people who find they out: and I wish I could put a thousand barrel of gunpowder under they, and blow they all up together! however, when I go to live with old Bounderby, Iwill have my revenge.'
'your revenge, Tom?'
'I mean, Iwill enjoy myself a little, and go about and see something, and hear something. Iwill recompense myself for the way in which I have be bring up.'
'but donot disappoint yourself beforehand, Tom. Mr. Bounderby think as father think, and be a great deal rougher, and not half so kind.'
'oh!' say Tom, laugh; 'I donot mind that. I shall very well know how to manage and smooth old Bounderby!'
their shadow be define upon the wall, but those of the high press in the room be all blend together on the wall and on the ceiling, as if the brother and sister be overhang by a dark cavern. or, a fanciful imagination - if such treason could have be there - might have make it out to be the shadow of their subject, and of its lower association with their future.
'what be your great mode of smooth and managing, Tom? be it a secret?'
'oh!' say Tom, 'if it be a secret, itbe not far off. itbe you. you be his little pet, you be his favourite; hewill do anything for you. when he say to I what I donot like, I shall say to he, "my sister Loo will be hurt and disappoint, Mr. Bounderby. she always use to tell I she be sure you would be easy with I than this." thatwill bring he about, or nothing will.'
after wait for some answer remark, and get none, Tom wearily relapse into the present time, and twin himself yawn round and about the rail of his chair, and rumple his head more and more, until he suddenly look up, and ask:
'have you go to sleep, Loo?'
'no, Tom. I be look at the fire.'
'you seem to find more to look at in it than ever I could find,' say Tom. 'another of the advantage, I suppose, of be a girl.'
'Tom,' enquire his sister, slowly, and in a curious tone, as if she be read what she ask in the fire, and it be not quite plainly write there, 'do you look forward with any satisfaction to this change to Mr. Bounderby's?'
'why, therebe one thing to be say of it,' return Tom, push his chair from he, and stand up; 'it will be get away from home.'
'there be one thing to be say of it,' louisa repeat in her former curious tone; 'it will be get away from home. yes.'
'not but what I shall be very unwilling, both to leave you, Loo, and to leave you here. but I must go, you know, whether I like it or not; and I have well go where I can take with I some advantage of your influence, than where I should lose it altogether. donot you see?'
'yes, Tom.'
the answer be so long in come, though there be no indecision in it, that Tom go and lean on the back of her chair, to contemplate the fire which so engross she, from her point of view, and see what he could make of it.
'except that it be a fire,' say Tom, 'it look to I as stupid and blank as everything else look. what do you see in it? not a circus?'
'I donot see anything in it, Tom, particularly. but since I have be look at it, I have be wonder about you and I, grow up.'
'wonder again!' say Tom.
'I have such unmanageable thought,' return his sister, 'that they will wonder.'
'then I beg of you, Louisa,' say Mrs. Gradgrind, who have open the door without be hear, 'to do nothing of that description, for goodness' sake, you inconsiderate girl, or I shall never hear the last of it from your father. and, Thomas, it be really shameful, with my poor head continually wear I out, that a boy bring up as you have be, and whose education have cost what yours have, should be find encourage his sister to wonder, when he know his father have expressly say that she be not to do it.'
Louisa deny Tom's participation in the offence; but her mother stop she with the conclusive answer, 'louisa, donot tell I, in my state of health; for unless you have be encourage, it be morally and physically impossible that you could have do it.'
'I be encourage by nothing, mother, but by look at the red spark drop out of the fire, and whiten and dying. it make I think, after all, how short my life would be, and how little I could hope to do in it.'
'nonsense!' say Mrs. Gradgrind, render almost energetic. 'nonsense! donot stand there and tell I such stuff, Louisa, to my face, when you know very well that if it be ever to reach your father's ear I should never hear the last of it. after all the trouble that have be take with you! after the lecture you have attend, and the experiment you have see! after I have hear you myself, when the whole of my right side have be benumb, go on with your master about combustion, and calcination, and calorification, and I may say every kind of ation that could drive a poor invalid distract, to hear you talk in this absurd way about spark and ash! I wish,' whimper Mrs. Gradgrind, take a chair, and discharge her strong point before succumb under these mere shadow of fact, 'yes, I really do wish that I have never have a family, and then you would have know what it be to do without I!'
CHAPTER ix - SISSY's PROGRESS
SISSY JUPE have not an easy time of it, between Mr. M'Choakumchild and Mrs. Gradgrind, and be not without strong impulse, in the first month of her probation, to run away. it hail fact all day long so very hard, and life in general be open to she as such a closely rule cipher-book, that assuredly she would have run away, but for only one restraint.
it be lamentable to think of; but this restraint be the result of no arithmetical process, be self-impose in defiance of all calculation, and go dead against any table of probability that any Actuary would have draw up from the premise. the girl believe that her father have not desert she; she live in the hope that he would come back, and in the faith that he would be make the happy by she remain where she be.
the wretched ignorance with which Jupe cling to this consolation, reject the superior comfort of know, on a sound arithmetical basis, that her father be an unnatural vagabond, fill Mr. Gradgrind with pity. yet, what be to be do? M'Choakumchild report that she have a very dense head for figure; that, once possess with a general idea of the globe, she take the smallest conceivable interest in its exact measurement; that she be extremely slow in the acquisition of date, unless some pitiful incident happen to be connect therewith; that she would burst into tear on be require (by the mental process) immediately to name the cost of two hundred and forty-seven muslin cap at fourteen-pence halfpenny; that she be as low down, in the school, as low could be; that after eight week of induction into the element of Political Economy, she have only yesterday be set right by a prattler three foot high, for return to the question, 'what be the first principle of this science?' the absurd answer, 'to do unto other as I would that they should do unto I.'
Mr. Gradgrind observe, shake his head, that all this be very bad; that it show the necessity of infinite grind at the mill of knowledge, as per system, schedule, blue book, report, and tabular statement a to Z; and that Jupe 'must be keep to it.' so Jupe be keep to it, and become low-spirited, but no wiser.
'it would be a fine thing to be you, Miss Louisa!' she say, one night, when Louisa have endeavour to make her perplexity for next day something clear to she.
'do you think so?'
'I should know so much, Miss Louisa. all that be difficult to I now, would be so easy then.'
'you might not be the well for it, Sissy.'
Sissy submit, after a little hesitation, 'I should not be the bad, Miss Louisa.' to which Miss Louisa answer, 'I donot know that.'
there have be so little communication between these two - both because life at Stone Lodge go monotonously round like a piece of machinery which discourage human interference, and because of the prohibition relative to Sissy's past career - that they be still almost stranger. Sissy, with her dark eye wonderingly direct to Louisa's face, be uncertain whether to say more or to remain silent.
'you be more useful to my mother, and more pleasant with she than I can ever be,' Louisa resume. 'you be pleasanter to yourself, than I be to myself.'
'but, if you please, Miss Louisa,' Sissy plead, 'I be - o so stupid!'
Louisa, with a bright laugh than usual, tell she she would be wise by-and-by.
'you donot know,' say Sissy, half cry, 'what a stupid girl I be. all through school hour I make mistake. Mr. and Mrs. M'Choakumchild call I up, over and over again, regularly to make mistake. I cannot help they. they seem to come natural to I.'
'Mr. and Mrs. M'Choakumchild never make any mistake themselves, I suppose, Sissy?'
'o no!' she eagerly return. 'they know everything.'
'tell I some of your mistake.'
'I be almost ashamed,' say Sissy, with reluctance. 'but to-day, for instance, Mr. M'Choakumchild be explain to we about Natural Prosperity.'
'National, I think it must have be,' observed Louisa.
'yes, it be. - but benot it the same?' she timidly ask.
'you have well say, National, as he say so,' return Louisa, with her dry reserve.
'National Prosperity. and he say, now, this schoolroom be a nation. and in this nation, there be fifty million of money. benot this a prosperous nation? girl number twenty, benot this a prosperous nation, and a'n't you in a thriving state?'
'what do you say?' ask Louisa.
'Miss Louisa, I say I donot know. I think I couldnot know whether it be a prosperous nation or not, and whether I be in a thriving state or not, unless I know who have get the money, and whether any of it be mine. but that have nothing to do with it. it be not in the figure at all,' say Sissy, wipe her eye.
'that be a great mistake of your,' observed Louisa.
'yes, Miss Louisa, I know it be, now. then Mr. M'Choakumchild say he would try I again. and he say, this schoolroom be an immense town, and in it there be a million of inhabitant, and only five-and-twenty be starve to death in the street, in the course of a year. what be your remark on that proportion? and my remark be - for I couldnot think of a well one - that I think it must be just as hard upon those who be starve, whether the other be a million, or a million million. and that be wrong, too.'
'of course it be.'
'then Mr. M'Choakumchild say he would try I once more. and he say, here be the stuttering - '
'statistic,' say Louisa.
'yes, Miss Louisa - they always remind I of stuttering, and thatbe another of my mistake - of accident upon the sea. and I find (Mr. M'Choakumchild say) that in a give time a hundred thousand person go to sea on long voyage, and only five hundred of they be drown or burn to death. what be the percentage? and I say, Miss;' here Sissy fairly sob as confess with extreme contrition to her great error; 'I say it be nothing.'
'nothing, Sissy?'
'nothing, Miss - to the relation and friend of the people who be kill. I shall never learn,' say Sissy. 'and the bad of all be, that although my poor father wish I so much to learn, and although I be so anxious to learn, because he wish I to, I be afraid I donot like it.'
Louisa stand look at the pretty modest head, as it droop abash before she, until it be raise again to glance at her face. then she ask:
'do your father know so much himself, that he wish you to be well teach too, Sissy?'
Sissy hesitate before reply, and so plainly show her sense that they be enter on forbid ground, that Louisa add, 'no one hear we; and if any one do, I be sure no harm could be find in such an innocent question.'
'no, Miss Louisa,' answer Sissy, upon this encouragement, shake her head; 'father know very little indeed. itbe as much as he can do to write; and itbe more than people in general can do to read his writing. though itbe plain to I.'
'your mother!'
'Father say she be quite a scholar. she die when I be bear. she be;' Sissy make the terrible communication nervously; 'she be a dancer.'
'do your father love she?' Louisa ask these question with a strong, wild, wander interest peculiar to she; an interest go astray like a banish creature, and hide in solitary place.
'o yes! as dearly as he love I. Father love I, first, for her sake. he carry I about with he when I be quite a baby. we have never be asunder from that time.'
'yet he leave you now, Sissy?'
'only for my good. nobody understand he as I do; nobody know he as I do. when he leave I for my good - he never would have leave I for his own - I know he be almost break-hearted with the trial. he will not be happy for a single minute, till he come back.'
'tell I more about he,' say Louisa, 'I will never ask you again. where do you live?'
'we travel about the country, and have no fix place to live in. Father's a;' Sissy whisper the awful word, 'a clown.'
'to make the people laugh?' say Louisa, with a nod of intelligence.
'yes. but they wouldnot laugh sometimes, and then father cry. lately, they very often wouldnot laugh, and he use to come home despairing. Father's not like most. those who donot know he as well as I do, and donot love he as dearly as I do, might believe he be not quite right. sometimes they play trick upon he; but they never know how he feel they, and shrink up, when he be alone with I. he be far, far timid than they think!'
'and you be his comfort through everything?'
she nod, with the tear roll down her face. 'I hope so, and father say I be. it be because he grow so scared and tremble, and because he feel himself to be a poor, weak, ignorant, helpless man (those use to be his word), that he want I so much to know a great deal, and be different from he. I use to read to he to cheer his courage, and he be very fond of that. they be wrong book - I be never to speak of they here - but we donot know there be any harm in they.'
'and he like they?' say Louisa, with a search gaze on Sissy all this time.
'o very much! they keep he, many time, from what do he real harm. and often and often of a night, he use to forget all his trouble in wonder whether the Sultan would let the lady go on with the story, or would have her head cut off before it be finish.'
'and your father be always kind? to the last?' ask Louisa contravene the great principle, and wonder very much.
'always, always!' return Sissy, clasp her hand. 'Kinder and kind than I can tell. he be angry only one night, and that be not to I, but Merrylegs. merryleg;' she whisper the awful fact; 'be his perform dog.'
'why be he angry with the dog?' Louisa demand.
'Father, soon after they come home from perform, tell Merrylegs to jump up on the back of the two chair and stand across they - which be one of his trick. he look at father, and donot do it at once. everything of father's have go wrong that night, and he havenot please the public at all. he cry out that the very dog know he be fail, and have no compassion on he. then he beat the dog, and I be frightened, and say, "Father, father! pray donot hurt the creature who be so fond of you! o Heaven forgive you, father, stop!" and he stop, and the dog be bloody, and father lie down cry on the floor with the dog in his arm, and the dog lick his face.'
Louisa see that she be sob; and go to she, kiss she, take her hand, and sit down beside she.
'finish by tell I how your father leave you, Sissy. now that I have ask you so much, tell I the end. the blame, if there be any blame, be mine, not your.'
'Dear Miss Louisa,' say Sissy, cover her eye, and sob yet; 'I come home from the school that afternoon, and find poor father just come home too, from the booth. and he sit rock himself over the fire, as if he be in pain. and I say, "have you hurt yourself, father?" (as he do sometimes, like they all do), and he say, "a little, my darling." and when I come to stoop down and look up at his face, I see that he be cry. the more I speak to he, the more he hide his face; and at first he shake all over, and say nothing but "my darling;" and "my love!"'
here Tom come lounge in, and star at the two with a coolness not particularly savour of interest in anything but himself, and not much of that at present.
'I be ask Sissy a few question, Tom,' observe his sister. 'you have no occasion to go away; but donot interrupt we for a moment, Tom dear.'
'oh! very well!' return Tom. 'only father have bring old Bounderby home, and I want you to come into the drawing-room. because if you come, therebe a good chance of old Bounderby's ask I to dinner; and if you donot, therebe none.'
'Iwill come directly.'
'Iwill wait for you,' say Tom, 'to make sure.'
Sissy resume in a low voice. 'at last poor father say that he have give no satisfaction again, and never do give any satisfaction now, and that he be a shame and disgrace, and I should have do well without he all along. I say all the affectionate thing to he that come into my heart, and presently he be quiet and I sit down by he, and tell he all about the school and everything that have be say and do there. when I have no more left to tell, he put his arm round my neck, and kiss I a great many time. then he ask I to fetch some of the stuff he use, for the little hurt he have have, and to get it at the good place, which be at the other end of town from there; and then, after kiss I again, he let I go. when I have go down-stair, I turn back that I might be a little bit more company to he yet, and look in at the door, and say, "Father dear, shall I take Merrylegs?" Father shake his head and say, "no, Sissy, no; take nothing thatbe know to be mine, my darling;" and I leave he sit by the fire. then the thought must have come upon he, poor, poor father! of go away to try something for my sake; for when I come back, he be go.'
'I say! look sharp for old Bounderby, Loo!' Tom remonstrate.
'therebe no more to tell, Miss Louisa. I keep the nine oil ready for he, and I know he will come back. every letter that I see in Mr. Gradgrind's hand take my breath away and blind my eye, for I think it come from father, or from Mr. Sleary about father. Mr. Sleary promise to write as soon as ever father should be hear of, and I trust to he to keep his word.'
'do look sharp for old Bounderby, Loo!' say Tom, with an impatient whistle. 'hewill be off if you donot look sharp!'
after this, whenever Sissy drop a curtsey to Mr. Gradgrind in the presence of his family, and say in a falter way, 'I beg your pardon, sir, for be troublesome - but - have you have any letter yet about I?' Louisa would suspend the occupation of the moment, whatever it be, and look for the reply as earnestly as Sissy do. and when Mr. Gradgrind regularly answer, 'no, Jupe, nothing of the sort,' the trembling of Sissy's lip would be repeat in Louisa's face, and her eye would follow Sissy with compassion to the door. Mr. Gradgrind usually improve these occasion by remark, when she be go, that if Jupe have be properly train from an early age she would have remonstrate to herself on sound principle the baselessness of these fantastic hope. yet it do seem (though not to he, for he see nothing of it) as if fantastic hope could take as strong a hold as Fact.
this observation must be limit exclusively to his daughter. as to Tom, he be become that not unprecedented triumph of calculation which be usually at work on number one. as to Mrs. Gradgrind, if she say anything on the subject, she would come a little way out of her wrapper, like a feminine dormouse, and say:
'good gracious bless I, how my poor head be vex and worry by that girl Jupe's so perseveringly ask, over and over again, about her tiresome letter! upon my word and honour I seem to be fat, and destine, and ordain, to live in the midst of thing that I be never to hear the last of. it really be a most extraordinary circumstance that it appear as if I never be to hear the last of anything!'
at about this point, Mr. Gradgrind's eye would fall upon she; and under the influence of that wintry piece of fact, she would become torpid again.
CHAPTER X - STEPHEN BLACKPOOL
I entertain a weak idea that the english people be as hard-work as any people upon whom the sun shin. I acknowledge to this ridiculous idiosyncrasy, as a reason why I would give they a little more play.
in the hard working part of Coketown; in the innermost fortification of that ugly citadel, where Nature be as strongly bricke out as kill air and gas be bricke in; at the heart of the labyrinth of narrow court upon court, and close street upon street, which have come into existence piecemeal, every piece in a violent hurry for some one man's purpose, and the whole an unnatural family, shouldering, and trampling, and press one another to death; in the last close nook of this great exhausted receiver, where the chimney, for want of air to make a draught, be build in an immense variety of stunted and crooked shape, as though every house put out a sign of the kind of people who might be expect to be bear in it; among the multitude of Coketown, generically call 'the Hands,' - a race who would have find more favour with some people, if Providence have see fit to make they only hand, or, like the low creature of the seashore, only hand and stomach - live a certain Stephen Blackpool, forty year of age.
Stephen look old, but he have have a hard life. it be say that every life have its rose and thorn; there seem, however, to have be a misadventure or mistake in Stephen's case, whereby somebody else have become possess of his rose, and he have become possessed of the same somebody else's thorn in addition to his own. he have know, to use his word, a peck of trouble. he be usually call Old Stephen, in a kind of rough homage to the fact.
a rather stoop man, with a knit brow, a ponder expression of face, and a hard-look head sufficiently capacious, on which his iron-grey hair lie long and thin, Old Stephen might have pass for a particularly intelligent man in his condition. yet he be not. he take no place among those remarkable 'hand,' who, piece together their broken interval of leisure through many year, have master difficult science, and acquire a knowledge of most unlikely thing. he hold no station among the Hands who could make speech and carry on debate. thousand of his compeer could talk much well than he, at any time. he be a good power-loom weaver, and a man of perfect integrity. what more he be, or what else he have in he, if anything, let he show for himself.
the light in the great factory, which look, when they be illuminate, like Fairy palace - or the traveller by express- train say so - be all extinguish; and the bell have ring for knock off for the night, and have cease again; and the Hands, man and woman, boy and girl, be clatter home. Old Stephen be stand in the street, with the old sensation upon he which the stoppage of the machinery always produce - the sensation of its have work and stop in his own head.
'yet I donot see Rachael, still!' say he.
it be a wet night, and many group of young woman pass he, with their shawl draw over their bare head and hold close under their chin to keep the rain out. he know Rachael well, for a glance at any one of these group be sufficient to show he that she be not there. at last, there be no more to come; and then he turn away, say in a tone of disappointment, 'why, then, ha' miss she!'
but, he have not go the length of three street, when he see another of the shawled figure in advance of he, at which he look so keenly that perhaps its mere shadow indistinctly reflect on the wet pavement - if he could have see it without the figure itself move along from lamp to lamp, brighten and fade as it go - would have be enough to tell he who be there. make his pace at once much quick and much soft, he dart on until he be very near this figure, then fall into his former walk, and call 'Rachael!'
she turn, be then in the brightness of a lamp; and raise her hood a little, show a quiet oval face, dark and rather delicate, irradiate by a pair of very gentle eye, and far set off by the perfect order of her shin black hair. it be not a face in its first bloom; she be a woman five and thirty year of age.
'ah, lad! 'tis thou?' when she have say this, with a smile which would have be quite express, though nothing of she have be see but her pleasant eye, she replace her hood again, and they go on together.
'I think thou wast ahind I, Rachael?'
'no.'
'early t'night, lass?'
''Times Ibe a little early, Stephen! 'time a little late. Ibe never to be count on, go home.'
'nor go t'other way, neither, 't seem to I, Rachael?'
'no, Stephen.'
he look at she with some disappointment in his face, but with a respectful and patient conviction that she must be right in whatever she do. the expression be not lose upon she; she lay her hand lightly on his arm a moment as if to thank he for it.
'we be such true friend, lad, and such old friend, and get to be such old folk, now.'
'no, Rachael, thou'rt as young as ever thou wast.'
'one of we would be puzzle how to get old, Stephen, without 't other get so too, both be alive,' she answer, laugh; 'but, anyways, webe such old friend, and t' hide a word of honest truth fro' one another would be a sin and a pity. 'tis well not to walk too much together. 'time, yes! 'twould be hard, indeed, if 'twa not to be at all,' she say, with a cheerfulness she seek to communicate to he.
''tis hard, anyways, Rachael.'
'try to think not; and 'twill seem well.'
'Ihave try a long time, and 'ta'nt get well. but thou'rt right; 't might mak fok talk, even of thee. Thou hast be that to I, Rachael, through so many year: thou hast do I so much good, and hearten of I in that cheering way, that thy word be a law to I. ah, lass, and a bright good law! well than some real one.'
'never fret about they, Stephen,' she answer quickly, and not without an anxious glance at his face. 'let the law be.'
'yes,' he say, with a slow nod or two. 'let them be. let everything be. let all sort alone. 'tis a muddle, and thatbe aw.'
'always a muddle?' say Rachael, with another gentle touch upon his arm, as if to recall he out of the thoughtfulness, in which he be bite the long end of his loose neckerchief as he walk along. the touch have its instantaneous effect. he let they fall, turn a smile face upon she, and say, as he break into a good-humour laugh, 'ay, Rachael, lass, awlus a muddle. thatbe where I stick. I come to the muddle many time and agen, and I never get beyond it.'
they have walk some distance, and be near their own home. the woman's be the first reach. it be in one of the many small street for which the favourite undertaker (who turn a handsome sum out of the one poor ghastly pomp of the neighbourhood) keep a black ladder, in order that those who have do their daily groping up and down the narrow stair might slide out of this work world by the window. she stop at the corner, and put her hand in his, wish he good night.
'good night, dear lass; good night!'
she go, with her neat figure and her sober womanly step, down the dark street, and he stand look after she until she turn into one of the small house. there be not a flutter of her coarse shawl, perhaps, but have its interest in this man's eye; not a tone of her voice but have its echo in his innermost heart.
when she be lose to his view, he pursue his homeward way, glance up sometimes at the sky, where the cloud be sail fast and wildly. but, they be break now, and the rain have cease, and the moon shine, - look down the high chimney of Coketown on the deep furnace below, and cast titanic shadow of the steam-engine at rest, upon the wall where they be lodge. the man seem to have brighten with the night, as he go on.
his home, in such another street as the first, save that it be narrow, be over a little shop. how it come to pass that any people find it worth their while to sell or buy the wretched little toy, mix up in its window with cheap newspaper and pork (there be a leg to be raffle for to-morrow-night), matter not here. he take his end of candle from a shelf, light it at another end of candle on the counter, without disturb the mistress of the shop who be asleep in her little room, and go upstairs into his lodging.
it be a room, not unacquainted with the black ladder under various tenant; but as neat, at present, as such a room could be. a few book and writing be on an old bureau in a corner, the furniture be decent and sufficient, and, though the atmosphere be taint, the room be clean.
go to the hearth to set the candle down upon a round three- legged table stand there, he stumble against something. as he recoil, look down at it, it raise itself up into the form of a woman in a sit attitude.
'Heaven's mercy, woman!' he cry, fall far off from the figure. 'hast thou come back again!'
such a woman! a disabled, drunken creature, barely able to preserve her sit posture by steady herself with one begrimed hand on the floor, while the other be so purposeless in try to push away her tangle hair from her face, that it only blind she the more with the dirt upon it. a creature so foul to look at, in her tatter, stain and splash, but so much fouler than that in her moral infamy, that it be a shameful thing even to see she.
after an impatient oath or two, and some stupid clawing of herself with the hand not necessary to her support, she get her hair away from her eye sufficiently to obtain a sight of he. then she sit sway her body to and fro, and make gesture with her unnerved arm, which seem intend as the accompaniment to a fit of laughter, though her face be stolid and drowsy.
'eigh, lad? what, yo'r there?' some hoarse sound mean for this, come mockingly out of she at last; and her head drop forward on her breast.
'back agen?' she screech, after some minute, as if he have that moment say it. 'yes! and back agen. back agen ever and ever so often. back? yes, back. why not?'
rouse by the unmeaning violence with which she cry it out, she scramble up, and stand support herself with her shoulder against the wall; dangle in one hand by the string, a dunghill- fragment of a bonnet, and try to look scornfully at he.
'Iwill sell thee off again, and Iwill sell thee off again, and Iwill sell thee off a score of time!' she cry, with something between a furious menace and an effort at a defiant dance. 'come awa' from th' bed!' he be sit on the side of it, with his face hide in his hand. 'come awa! from 't. 'Tis mine, and Ihave a right to t'!'
as she stagger to it, he avoid she with a shudder, and pass - his face still hide - to the opposite end of the room. she throw herself upon the bed heavily, and soon be snore hard. he sink into a chair, and move but once all that night. it be to throw a covering over she; as if his hand be not enough to hide she, even in the darkness.
CHAPTER XI - no WAY OUT
the Fairy palace burst into illumination, before pale morning show the monstrous serpent of smoke trail themselves over Coketown. a clattering of clogs upon the pavement; a rapid ringing of bell; and all the melancholy mad elephant, polished and oil up for the day's monotony, be at their heavy exercise again.
Stephen bend over his loom, quiet, watchful, and steady. a special contrast, as every man be in the forest of loom where Stephen work, to the crashing, smash, tear piece of mechanism at which he labour. never fear, good people of an anxious turn of mind, that art will consign Nature to oblivion. Set anywhere, side by side, the work of GOD and the work of man; and the former, even though it be a troop of Hands of very small account, will gain in dignity from the comparison.
so many hundred Hands in this Mill; so many hundred horse Steam Power. it be know, to the force of a single pound weight, what the engine will do; but, not all the calculator of the National Debt can tell I the capacity for good or evil, for love or hatred, for patriotism or discontent, for the decomposition of virtue into vice, or the reverse, at any single moment in the soul of one of these its quiet servant, with the compose face and the regulated action. there be no mystery in it; there be an unfathomable mystery in the mean of they, for ever. - supposing we be to reverse our arithmetic for material object, and to govern these awful unknown quantity by other mean!
the day grow strong, and show itself outside, even against the flame light within. the light be turn out, and the work go on. the rain fall, and the smoke-serpent, submissive to the curse of all that tribe, trail themselves upon the earth. in the waste-yard outside, the steam from the escape pipe, the litter of barrel and old iron, the shin heap of coal, the ash everywhere, be shroud in a veil of mist and rain.
the work go on, until the noon-bell ring. more clattering upon the pavement. the loom, and wheel, and hand all out of gear for an hour.
Stephen come out of the hot mill into the damp wind and cold wet street, haggard and worn. he turn from his own class and his own quarter, take nothing but a little bread as he walk along, towards the hill on which his principal employer live, in a red house with black outside shutter, green inside blind, a black street door, up two white step, BOUNDERBY (in letter very like himself) upon a brazen plate, and a round brazen door-handle underneath it, like a brazen full-stop.
Mr. Bounderby be at his lunch. so Stephen have expect. would his servant say that one of the Hands beg leave to speak to he? message in return, require name of such Hand. Stephen Blackpool. there be nothing troublesome against Stephen Blackpool; yes, he might come in.
Stephen Blackpool in the parlour. Mr. Bounderby (whom he just know by sight), at lunch on chop and sherry. Mrs. Sparsit net at the fireside, in a side-saddle attitude, with one foot in a cotton stirrup. it be a part, at once of Mrs. Sparsit's dignity and service, not to lunch. she supervise the meal officially, but imply that in her own stately person she consider lunch a weakness.
'now, Stephen,' say Mr. Bounderby, 'whatbe the matter with you?'
Stephen make a bow. not a servile one - these Hands will never do that! Lord bless you, sir, youwill never catch they at that, if they have be with you twenty year! - and, as a complimentary toilet for Mrs. Sparsit, tuck his neckerchief end into his waistcoat.
'now, you know,' say Mr. Bounderby, take some sherry, 'we have never have any difficulty with you, and you have never be one of the unreasonable one. you donot expect to be set up in a coach and six, and to be feed on turtle soup and venison, with a gold spoon, as a good many of them do!' Mr. Bounderby always represent this to be the sole, immediate, and direct object of any Hand who be not entirely satisfied; 'and therefore I know already that you have not come here to make a complaint. now, you know, I be certain of that, beforehand.'
'no, sir, sure I ha' not coom for nowt o' th' kind.'
Mr. Bounderby seem agreeably surprised, notwithstanding his previous strong conviction. 'very well,' he return. 'yoube a steady hand, and I be not mistaken. now, let I hear what itbe all about. as itbe not that, let I hear what it be. what have you get to say? out with it, lad!'
Stephen happen to glance towards Mrs. Sparsit. 'I can go, Mr. Bounderby, if you wish it,' say that self-sacrifice lady, make a feint of take her foot out of the stirrup.
Mr. Bounderby stay she, by hold a mouthful of chop in suspension before swallow it, and put out his left hand. then, withdraw his hand and swallow his mouthful of chop, he say to Stephen:
'now you know, this good lady be a bear lady, a high lady. you be not to suppose because she keep my house for I, that she havenot be very high up the tree - ah, up at the top of the tree! now, if you have get anything to say that cannot be say before a bear lady, this lady will leave the room. if what you have get to say can be say before a bear lady, this lady will stay where she be.'
'Sir, I hope I never have nowt to say, not fitten for a bear lady to year, sin' I be bear mysen',' be the reply, accompany with a slight flush.
'very well,' say Mr. Bounderby, push away his plate, and lean back. 'fire away!'
'I ha' coom,' Stephen begin, raise his eye from the floor, after a moment's consideration, 'to ask yo yor advice. I need 't overmuch. I be married on Eas'r Monday nineteen year sin, long and dree. she be a young lass - pretty enow - wi' good account of herseln. well! she go bad - soon. not along of I. Gonnows I be not a unkind husband to she.'
'I have hear all this before,' say Mr. Bounderby. 'she take to drinking, leave off work, sell the furniture, pawn the clothe, and play old Gooseberry.'
'I be patient wi' she.'
('the more fool you, I think,' say Mr. Bounderby, in confidence to his wine-glass.)
'I be very patient wi' she. I try to wean her fra 't ower and ower agen. I try this, I try that, I try t'other. I ha' go home, manybe the time, and find all vanish as I have in the world, and she without a sense leave to bless herseln lie on bare ground. I ha' dun 't not once, not twice - twenty time!'
every line in his face deepen as he say it, and put in its affect evidence of the suffering he have undergo.
'from bad to bad, from bad to worsen. she leave I. she disgrace herseln everyway, bitter and bad. she coom back, she coom back, she coom back. what could I do t' hinder she? I ha' walk the street night long, ere ever Iwould go home. I ha' go t' th' brigg, minded to fle myseln ower, and ha' no more on't. I ha' bore that much, that I be owd when I be young.'
Mrs. Sparsit, easily amble along with her netting-needle, raise the coriolanian eyebrow and shake her head, as much as to say, 'the great know trouble as well as the small. please to turn your humble eye in my direction.'
'I ha' pay she to keep awa' fra' I. these five year I ha' pay she. I ha' get decent fewtril about I agen. I ha' live hard and sad, but not ashamed and fearfo' a' the minnit o' my life. last night, I go home. there she lie upon my har-stone! there she be!'
in the strength of his misfortune, and the energy of his distress, he fire for the moment like a proud man. in another moment, he stand as he have stand all the time - his usual stoop upon he; his ponder face address to Mr. Bounderby, with a curious expression on it, half shrewd, half perplexed, as if his mind be set upon unravel something very difficult; his hat hold tight in his left hand, which rest on his hip; his right arm, with a rugged propriety and force of action, very earnestly emphasize what he say: not least so when it always pause, a little bent, but not withdraw, as he pause.
'I be acquaint with all this, you know,' say Mr. Bounderby, 'except the last clause, long ago. itbe a bad job; thatbe what it be. you have well have be satisfied as you be, and not have get marry. however, itbe too late to say that.'
'be it an unequal marriage, sir, in point of year?' ask Mrs. Sparsit.
'you hear what this lady ask. be it an unequal marriage in point of year, this unlucky job of your?' say Mr. Bounderby.
'not e'en so. I be one-and-twenty myseln; she be twenty nighbut.'
'indeed, sir?' say Mrs. Sparsit to her Chief, with great placidity. 'I infer, from its be so miserable a marriage, that it be probably an unequal one in point of year.'
Mr. Bounderby look very hard at the good lady in a side-long way that have an odd sheepishness about it. he fortify himself with a little more sherry.
'well? why donot you go on?' he then ask, turn rather irritably on Stephen Blackpool.
'I ha' coom to ask yo, sir, how I be to be rid o' this woman.' Stephen infuse a yet deep gravity into the mixed expression of his attentive face. Mrs. Sparsit utter a gentle ejaculation, as have receive a moral shock.
'what do you mean?' say Bounderby, get up to lean his back against the chimney-piece. 'what be you talk about? you take she for well for bad.'
'I mun' be ride o' she. I cannot bear 't nommore. I ha' live under 't so long, for that I ha' had'n the pity and comfort word o' th' good lass living or dead. haply, but for she, I should ha' go batter mad.'
'he wish to be free, to marry the female of whom he speak, I fear, sir,' observe Mrs. Sparsit in an undertone, and much deject by the immorality of the people.
'I do. the lady say whatbe right. I do. I be a come to 't. I ha' read I' th' paper that great folk (fair faw them a'! I wish them no hurt!) be not bond together for well for bad so fast, but that they can be set free fro' their misfortnet marriage, an' marry ower agen. when they dunnot agree, for that their temper be ill-sorted, they have room o' one kind an' another in their house, above a bit, and they can live asunder. we fok ha' only one room, and we cannot. when that willnot do, they ha' gowd an' other cash, an' they can say "this for yo' an' that for I," an' they can go their separate way. we cannot. spite o' all that, they can be set free for small wrong than mine. so, I mun be ride o' this woman, and I want t' know how?'
'no how,' return Mr. Bounderby.
'if I do she any hurt, sir, therebe a law to punish I?'
'of course there be.'
'if I flee from she, therebe a law to punish I?'
'of course there be.'
'if I marry t'oother dear lass, therebe a law to punish I?'
'of course there be.'
'if I be to live wi' her an' not marry she - say such a thing could be, which it never could or would, an' her so good - therebe a law to punish I, in every innocent child belong to I?'
'of course there be.'
'now, a' God's name,' say Stephen Blackpool, 'show I the law to help I!'
'Hem! therebe a sanctity in this relation of life,' say Mr. Bounderby, 'and - and - it must be keep up.'
'no no, dunnot say that, sir. 'tan't kep' up that way. not that way. 'Tis kep' down that way. Ibe a weaver, I be in a fact'ry when a chilt, but I ha' get een to see wi' and eern to year wi'. I read in th' paper every 'Sizes, every Sessions - and you read too - I know it! - with dismay - how th' suppose unpossibility o' ever get unchained from one another, at any price, on any term, bring blood upon this land, and bring many common married fok to battle, murder, and sudden death. let we ha' this, right understood. minebe a grievous case, an' I want - if yo will be so good - t' know the law that help I.'
'now, I tell you what!' say Mr. Bounderby, put his hand in his pocket. 'there be such a law.'
Stephen, subside into his quiet manner, and never wander in his attention, give a nod.
'but itbe not for you at all. it cost money. it cost a mint of money.'
'how much might that be?' Stephen calmly ask.
'why, youwould have to go to doctor' Commons with a suit, and youwould have to go to a court of Common Law with a suit, and youwould have to go to the House of Lords with a suit, and youwould have to get an Act of Parliament to enable you to marry again, and it would cost you (if it be a case of very plain sailing), I suppose from a thousand to fifteen hundred pound,' say Mr. Bounderby. 'perhaps twice the money.'
'therebe no other law?'
'certainly not.'
'why then, sir,' say Stephen, turn white, and motion with that right hand of his, as if he give everything to the four wind, ''tis a muddle. 'tis just a muddle a'toogether, an' the soon I be dead, the well.'
(Mrs. Sparsit again deject by the impiety of the people.)
'Pooh, pooh! donot you talk nonsense, my good fellow,' say Mr. Bounderby, 'about thing you donot understand; and donot you call the institution of your country a muddle, or youwill get yourself into a real muddle one of these fine morning. the institution of your country be not your piece-work, and the only thing you have get to do, be, to mind your piece-work. you donot take your wife for fast and for loose; but for well for bad. if she have turn out bad - why, all we have get to say be, she might have turn out well.'
''tis a muddle,' say Stephen, shake his head as he move to the door. ''tis a' a muddle!'
'now, Iwill tell you what!' Mr. Bounderby resume, as a valedictory address. 'with what I shall call your unhallowed opinion, you have be quite shocking this lady: who, as I have already tell you, be a bear lady, and who, as I have not already tell you, have have her own marriage misfortune to the tune of ten of thousand of pound - ten of thousand of Pounds!' (he repeat it with great relish). 'now, you have always be a steady Hand hitherto; but my opinion be, and so I tell you plainly, that you be turn into the wrong road. you have be listen to some mischievous stranger or other - theybe always about - and the good thing you can do be, to come out of that. now you know;' here his countenance express marvellous acuteness; 'I can see as far into a grindstone as another man; far than a good many, perhaps, because I have my nose well keep to it when I be young. I see trace of the turtle soup, and venison, and gold spoon in this. yes, I do!' cry Mr. Bounderby, shake his head with obstinate cunning. 'by the Lord Harry, I do!'
with a very different shake of the head and deep sigh, Stephen say, 'thank you, sir, I wish you good day.' so he leave Mr. Bounderby swell at his own portrait on the wall, as if he be go to explode himself into it; and Mrs. Sparsit still amble on with her foot in her stirrup, look quite cast down by the popular vice.
CHAPTER XII - the OLD woman
OLD STEPHEN descend the two white step, shut the black door with the brazen door-plate, by the aid of the brazen full-stop, to which he give a parting polish with the sleeve of his coat, observe that his hot hand cloud it. he cross the street with his eye bent upon the ground, and thus be walk sorrowfully away, when he feel a touch upon his arm.
it be not the touch he need most at such a moment - the touch that could calm the wild water of his soul, as the uplifted hand of the sublime love and patience could abate the raging of the sea - yet it be a woman's hand too. it be an old woman, tall and shapely still, though wither by time, on whom his eye fall when he stop and turn. she be very cleanly and plainly dress, have country mud upon her shoe, and be newly come from a journey. the flutter of her manner, in the unwonted noise of the street; the spare shawl, carry unfold on her arm; the heavy umbrella, and little basket; the loose long-finger glove, to which her hand be unused; all bespoke an old woman from the country, in her plain holiday clothe, come into Coketown on an expedition of rare occurrence. remark this at a glance, with the quick observation of his class, Stephen Blackpool bend his attentive face - his face, which, like the face of many of his order, by dint of long work with eye and hand in the midst of a prodigious noise, have acquire the concentrated look with which we be familiar in the countenance of the deaf - the well to hear what she ask he.
'pray, sir,' say the old woman, 'donot I see you come out of that gentleman's house?' point back to Mr. Bounderby's. 'I believe it be you, unless I have have the bad luck to mistake the person in follow?'
'yes, missus,' return Stephen, 'it be I.'
'have you - youwill excuse an old woman's curiosity - have you see the gentleman?'
'yes, missus.'
'and how do he look, sir? be he portly, bold, outspoken, and hearty?' as she straighten her own figure, and hold up her head in adapt her action to her word, the idea cross Stephen that he have see this old woman before, and have not quite like she.
'o yes,' he return, observe she more attentively, 'he be all that.'
'and healthy,' say the old woman, 'as the fresh wind?'
'yes,' return Stephen. 'he be ett'n and drinking - as large and as loud as a Hummobee.'
'thank you!' say the old woman, with infinite content. 'thank you!'
he certainly never have see this old woman before. yet there be a vague remembrance in his mind, as if he have more than once dream of some old woman like she.
she walk along at his side, and, gently accommodate himself to her humour, he say Coketown be a busy place, be it not? to which she answer 'eigh sure! dreadful busy!' then he say, she come from the country, he see? to which she answer in the affirmative.
'by Parliamentary, this morning. I come forty mile by Parliamentary this morning, and Ibe go back the same forty mile this afternoon. I walk nine mile to the station this morning, and if I find nobody on the road to give I a lift, I shall walk the nine mile back to-night. thatbe pretty well, sir, at my age!' say the chatty old woman, her eye brightening with exultation.
''deed 'tis. donot do't too often, missus.'
'no, no. once a year,' she answer, shake her head. 'I spend my saving so, once every year. I come regular, to tramp about the street, and see the gentleman.'
'only to see them?' return Stephen.
'thatbe enough for I,' she reply, with great earnestness and interest of manner. 'I ask no more! I have be stand about, on this side of the way, to see that gentleman,' turn her head back towards Mr. Bounderby's again, 'come out. but, hebe late this year, and I have not see he. you come out instead. now, if I be oblige to go back without a glimpse of he - I only want a glimpse - well! I have see you, and you have see he, and I must make that do.' say this, she look at Stephen as if to fix his feature in her mind, and her eye be not so bright as it have be.
with a large allowance for difference of taste, and with all submission to the patrician of Coketown, this seem so extraordinary a source of interest to take so much trouble about, that it perplex he. but they be pass the church now, and as his eye catch the clock, he quicken his pace.
he be go to his work? the old woman say, quicken her, too, quite easily. yes, time be nearly out. on his tell she where he work, the old woman become a more singular old woman than before.
'an't you happy?' she ask he.
'why - therebe awmost nobbody but have their trouble, missus.' he answer evasively, because the old woman appear to take it for grant that he would be very happy indeed, and he have not the heart to disappoint she. he know that there be trouble enough in the world; and if the old woman have live so long, and could count upon his have so little, why so much the well for she, and none the bad for he.
'ay, ay! you have your trouble at home, you mean?' she say.
'time. just now and then,' he answer, slightly.
'but, work under such a gentleman, they donot follow you to the Factory?'
no, no; they donot follow he there, say Stephen. all correct there. everything accordant there. (he do not go so far as to say, for her pleasure, that there be a sort of Divine right there; but, I have hear claim almost as magnificent of late year.)
they be now in the black by-road near the place, and the Hands be crowd in. the bell be ring, and the Serpent be a Serpent of many coil, and the Elephant be get ready. the strange old woman be delighted with the very bell. it be the beautifull bell she have ever hear, she say, and sound grand!
she ask he, when he stop good-naturedly to shake hand with she before go in, how long he have work there?
'a dozen year,' he tell she.
'I must kiss the hand,' say she, 'that have work in this fine factory for a dozen year!' and she lift it, though he would have prevent she, and put it to her lip. what harmony, besides her age and her simplicity, surround she, he do not know, but even in this fantastic action there be a something neither out of time nor place: a something which it seem as if nobody else could have make as serious, or do with such a natural and touching air.
he have be at his loom full half an hour, think about this old woman, when, have occasion to move round the loom for its adjustment, he glance through a window which be in his corner, and see she still look up at the pile of building, lose in admiration. heedless of the smoke and mud and wet, and of her two long journey, she be gaze at it, as if the heavy thrum that issue from its many story be proud music to she.
she be go by and by, and the day go after she, and the light spring up again, and the Express whirl in full sight of the Fairy Palace over the arch near: little feel amid the jarring of the machinery, and scarcely hear above its crash and rattle. long before then his thought have go back to the dreary room above the little shop, and to the shameful figure heavy on the bed, but heavy on his heart.
Machinery slacken; throb feebly like a faint pulse; stop. the bell again; the glare of light and heat dispel; the factory, loom heavy in the black wet night - their tall chimney rise up into the air like compete tower of Babel.
he have speak to Rachael only last night, it be true, and have walk with she a little way; but he have his new misfortune on he, in which no one else could give he a moment's relief, and, for the sake of it, and because he know himself to want that soften of his anger which no voice but hers could effect, he feel he might so far disregard what she have say as to wait for she again. he wait, but she have elude he. she be go. on no other night in the year could he so ill have spar her patient face.
o! well to have no home in which to lay his head, than to have a home and dread to go to it, through such a cause. he eat and drank, for he be exhausted - but he little know or care what; and he wander about in the chill rain, think and thinking, and brood and brooding.
no word of a new marriage have ever pass between they; but Rachael have take great pity on he year ago, and to she alone he have open his closed heart all this time, on the subject of his misery; and he know very well that if he be free to ask she, she would take he. he think of the home he might at that moment have be seek with pleasure and pride; of the different man he might have be that night; of the lightness then in his now heavy- laden breast; of the then restore honour, self-respect, and tranquillity all tear to piece. he think of the waste of the good part of his life, of the change it make in his character for the bad every day, of the dreadful nature of his existence, bind hand and foot, to a dead woman, and torment by a demon in her shape. he think of Rachael, how young when they be first bring together in these circumstance, how mature now, how soon to grow old. he think of the number of girl and woman she have see marry, how many home with child in they she have see grow up around she, how she have contentedly pursue her own lone quiet path - for he - and how he have sometimes see a shade of melancholy on her blessed face, that smite he with remorse and despair. he set the picture of she up, beside the infamous image of last night; and think, could it be, that the whole earthly course of one so gentle, good, and self-deny, be subjugate to such a wretch as that!
fill with these thought - so fill that he have an unwholesome sense of grow large, of be place in some new and diseased relation towards the object among which he pass, of see the iris round every misty light turn red - he go home for shelter.
CHAPTER XIII - RACHAEL
a candle faintly burn in the window, to which the black ladder have often be raise for the slide away of all that be most precious in this world to a strive wife and a brood of hungry baby; and Stephen add to his other thought the stern reflection, that of all the casualty of this existence upon earth, not one be deal out with so unequal a hand as death. the inequality of Birth be nothing to it. for, say that the child of a King and the child of a Weaver be bear to-night in the same moment, what be that disparity, to the death of any human creature who be serviceable to, or belove by, another, while this abandon woman live on!
from the outside of his home he gloomily pass to the inside, with suspend breath and with a slow footstep. he go up to his door, open it, and so into the room.
quiet and peace be there. Rachael be there, sit by the bed.
she turn her head, and the light of her face shine in upon the midnight of his mind. she sit by the bed, watch and tend his wife. that be to say, he see that some one lie there, and he know too well it must be she; but Rachael's hand have put a curtain up, so that she be screen from his eye. her disgraceful garment be remove, and some of Rachael's be in the room. everything be in its place and order as he have always keep it, the little fire be newly trim, and the hearth be freshly sweep. it appear to he that he see all this in Rachael's face, and look at nothing besides. while look at it, it be shut out from his view by the soften tear that fill his eye; but not before he have see how earnestly she look at he, and how her own eye be fill too.
she turn again towards the bed, and satisfy herself that all be quiet there, speak in a low, calm, cheerful voice.
'I be glad you have come at last, Stephen. you be very late.'
'I ha' be walk up an' down.'
'I think so. but 'tis too bad a night for that. the rain fall very heavy, and the wind have rise.'
the wind? true. it be blow hard. Hark to the thundering in the chimney, and the surge noise! to have be out in such a wind, and not to have know it be blow!
'I have be here once before, to-day, Stephen. Landlady come round for I at dinner-time. there be some one here that need look to, she say. and 'deed she be right. all wander and lose, Stephen. wound too, and bruise.'
he slowly move to a chair and sit down, droop his head before she.
'I come to do what little I could, Stephen; first, for that she work with I when we be girl both, and for that you court she and marry she when I be her friend - '
he lay his furrowed forehead on his hand, with a low groan.
'and next, for that I know your heart, and be right sure and certain that 'tis far too merciful to let she die, or even so much as suffer, for want of aid. Thou know who say, "let he who be without sin among you cast the first stone at she!" there have be plenty to do that. thou art not the man to cast the last stone, Stephen, when she be bring so low.'
'o Rachael, Rachael!'
'Thou hast be a cruel sufferer, Heaven reward thee!' she say, in compassionate accent. 'I be thy poor friend, with all my heart and mind.'
the wound of which she have speak, seem to be about the neck of the self-make outcast. she dress they now, still without show she. she steep a piece of linen in a basin, into which she pour some liquid from a bottle, and lay it with a gentle hand upon the sore. the three-legged table have be draw close to the bedside, and on it there be two bottle. this be one.
it be not so far off, but that Stephen, follow her hand with his eye, could read what be print on it in large letter. he turn of a deadly hue, and a sudden horror seem to fall upon he.
'I will stay here, Stephen,' say Rachael, quietly resume her seat, 'till the bell go Three. 'tis to be do again at three, and then she may be leave till morning.'
'but thy rest agen to-morrow's work, my dear.'
'I sleep sound last night. I can wake many night, when I be put to it. 'tis thou who art in need of rest - so white and tired. try to sleep in the chair there, while I watch. Thou hadst no sleep last night, I can well believe. to-morrow's work be far hard for thee than for I.'
he hear the thundering and surge out of door, and it seem to he as if his late angry mood be go about try to get at he. she have cast it out; she would keep it out; he trust to she to defend he from himself.
'she donot know I, Stephen; she just drowsily mutter and stare. I have speak to her time and again, but she donot notice! 'tis as well so. when she come to her right mind once more, I shall have do what I can, and she never the wiser.'
'how long, Rachael, be 't look for, that shewill be so?'
'doctor say she would haply come to her mind to-morrow.'
his eye fall again on the bottle, and a tremble pass over he, cause he to shiver in every limb. she think he be chill with the wet. 'no,' he say, 'it be not that. he have have a fright.'
'a fright?'
'ay, ay! come in. when I be walk. when I be think. when I - ' it seize he again; and he stand up, hold by the mantel-shelf, as he press his dank cold hair down with a hand that shake as if it be palsy.
'Stephen!'
she be come to he, but he stretch out his arm to stop she.
'no! donot, please; donot. let I see thee setten by the bed. let I see thee, a' so good, and so forgiving. let I see thee as I see thee when I coom in. I can never see thee well than so. never, never, never!'
he have a violent fit of trembling, and then sink into his chair. after a time he control himself, and, rest with an elbow on one knee, and his head upon that hand, could look towards Rachael. see across the dim candle with his moistened eye, she look as if she have a glory shin round her head. he could have believe she have. he do believe it, as the noise without shake the window, rattle at the door below, and go about the house clamouring and lament.
'when she get well, Stephen, 'tis to be hop shewill leave thee to thyself again, and do thee no more hurt. anyways we will hope so now. and now I shall keep silence, for I want thee to sleep.'
he close his eye, more to please she than to rest his weary head; but, by slow degree as he listen to the great noise of the wind, he cease to hear it, or it change into the working of his loom, or even into the voice of the day (his own include) say what have be really say. even this imperfect consciousness fade away at last, and he dream a long, troubled dream.
he think that he, and some one on whom his heart have long be set - but she be not Rachael, and that surprise he, even in the midst of his imaginary happiness - stand in the church be marry. while the ceremony be perform, and while he recognize among the witness some whom he know to be live, and many whom he know to be dead, darkness come on, succeed by the shining of a tremendous light. it break from one line in the table of commandment at the altar, and illuminate the building with the word. they be sound through the church, too, as if there be voice in the fiery letter. upon this, the whole appearance before he and around he change, and nothing be leave as it have be, but himself and the clergyman. they stand in the daylight before a crowd so vast, that if all the people in the world could have be bring together into one space, they could not have look, he think, more numerous; and they all abhor he, and there be not one pity or friendly eye among the million that be fasten on his face. he stand on a raise stage, under his own loom; and, look up at the shape the loom took, and hear the burial service distinctly read, he know that he be there to suffer death. in an instant what he stand on fall below he, and he be go.
- out of what mystery he come back to his usual life, and to place that he know, he be unable to consider; but he be back in those place by some mean, and with this condemnation upon he, that he be never, in this world or the next, through all the unimaginable age of eternity, to look on Rachael's face or hear her voice. wander to and fro, unceasingly, without hope, and in search of he know not what (he only know that he be doom to seek it), he be the subject of a nameless, horrible dread, a mortal fear of one particular shape which everything take. whatsoever he look at, grow into that form soon or later. the object of his miserable existence be to prevent its recognition by any one among the various people he encounter. hopeless labour! if he lead they out of room where it be, if he shut up drawer and closet where it stand, if he draw the curious from place where he know it to be secrete, and get they out into the street, the very chimney of the mill assume that shape, and round they be the print word.
the wind be blow again, the rain be beat on the house-top, and the large space through which he have stray contract to the four wall of his room. save that the fire have die out, it be as his eye have close upon it. Rachael seem to have fall into a doze, in the chair by the bed. she sit wrap in her shawl, perfectly still. the table stand in the same place, close by the bedside, and on it, in its real proportion and appearance, be the shape so often repeat.
he think he see the curtain move. he look again, and he be sure it move. he see a hand come forth and grope about a little. then the curtain move more perceptibly, and the woman in the bed put it back, and sit up.
with her woful eye, so haggard and wild, so heavy and large, she look all round the room, and pass the corner where he sleep in his chair. her eye return to that corner, and she put her hand over they as a shade, while she look into it. again they go all round the room, scarcely heed Rachael if at all, and return to that corner. he think, as she once more shade they - not so much look at he, as look for he with a brutish instinct that he be there - that no single trace be leave in those debauch feature, or in the mind that go along with they, of the woman he have marry eighteen year before. but that he have see she come to this by inch, he never could have believe she to be the same.
all this time, as if a spell be on he, he be motionless and powerless, except to watch she.
stupidly dozing, or commune with her incapable self about nothing, she sit for a little while with her hand at her ear, and her head rest on they. presently, she resume her star round the room. and now, for the first time, her eye stop at the table with the bottle on it.
Straightway she turn her eye back to his corner, with the defiance of last night, and move very cautiously and softly, stretch out her greedy hand. she draw a mug into the bed, and sit for a while consider which of the two bottle she should choose. finally, she lay she insensate grasp upon the bottle that have swift and certain death in it, and, before his eye, pull out the cork with her tooth.
dream or reality, he have no voice, nor have he power to stir. if this be real, and her allotted time be not yet come, wake, Rachael, wake!
she think of that, too. she look at Rachael, and very slowly, very cautiously, pour out the content. the draught be at her lip. a moment and she would be past all help, let the whole world wake and come about she with its utmost power. but in that moment Rachael start up with a suppress cry. the creature struggle, strike she, seize she by the hair; but Rachael have the cup.
Stephen break out of his chair. 'Rachael, be I wakin' or dreamin' this dreadfo' night?'
''tis all well, Stephen. I have be asleep, myself. 'tis near three. hush! I hear the bell.'
the wind bring the sound of the church clock to the window. they listen, and it strike three. Stephen look at she, see how pale she be, note the disorder of her hair, and the red mark of finger on her forehead, and feel assure that his sens of sight and hearing have be awake. she hold the cup in her hand even now.
'I think it must be near three,' she say, calmly pour from the cup into the basin, and steep the linen as before. 'I be thankful I stay! 'tis do now, when I have put this on. there! and now shebe quiet again. the few drop in the basin Iwill pour away, for 'tis bad stuff to leave about, though ever so little of it.' as she speak, she drain the basin into the ash of the fire, and break the bottle on the hearth.
she have nothing to do, then, but to cover herself with her shawl before go out into the wind and rain.
'thou'lt let I walk wi' thee at this hour, Rachael?'
'no, Stephen. 'tis but a minute, and Ibe home.'
'Thou'rt not fearfo';' he say it in a low voice, as they go out at the door; 'to leave I alone wi' she!'
as she look at he, say, 'Stephen?' he go down on his knee before she, on the poor mean stair, and put an end of her shawl to his lip.
'thou art an Angel. bless thee, bless thee!'
'I be, as I have tell thee, Stephen, thy poor friend. angel be not like I. between they, and a work woman fu' of fault, there be a deep gulf set. my little sister be among they, but she be change.'
she raise her eye for a moment as she say the word; and then they fall again, in all their gentleness and mildness, on his face.
'Thou chang I from bad to good. Thou mak'st I humbly wishfo' to be more like thee, and fearfo' to lose thee when this life be ower, and a' the muddle clear awa'. Thou'rt an Angel; it may be, thou hast save my soul alive!'
she look at he, on his knee at her foot, with her shawl still in his hand, and the reproof on her lip die away when she see the working of his face.
'I coom home desp'rate. I coom home wi'out a hope, and mad wi' thinking that when I say a word o' complaint I be reckon a unreasonable Hand. I tell thee I have have a fright. it be the poison-bottle on table. I never hurt a livin' creetur; but happenin' so suddenly upon 't, I thowt, "how can I say what I might ha' do to myseln, or she, or both!"'
she put she two hand on his mouth, with a face of terror, to stop he from say more. he catch they in his unoccupied hand, and hold they, and still clasp the border of her shawl, say hurriedly:
'but I see thee, Rachael, setten by the bed. I ha' see thee, aw this night. in my troublous sleep I ha' know thee still to be there. evermore I will see thee there. I nevermore will see she or think o' she, but thou shalt be beside she. I nevermore will see or think o' anything that anger I, but thou, so much well than I, shalt be by th' side on't. and so I will try t' look t' th' time, and so I will try t' trust t' th' time, when thou and I at last shall walk together far awa', beyond the deep gulf, in th' country where thy little sister be.'
he kiss the border of her shawl again, and let she go. she bid he good night in a broken voice, and go out into the street.
the wind blow from the quarter where the day would soon appear, and still blow strongly. it have clear the sky before it, and the rain have spend itself or travel elsewhere, and the star be bright. he stand bare-headed in the road, watch her quick disappearance. as the shin star be to the heavy candle in the window, so be Rachael, in the rugged fancy of this man, to the common experience of his life.
CHAPTER XIV - the great MANUFACTURER
time go on in Coketown like its own machinery: so much material work up, so much fuel consume, so many power wear out, so much money make. but, less inexorable than iron, steal, and brass, it bring its vary season even into that wilderness of smoke and brick, and make the only stand that ever be make in the place against its direful uniformity.
'louisa be become,' say Mr. Gradgrind, 'almost a young woman.'
Time, with his innumerable horse-power, work away, not mind what anybody say, and presently turn out young Thomas a foot tall than when his father have last take particular notice of he.
'Thomas be become,' say Mr. Gradgrind, 'almost a young man.'
Time pass Thomas on in the mill, while his father be think about it, and there he stand in a long-tail coat and a stiff shirt-collar.
'really,' say Mr. Gradgrind, 'the period have arrive when Thomas ought to go to Bounderby.'
Time, stick to he, pass he on into Bounderby's Bank, make he an inmate of Bounderby's house, necessitate the purchase of his first razor, and exercise he diligently in his calculation relative to number one.
the same great manufacturer, always with an immense variety of work on hand, in every stage of development, pass Sissy onward in his mill, and work she up into a very pretty article indeed.
'I fear, Jupe,' say Mr. Gradgrind, 'that your continuance at the school any long would be useless.'
'I be afraid it would, sir,' Sissy answer with a curtsey.
'I cannot disguise from you, Jupe,' say Mr. Gradgrind, knit his brow, 'that the result of your probation there have disappoint I; have greatly disappoint I. you have not acquire, under Mr. and Mrs. M'Choakumchild, anything like that amount of exact knowledge which I look for. you be extremely deficient in your fact. your acquaintance with figure be very limited. you be altogether backward, and below the mark.'
'I be sorry, sir,' she return; 'but I know it be quite true. yet I have try hard, sir.'
'yes,' say Mr. Gradgrind, 'yes, I believe you have try hard; I have observe you, and I can find no fault in that respect.'
'thank you, sir. I have think sometimes;' Sissy very timid here; 'that perhaps I try to learn too much, and that if I have ask to be allow to try a little less, I might have - '
'no, Jupe, no,' say Mr. Gradgrind, shake his head in his profound and most eminently practical way. 'no. the course you pursue, you pursue accord to the system - the system - and there be no more to be say about it. I can only suppose that the circumstance of your early life be too unfavourable to the development of your reasoning power, and that we begin too late. still, as I have say already, I be disappointed.'
'I wish I could have make a well acknowledgment, sir, of your kindness to a poor forlorn girl who have no claim upon you, and of your protection of she.'
'donot shed tear,' say Mr. Gradgrind. 'donot shed tear. I donot complain of you. you be an affectionate, earnest, good young woman - and - and we must make that do.'
'thank you, sir, very much,' say Sissy, with a grateful curtsey.
'you be useful to Mrs. Gradgrind, and (in a generally pervade way) you be serviceable in the family also; so I understand from Miss Louisa, and, indeed, so I have observe myself. I therefore hope,' say Mr. Gradgrind, 'that you can make yourself happy in those relation.'
'I should have nothing to wish, sir, if - '
'I understand you,' say Mr. Gradgrind; 'you still refer to your father. I have hear from Miss Louisa that you still preserve that bottle. well! if your training in the science of arrive at exact result have be more successful, you would have be wise on these point. I will say no more.'
he really like Sissy too well to have a contempt for she; otherwise he hold her calculate power in such very slight estimation that he must have fall upon that conclusion. somehow or other, he have become possess by an idea that there be something in this girl which could hardly be set forth in a tabular form. her capacity of definition might be easily state at a very low figure, her mathematical knowledge at nothing; yet he be not sure that if he have be require, for example, to tick she off into column in a parliamentary return, he would have quite know how to divide she.
in some stage of his manufacture of the human fabric, the process of Time be very rapid. young Thomas and Sissy be both at such a stage of their work up, these change be effect in a year or two; while Mr. Gradgrind himself seem stationary in his course, and undergo no alteration.
except one, which be apart from his necessary progress through the mill. time hustle he into a little noisy and rather dirty machinery, in a by-comer, and make he Member of Parliament for Coketown: one of the respected member for ounce weight and measure, one of the representative of the multiplication table, one of the deaf honourable gentleman, dumb honourable gentleman, blind honourable gentleman, lame honourable gentleman, dead honourable gentleman, to every other consideration. else wherefore live we in a christian land, eighteen hundred and odd year after our Master?
all this while, Louisa have be pass on, so quiet and reserved, and so much give to watch the bright ash at twilight as they fall into the grate, and become extinct, that from the period when her father have say she be almost a young woman - which seem but yesterday - she have scarcely attract his notice again, when he find she quite a young woman.
'quite a young woman,' say Mr. Gradgrind, muse. 'dear I!'
soon after this discovery, he become more thoughtful than usual for several day, and seem much engross by one subject. on a certain night, when he be go out, and Louisa come to bid he good-bye before his departure - as he be not to be home until late and she would not see he again until the morning - he hold she in his arm, look at she in his kind manner, and say:
'my dear Louisa, you be a woman!'
she answer with the old, quick, search look of the night when she be find at the Circus; then cast down her eye. 'yes, father.'
'my dear,' say Mr. Gradgrind, 'I must speak with you alone and seriously. come to I in my room after breakfast to-morrow, will you?'
'yes, father.'
'your hand be rather cold, Louisa. be you not well?'
'quite well, father.'
'and cheerful?'
she look at he again, and smile in her peculiar manner. 'I be as cheerful, father, as I usually be, or usually have be.'
'thatbe well,' say Mr. Gradgrind. so, he kiss she and go away; and Louisa return to the serene apartment of the haircutte character, and lean her elbow on her hand, look again at the short-live spark that so soon subside into ash.
'be you there, Loo?' say her brother, look in at the door. he be quite a young gentleman of pleasure now, and not quite a prepossess one.
'Dear Tom,' she answer, rise and embrace he, 'how long it be since you have be to see I!'
'why, I have be otherwise engage, Loo, in the evening; and in the daytime old Bounderby have be keep I at it rather. but I touch he up with you when he come it too strong, and so we preserve an understanding. I say! have father say anything particular to you to-day or yesterday, Loo?'
'no, Tom. but he tell I to-night that he wish to do so in the morning.'
'ah! thatbe what I mean,' say Tom. 'do you know where he be to- night?' - with a very deep expression.
'no.'
'then Iwill tell you. hebe with old Bounderby. they be have a regular confab together up at the Bank. why at the Bank, do you think? well, Iwill tell you again. to keep Mrs. Sparsit's ear as far off as possible, I expect.'
with her hand upon her brother's shoulder, Louisa still stand look at the fire. her brother glance at her face with great interest than usual, and, encircle her waist with his arm, draw she coaxingly to he.
'you be very fond of I, an't you, Loo?'
'indeed I be, Tom, though you do let such long interval go by without come to see I.'
'well, sister of mine,' say Tom, 'when you say that, you be near my thought. we might be so much oftener together - mightnot we? always together, almost - mightnot we? it would do I a great deal of good if you be to make up your mind to I know what, Loo. it would be a splendid thing for I. it would be uncommonly jolly!'
her thoughtfulness baffle his cunning scrutiny. he could make nothing of her face. he press she in his arm, and kiss her cheek. she return the kiss, but still look at the fire.
'I say, Loo! I think Iwould come, and just hint to you what be go on: though I suppose youwould most likely guess, even if you donot know. I cannot stay, because Ibe engaged to some fellow to- night. you willnot forget how fond you be of I?'
'no, dear Tom, I willnot forget.'
'thatbe a capital girl,' say Tom. 'good-bye, Loo.'
she give he an affectionate good-night, and go out with he to the door, whence the fire of Coketown could be see, make the distance lurid. she stand there, look steadfastly towards they, and listen to his depart step. they retreat quickly, as glad to get away from Stone Lodge; and she stand there yet, when he be go and all be quiet. it seem as if, first in her own fire within the house, and then in the fiery haze without, she try to discover what kind of woof Old Time, that great and longest- establish Spinner of all, would weave from the thread he have already spin into a woman. but his factory be a secret place, his work be noiseless, and his Hands be mute.
CHAPTER XV - FATHER and DAUGHTER
ALTHOUGH Mr. Gradgrind do not take after Blue Beard, his room be quite a blue chamber in its abundance of blue book. whatever they could prove (which be usually anything you like), they prove there, in an army constantly strengthen by the arrival of new recruit. in that charm apartment, the most complicated social question be cast up, get into exact total, and finally settle - if those concern could only have be bring to know it. as if an astronomical observatory should be make without any window, and the astronomer within should arrange the starry universe solely by pen, ink, and paper, so Mr. Gradgrind, in his observatory (and there be many like it), have no need to cast an eye upon the teem myriad of human being around he, but could settle all their destiny on a slate, and wipe out all their tear with one dirty little bit of sponge.
to this observatory, then: a stern room, with a deadly statistical clock in it, which measure every second with a beat like a rap upon a coffin-lid; Louisa repair on the appoint morning. a window look towards Coketown; and when she sit down near her father's table, she see the high chimney and the long tract of smoke loom in the heavy distance gloomily.
'my dear Louisa,' say her father, 'I prepare you last night to give I your serious attention in the conversation we be now go to have together. you have be so well train, and you do, I be happy to say, so much justice to the education you have receive, that I have perfect confidence in your good sense. you be not impulsive, you be not romantic, you be accustom to view everything from the strong dispassionate ground of reason and calculation. from that ground alone, I know you will view and consider what I be go to communicate.'
he wait, as if he would have be glad that she say something. but she say never a word.
'Louisa, my dear, you be the subject of a proposal of marriage that have be make to I.'
again he wait, and again she answer not one word. this so far surprise he, as to induce he gently to repeat, 'a proposal of marriage, my dear.' to which she return, without any visible emotion whatever:
'I hear you, father. I be attend, I assure you.'
'well!' say Mr. Gradgrind, break into a smile, after be for the moment at a loss, 'you be even more dispassionate than I expect, Louisa. or, perhaps, you be not unprepared for the announcement I have it in charge to make?'
'I cannot say that, father, until I hear it. prepared or unprepared, I wish to hear it all from you. I wish to hear you state it to I, father.'
strange to relate, Mr. Gradgrind be not so collect at this moment as his daughter be. he take a paper-knife in his hand, turn it over, lay it down, take it up again, and even then have to look along the blade of it, consider how to go on.
'what you say, my dear Louisa, be perfectly reasonable. I have undertake then to let you know that - in short, that Mr. Bounderby have inform I that he have long watch your progress with particular interest and pleasure, and have long hop that the time might ultimately arrive when he should offer you his hand in marriage. that time, to which he have so long, and certainly with great constancy, look forward, be now come. Mr. Bounderby have make his proposal of marriage to I, and have entreat I to make it known to you, and to express his hope that you will take it into your favourable consideration.'
silence between they. the deadly statistical clock very hollow. the distant smoke very black and heavy.
'Father,' say Louisa, 'do you think I love Mr. Bounderby?'
Mr. Gradgrind be extremely discomfited by this unexpected question. 'well, my child,' he return, 'i - really - cannot take upon myself to say.'
'Father,' pursue Louisa in exactly the same voice as before, 'do you ask I to love Mr. Bounderby?'
'my dear Louisa, no. no. I ask nothing.'
'Father,' she still pursue, 'do Mr. Bounderby ask I to love he?'
'really, my dear,' say Mr. Gradgrind, 'it be difficult to answer your question - '
'difficult to answer it, yes or No, father?
'certainly, my dear. because;' here be something to demonstrate, and it set he up again; 'because the reply depend so materially, Louisa, on the sense in which we use the expression. now, Mr. Bounderby do not do you the injustice, and do not do himself the injustice, of pretend to anything fanciful, fantastic, or (I be use synonymous term) sentimental. Mr. Bounderby would have see you grow up under his eye, to very little purpose, if he could so far forget what be due to your good sense, not to say to his, as to address you from any such ground. therefore, perhaps the expression itself - I merely suggest this to you, my dear - may be a little misplaced.'
'what would you advise I to use in its stead, father?'
'why, my dear Louisa,' say Mr. Gradgrind, completely recover by this time, 'I would advise you (since you ask I) to consider this question, as you have be accustom to consider every other question, simply as one of tangible Fact. the ignorant and the giddy may embarrass such subject with irrelevant fancy, and other absurdity that have no existence, properly view - really no existence - but it be no compliment to you to say, that you know well. now, what be the fact of this case? you be, we will say in round number, twenty year of age; Mr. Bounderby be, we will say in round number, fifty. there be some disparity in your respective year, but in your mean and position there be none; on the contrary, there be a great suitability. then the question arise, be this one disparity sufficient to operate as a bar to such a marriage? in consider this question, it be not unimportant to take into account the statistic of marriage, so far as they have yet be obtain, in England and Wales. I find, on reference to the figure, that a large proportion of these marriage be contract between party of very unequal age, and that the elder of these contracting party be, in rather more than three-fourth of these instance, the bridegroom. it be remarkable as show the wide prevalence of this law, that among the native of the british possession in India, also in a considerable part of China, and among the calmuck of Tartary, the good mean of computation yet furnish we by traveller, yield similar result. the disparity I have mention, therefore, almost cease to be disparity, and (virtually) all but disappear.'
'what do you recommend, father,' ask Louisa, her reserved composure not in the least affected by these gratifying result, 'that I should substitute for the term I use just now? for the misplaced expression?'
'Louisa,' return her father, 'it appear to I that nothing can be plainer. confine yourself rigidly to Fact, the question of fact you state to yourself be: do Mr. Bounderby ask I to marry he? yes, he do. the sole remain question then be: shall I marry he? I think nothing can be plain than that?'
'shall I marry he?' repeat Louisa, with great deliberation.
'precisely. and it be satisfactory to I, as your father, my dear Louisa, to know that you do not come to the consideration of that question with the previous habit of mind, and habit of life, that belong to many young woman.'
'no, father,' she return, 'I do not.'
'I now leave you to judge for yourself,' say Mr. Gradgrind. 'I have state the case, as such case be usually state among practical mind; I have state it, as the case of your mother and myself be state in its time. the rest, my dear Louisa, be for you to decide.'
from the beginning, she have sit look at he fixedly. as he now lean back in his chair, and bent his deep-set eye upon she in his turn, perhaps he might have see one waver moment in she, when she be impel to throw herself upon his breast, and give he the pen-up confidence of her heart. but, to see it, he must have overleap at a bind the artificial barrier he have for many year be erect, between himself and all those subtle essence of humanity which will elude the utmost cunning of algebra until the last trumpet ever to be sound shall blow even algebra to wreck. the barrier be too many and too high for such a leap. with his unbending, utilitarian, matter-of-fact face, he harden she again; and the moment shoot away into the plumbless depth of the past, to mingle with all the lose opportunity that be drown there.
remove her eye from he, she sit so long look silently towards the town, that he say, at length: 'be you consult the chimney of the Coketown work, Louisa?'
'there seem to be nothing there but languid and monotonous smoke. yet when the night come, Fire burst out, father!' she answer, turn quickly.
'of course I know that, Louisa. I do not see the application of the remark.' to do he justice he do not, at all.
she pass it away with a slight motion of her hand, and concentrate her attention upon he again, say, 'Father, I have often think that life be very short.' - this be so distinctly one of his subject that he interpose.
'it be short, no doubt, my dear. still, the average duration of human life be prove to have increase of late year. the calculation of various life assurance and annuity office, among other figure which cannot go wrong, have establish the fact.'
'I speak of my own life, father.'
'o indeed? still,' say Mr. Gradgrind, 'I need not point out to you, Louisa, that it be govern by the law which govern life in the aggregate.'
'while it last, I would wish to do the little I can, and the little I be fit for. what do it matter?'
Mr. Gradgrind seem rather at a loss to understand the last four word; reply, 'how, matter? what matter, my dear?'
'Mr. Bounderby,' she go on in a steady, straight way, without regard this, 'ask I to marry he. the question I have to ask myself be, shall I marry he? that be so, father, be it not? you have tell I so, father. have you not?'
'certainly, my dear.'
'let it be so. since Mr. Bounderby like to take I thus, I be satisfied to accept his proposal. tell he, father, as soon as you please, that this be my answer. repeat it, word for word, if you can, because I should wish he to know what I say.'
'it be quite right, my dear,' retort her father approvingly, 'to be exact. I will observe your very proper request. have you any wish in reference to the period of your marriage, my child?'
'none, father. what do it matter!'
Mr. Gradgrind have draw his chair a little near to she, and take her hand. but, her repetition of these word seem to strike with some little discord on his ear. he pause to look at she, and, still hold her hand, say:
'Louisa, I have not consider it essential to ask you one question, because the possibility imply in it appear to I to be too remote. but perhaps I ought to do so. you have never entertain in secret any other proposal?'
'Father,' she return, almost scornfully, 'what other proposal can have be make to I? whom have I see? where have I be? what be my heart's experience?'
'my dear Louisa,' return Mr. Gradgrind, reassure and satisfied. 'you correct I justly. I merely wish to discharge my duty.'
'what do I know, father,' say Louisa in her quiet manner, 'of taste and fancy; of aspiration and affection; of all that part of my nature in which such light thing might have be nourish? what escape have I have from problem that could be demonstrate, and reality that could be grasp?' as she say it, she unconsciously close her hand, as if upon a solid object, and slowly open it as though she be release dust or ash.
'my dear,' assent she eminently practical parent, 'quite true, quite true.'
'why, father,' she pursue, 'what a strange question to ask I! the baby-preference that even I have hear of as common among child, have never have its innocent resting-place in my breast. you have be so careful of I, that I never have a child's heart. you have train I so well, that I never dream a child's dream. you have deal so wisely with I, father, from my cradle to this hour, that I never have a child's belief or a child's fear.'
Mr. Gradgrind be quite move by his success, and by this testimony to it. 'my dear Louisa,' say he, 'you abundantly repay my care. kiss I, my dear girl.'
so, his daughter kiss he. detain she in his embrace, he say, 'I may assure you now, my favourite child, that I be make happy by the sound decision at which you have arrive. Mr. Bounderby be a very remarkable man; and what little disparity can be say to exist between you - if any - be more than counterbalance by the tone your mind have acquire. it have always be my object so to educate you, as that you might, while still in your early youth, be (if I may so express myself) almost any age. kiss I once more, Louisa. now, let we go and find your mother.'
accordingly, they go down to the drawing-room, where the esteemed lady with no nonsense about she, be recumbent as usual, while Sissy work beside she. she give some feeble sign of return animation when they enter, and presently the faint transparency be present in a sit attitude.
'Mrs. Gradgrind,' say her husband, who have wait for the achievement of this feat with some impatience, 'allow I to present to you Mrs. Bounderby.'
'oh!' say Mrs. Gradgrind, 'so you have settle it! well, Ibe sure I hope your health may be good, Louisa; for if your head begin to split as soon as you be marry, which be the case with mine, I cannot consider that you be to be envy, though I have no doubt you think you be, as all girl do. however, I give you joy, my dear - and I hope you may now turn all your ological study to good account, I be sure I do! I must give you a kiss of congratulation, Louisa; but donot touch my right shoulder, for therebe something run down it all day long. and now you see,' whimper Mrs. Gradgrind, adjust her shawl after the affectionate ceremony, 'I shall be worry myself, morning, noon, and night, to know what I be to call he!'
'Mrs. Gradgrind,' say her husband, solemnly, 'what do you mean?'
'whatever I be to call he, Mr. Gradgrind, when he be married to Louisa! I must call he something. itbe impossible,' say Mrs. Gradgrind, with a mingled sense of politeness and injury, 'to be constantly address he and never give he a name. I cannot call he Josiah, for the name be insupportable to I. you yourself wouldnot hear of Joe, you very well know. be I to call my own son- in-law, Mister! not, I believe, unless the time have arrive when, as an invalid, I be to be trample upon by my relation. then, what be I to call he!'
nobody present have any suggestion to offer in the remarkable emergency, Mrs. Gradgrind depart this life for the time be, after deliver the follow codicil to her remark already execute:
'as to the wedding, all I ask, Louisa, be, - and I ask it with a fluttering in my chest, which actually extend to the sol of my foot, - that it may take place soon. otherwise, I know it be one of those subject I shall never hear the last of.'
when Mr. Gradgrind have present Mrs. Bounderby, Sissy have suddenly turn her head, and look, in wonder, in pity, in sorrow, in doubt, in a multitude of emotion, towards Louisa. Louisa have know it, and see it, without look at she. from that moment she be impassive, proud and cold - hold Sissy at a distance - change to she altogether.
CHAPTER XVI - HUSBAND and WIFE
MR. BOUNDERBY's first disquietude on hearing of his happiness, be occasion by the necessity of impart it to Mrs. Sparsit. he could not make up his mind how to do that, or what the consequence of the step might be. whether she would instantly depart, bag and baggage, to Lady Scadgers, or would positively refuse to budge from the premise; whether she would be plaintive or abusive, tearful or tearing; whether she would break her heart, or break the looking- glass; Mr. Bounderby could not all foresee. however, as it must be do, he have no choice but to do it; so, after attempt several letter, and fail in they all, he resolve to do it by word of mouth.
on his way home, on the evening he set aside for this momentous purpose, he take the precaution of step into a chemist's shop and buy a bottle of the very strong smelling-salt. 'by George!' say Mr. Bounderby, 'if she take it in the fainting way, Iwill have the skin off her nose, at all event!' but, in spite of be thus forearm, he enter his own house with anything but a courageous air; and appear before the object of his misgiving, like a dog who be conscious of come direct from the pantry.
'good evening, Mr. Bounderby!'
'good evening, ma'am, good evening.' he draw up his chair, and Mrs. Sparsit draw back her, as who should say, 'your fireside, sir. I freely admit it. it be for you to occupy it all, if you think proper.'
'donot go to the North Pole, ma'am!' say Mr. Bounderby.
'thank you, sir,' say Mrs. Sparsit, and return, though short of her former position.
Mr. Bounderby sit look at she, as, with the point of a stiff, sharp pair of scissor, she pick out hole for some inscrutable ornamental purpose, in a piece of cambric. an operation which, take in connexion with the bushy eyebrow and the Roman nose, suggest with some liveliness the idea of a hawk engage upon the eye of a tough little bird. she be so steadfastly occupy, that many minute elapse before she look up from her work; when she do so Mr. Bounderby bespoke her attention with a hitch of his head.
'Mrs. Sparsit, ma'am,' say Mr. Bounderby, put his hand in his pocket, and assure himself with his right hand that the cork of the little bottle be ready for use, 'I have no occasion to say to you, that you be not only a lady bear and breed, but a devilish sensible woman.'
'Sir,' return the lady, 'this be indeed not the first time that you have honour I with similar expression of your good opinion.'
'Mrs. Sparsit, ma'am,' say Mr. Bounderby, 'I be go to astonish you.'
'yes, sir?' return Mrs. Sparsit, interrogatively, and in the most tranquil manner possible. she generally wear mitten, and she now lay down her work, and smooth those mitten.
'I be go, ma'am,' say Bounderby, 'to marry Tom Gradgrind's daughter.'
'yes, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit. 'I hope you may be happy, Mr. Bounderby. oh, indeed I hope you may be happy, sir!' and she say it with such great condescension as well as with such great compassion for he, that Bounderby, - far more disconcerted than if she have throw she workbox at the mirror, or swoon on the hearthrug, - cork up the smell-salt tight in his pocket, and think, 'now confound this woman, who could have even guess that she would take it in this way!'
'I wish with all my heart, sir,' say Mrs. Sparsit, in a highly superior manner; somehow she seem, in a moment, to have establish a right to pity he ever afterwards; 'that you may be in all respect very happy.'
'well, ma'am,' return Bounderby, with some resentment in his tone: which be clearly lower, though in spite of himself, 'I be oblige to you. I hope I shall be.'
'do you, sir!' say Mrs. Sparsit, with great affability. 'but naturally you do; of course you do.'
a very awkward pause on Mr. Bounderby's part, succeed. Mrs. Sparsit sedately resume her work and occasionally give a small cough, which sound like the cough of conscious strength and forbearance.
'well, ma'am,' resume Bounderby, 'under these circumstance, I imagine it would not be agreeable to a character like your to remain here, though you would be very welcome here.'
'oh, dear no, sir, I could on no account think of that!' Mrs. Sparsit shake her head, still in her highly superior manner, and a little change the small cough - cough now, as if the spirit of prophecy rise within she, but have well be cough down.
'however, ma'am,' say Bounderby, 'there be apartment at the Bank, where a born and breed lady, as keeper of the place, would be rather a catch than otherwise; and if the same term - '
'I beg your pardon, sir. you be so good as to promise that you would always substitute the phrase, annual compliment.'
'well, ma'am, annual compliment. if the same annual compliment would be acceptable there, why, I see nothing to part we, unless you do.'
'Sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit. 'the proposal be like yourself, and if the position I shall assume at the Bank be one that I could occupy without descend lower in the social scale - '
'why, of course it be,' say Bounderby. 'if it be not, ma'am, you donot suppose that I should offer it to a lady who have move in the society you have move in. not that I care for such society, you know! but you do.'
'Mr. Bounderby, you be very considerate.'
'youwill have your own private apartment, and youwill have your coal and your candle, and all the rest of it, and youwill have your maid to attend upon you, and youwill have your light porter to protect you, and youwill be what I take the liberty of consider precious comfortable,' say Bounderby.
'Sir,' rejoin Mrs. Sparsit, 'say no more. in yield up my trust here, I shall not be free from the necessity of eat the bread of dependence:' she might have say the sweetbread, for that delicate article in a savoury brown sauce be her favourite supper: 'and I would rather receive it from your hand, than from any other. therefore, sir, I accept your offer gratefully, and with many sincere acknowledgment for past favour. and I hope, sir,' say Mrs. Sparsit, conclude in an impressively compassionate manner, 'I fondly hope that Miss Gradgrind may be all you desire, and deserve!'
nothing move Mrs. Sparsit from that position any more. it be in vain for Bounderby to bluster or to assert himself in any of his explosive way; Mrs. Sparsit be resolve to have compassion on he, as a Victim. she be polite, obliging, cheerful, hopeful; but, the more polite, the more obliging, the more cheerful, the more hopeful, the more exemplary altogether, she; the forlorner Sacrifice and Victim, he. she have that tenderness for his melancholy fate, that his great red countenance use to break out into cold perspiration when she look at he.
meanwhile the marriage be appoint to be solemnize in eight week' time, and Mr. Bounderby go every evening to Stone Lodge as an accepted wooer. love be make on these occasion in the form of bracelet; and, on all occasion during the period of betrothal, take a manufacturing aspect. dress be make, jewellery be make, cake and glove be make, settlement be make, and an extensive assortment of Facts do appropriate honour to the contract. the business be all Fact, from first to last. the hour do not go through any of those rosy performance, which foolish poet have ascribe to they at such time; neither do the clock go any fast, or any slow, than at other season. the deadly statistical recorder in the Gradgrind observatory knock every second on the head as it be bear, and bury it with his accustomed regularity.
so the day come, as all other day come to people who will only stick to reason; and when it come, there be marry in the church of the florid wooden leg - that popular order of architecture - Josiah Bounderby Esquire of Coketown, to Louisa eld daughter of Thomas Gradgrind Esquire of Stone Lodge, M.P. for that borough. and when they be unite in holy matrimony, they go home to breakfast at Stone Lodge aforesaid.
there be an improve party assemble on the auspicious occasion, who know what everything they have to eat and drink be make of, and how it be import or export, and in what quantity, and in what bottom, whether native or foreign, and all about it. the bridesmaid, down to little Jane Gradgrind, be, in an intellectual point of view, fit helpmate for the calculate boy; and there be no nonsense about any of the company.
after breakfast, the bridegroom address they in the following term:
'lady and gentleman, I be Josiah Bounderby of Coketown. since you have do my wife and myself the honour of drink our health and happiness, I suppose I must acknowledge the same; though, as you all know I, and know what I be, and what my extraction be, you willnot expect a speech from a man who, when he see a Post, say "thatbe a Post," and when he see a Pump, say "thatbe a Pump," and be not to be get to call a Post a pump, or a Pump a post, or either of they a Toothpick. if you want a speech this morning, my friend and father-in-law, Tom Gradgrind, be a Member of Parliament, and you know where to get it. I be not your man. however, if I feel a little independent when I look around this table to-day, and reflect how little I think of marry Tom Gradgrind's daughter when I be a ragged street-boy, who never wash his face unless it be at a pump, and that not oftener than once a fortnight, I hope I may be excuse. so, I hope you like my feeling independent; if you donot, I cannot help it. I do feel independent. now I have mention, and you have mention, that I be this day married to Tom Gradgrind's daughter. I be very glad to be so. it have long be my wish to be so. I have watch her bringing-up, and I believe she be worthy of I. at the same time - not to deceive you - I believe I be worthy of she. so, I thank you, on both our part, for the good-will you have show towards we; and the good wish I can give the unmarried part of the present company, be this: I hope every bachelor may find as good a wife as I have find. and I hope every spinster may find as good a husband as my wife have find.'
shortly after which oration, as they be go on a nuptial trip to Lyons, in order that Mr. Bounderby might take the opportunity of see how the Hands get on in those part, and whether they, too, require to be feed with gold spoon; the happy pair depart for the railroad. the bride, in pass down-stair, dress for her journey, find Tom wait for she - flushed, either with his feeling, or the vinous part of the breakfast.
'what a game girl you be, to be such a first-rate sister, Loo!' whisper Tom.
she cling to he as she should have clung to some far well nature that day, and be a little shake in her reserved composure for the first time.
'Old Bounderby's quite ready,' say Tom. 'Time's up. good-bye! I shall be on the look-out for you, when you come back. I say, my dear Loo! AN'T it uncommonly jolly now!'
END of the FIRST BOOK
BOOK the second - reaping
CHAPTER i - EFFECTS in THE BANK
a sunny midsummer day. there be such a thing sometimes, even in Coketown.
see from a distance in such weather, Coketown lie shroud in a haze of its own, which appear impervious to the sun's ray. you only know the town be there, because you know there could have be no such sulky blotch upon the prospect without a town. a blur of soot and smoke, now confusedly tend this way, now that way, now aspire to the vault of Heaven, now murkily creep along the earth, as the wind rise and fall, or change its quarter: a dense formless jumble, with sheet of cross light in it, that show nothing but mass of darkness:- Coketown in the distance be suggestive of itself, though not a brick of it could be see.
the wonder be, it be there at all. it have be ruin so often, that it be amazing how it have bear so many shock. surely there never be such fragile china-ware as that of which the miller of Coketown be make. handle they never so lightly, and they fall to piece with such ease that you might suspect they of have be flawed before. they be ruin, when they be require to send labour child to school; they be ruin when inspector be appoint to look into their work; they be ruin, when such inspector consider it doubtful whether they be quite justified in chop people up with their machinery; they be utterly undo, when it be hint that perhaps they need not always make quite so much smoke. besides Mr. Bounderby's gold spoon which be generally receive in Coketown, another prevalent fiction be very popular there. it take the form of a threat. whenever a Coketowner feel he be ill-use - that be to say, whenever he be not leave entirely alone, and it be propose to hold he accountable for the consequence of any of his act - he be sure to come out with the awful menace, that he would 'soon pitch his property into the Atlantic.' this have terrify the Home Secretary within an inch of his life, on several occasion.
however, the Coketowners be so patriotic after all, that they never have pitch their property into the Atlantic yet, but, on the contrary, have be kind enough to take mighty good care of it. so there it be, in the haze yonder; and it increase and multiply.
the street be hot and dusty on the summer day, and the sun be so bright that it even shine through the heavy vapour droop over Coketown, and could not be look at steadily. stoker emerge from low underground doorway into factory yard, and sit on step, and post, and paling, wipe their swarthy visage, and contemplate coal. the whole town seem to be fry in oil. there be a stifling smell of hot oil everywhere. the steam- engine shine with it, the dress of the Hands be soil with it, the mill throughout their many story ooze and trickle it. the atmosphere of those Fairy palace be like the breath of the simoom: and their inhabitant, waste with heat, toil languidly in the desert. but no temperature make the melancholy mad elephant more mad or more sane. their wearisome head go up and down at the same rate, in hot weather and cold, wet weather and dry, fair weather and foul. the measured motion of their shadow on the wall, be the substitute Coketown have to show for the shadow of rustle wood; while, for the summer hum of insect, it could offer, all the year round, from the dawn of Monday to the night of Saturday, the whirr of shaft and wheel.
Drowsily they whir all through this sunny day, make the passenger more sleepy and more hot as he pass the hum wall of the mill. Sun-blind, and sprinkling of water, a little cool the main street and the shop; but the mill, and the court and alley, bake at a fierce heat. down upon the river that be black and thick with dye, some Coketown boy who be at large - a rare sight there - row a crazy boat, which make a spumous track upon the water as it jog along, while every dip of an oar stir up vile smell. but the sun itself, however beneficent, generally, be less kind to Coketown than hard frost, and rarely look intently into any of its close region without engender more death than life. so do the eye of Heaven itself become an evil eye, when incapable or sordid hand be interpose between it and the thing it look upon to bless.
Mrs. Sparsit sit in her afternoon apartment at the Bank, on the shady side of the fry street. office-hour be over: and at that period of the day, in warm weather, she usually embellish with her genteel presence, a managerial board-room over the public office. her own private sitting-room be a story high, at the window of which post of observation she be ready, every morning, to greet Mr. Bounderby, as he come across the road, with the sympathize recognition appropriate to a Victim. he have be marry now a year; and Mrs. Sparsit have never release he from her determined pity a moment.
the Bank offer no violence to the wholesome monotony of the town. it be another red brick house, with black outside shutter, green inside blind, a black street-door up two white step, a brazen door-plate, and a brazen door-handle full stop. it be a size large than Mr. Bounderby's house, as other house be from a size to half-a-dozen size small; in all other particular, it be strictly accord to pattern.
Mrs. Sparsit be conscious that by come in the evening-tide among the desk and write implement, she shed a feminine, not to say also aristocratic, grace upon the office. seat, with her needlework or netting apparatus, at the window, she have a self- laudatory sense of correct, by her ladylike deportment, the rude business aspect of the place. with this impression of her interesting character upon she, Mrs. Sparsit consider herself, in some sort, the Bank Fairy. the townspeople who, in their passing and repasse, see she there, regard she as the Bank Dragon keep watch over the treasure of the mine.
what those treasure be, Mrs. Sparsit know as little as they do. gold and silver coin, precious paper, secret that if divulge would bring vague destruction upon vague person (generally, however, people whom she dislike), be the chief item in her ideal catalogue thereof. for the rest, she know that after office- hour, she reign supreme over all the office furniture, and over a lock-up iron room with three lock, against the door of which strong chamber the light porter lay his head every night, on a truckle bed, that disappear at cockcrow. far, she be lady paramount over certain vault in the basement, sharply spike off from communication with the predatory world; and over the relic of the current day's work, consist of blot of ink, wear-out pen, fragment of wafer, and scrap of paper tear so small, that nothing interesting could ever be decipher on they when Mrs. Sparsit try. lastly, she be guardian over a little armoury of cutlass and carbine, array in vengeful order above one of the official chimney-piece; and over that respectable tradition never to be separate from a place of business claim to be wealthy - a row of fire-bucket - vessel calculate to be of no physical utility on any occasion, but observe to exercise a fine moral influence, almost equal to bullion, on most beholder.
a deaf serve-woman and the light porter complete Mrs. Sparsit's empire. the deaf serve-woman be rumour to be wealthy; and a saying have for year go about among the low order of Coketown, that she would be murder some night when the Bank be shut, for the sake of her money. it be generally consider, indeed, that she have be due some time, and ought to have fall long ago; but she have keep her life, and her situation, with an ill-condition tenacity that occasion much offence and disappointment.
Mrs. Sparsit's tea be just set for she on a pert little table, with its tripod of leg in an attitude, which she insinuate after office-hour, into the company of the stern, leathern-top, long board-table that bestrode the middle of the room. the light porter place the tea-tray on it, knuckle his forehead as a form of homage.
'thank you, Bitzer,' say Mrs. Sparsit.
'thank you, ma'am,' return the light porter. he be a very light porter indeed; as light as in the day when he blinkingly define a horse, for girl number twenty.
'all be shut up, Bitzer?' say Mrs. Sparsit.
'all be shut up, ma'am.'
'and what,' say Mrs. Sparsit, pour out her tea, 'be the news of the day? anything?'
'well, ma'am, I cannot say that I have hear anything particular. our people be a bad lot, ma'am; but that be no news, unfortunately.'
'what be the restless wretch do now?' ask Mrs. Sparsit.
'merely go on in the old way, ma'am. uniting, and leaguing, and engage to stand by one another.'
'it be much to be regret,' say Mrs. Sparsit, make her nose more roman and her eyebrow more coriolanian in the strength of her severity, 'that the united masters allow of any such class- combination.'
'yes, ma'am,' say Bitzer.
'be unite themselves, they ought one and all to set their face against employ any man who be unite with any other man,' say Mrs. Sparsit.
'they have do that, ma'am,' return Bitzer; 'but it rather fall through, ma'am.'
'I do not pretend to understand these thing,' say Mrs. Sparsit, with dignity, 'my lot have be signally cast in a widely different sphere; and Mr. Sparsit, as a Powler, be also quite out of the pale of any such dissension. I only know that these people must be conquer, and that itbe high time it be do, once for all.'
'yes, ma'am,' return Bitzer, with a demonstration of great respect for Mrs. Sparsit's oracular authority. 'you couldnot put it clear, I be sure, ma'am.'
as this be his usual hour for have a little confidential chat with Mrs. Sparsit, and as he have already catch her eye and see that she be go to ask he something, he make a pretence of arrange the ruler, inkstand, and so forth, while that lady go on with her tea, glance through the open window, down into the street.
'has it be a busy day, Bitzer?' ask Mrs. Sparsit.
'not a very busy day, my lady. about an average day.' he now and then slide into my lady, instead of ma'am, as an involuntary acknowledgment of Mrs. Sparsit's personal dignity and claim to reverence.
'the clerk,' say Mrs. Sparsit, carefully brush an imperceptible crumb of bread and butter from her left-hand mitten, 'be trustworthy, punctual, and industrious, of course?'
'yes, ma'am, pretty fair, ma'am. with the usual exception.'
he hold the respectable office of general spy and informer in the establishment, for which volunteer service he receive a present at Christmas, over and above his weekly wage. he have grow into an extremely clear-head, cautious, prudent young man, who be safe to rise in the world. his mind be so exactly regulated, that he have no affection or passion. all his proceeding be the result of the nice and cold calculation; and it be not without cause that Mrs. Sparsit habitually observe of he, that he be a young man of the steady principle she have ever know. have satisfied himself, on his father's death, that his mother have a right of settlement in Coketown, this excellent young economist have assert that right for she with such a steadfast adherence to the principle of the case, that she have be shut up in the workhouse ever since. it must be admit that he allow she half a pound of tea a year, which be weak in he: first, because all gift have an inevitable tendency to pauperise the recipient, and secondly, because his only reasonable transaction in that commodity would have be to buy it for as little as he could possibly give, and sell it for as much as he could possibly get; it have be clearly ascertain by philosopher that in this be comprise the whole duty of man - not a part of man's duty, but the whole.
'pretty fair, ma'am. with the usual exception, ma'am,' repeat Bitzer.
'ah - h!' say Mrs. Sparsit, shake her head over her tea-cup, and take a long gulp.
'Mr. Thomas, ma'am, I doubt Mr. Thomas very much, ma'am, I donot like his way at all.'
'Bitzer,' say Mrs. Sparsit, in a very impressive manner, 'do you recollect my have say anything to you respect name?'
'I beg your pardon, ma'am. itbe quite true that you do object to name be use, and theybe always well avoid.'
'please to remember that I have a charge here,' say Mrs. Sparsit, with her air of state. 'I hold a trust here, Bitzer, under Mr. Bounderby. however improbable both Mr. Bounderby and myself might have deem it year ago, that he would ever become my patron, make I an annual compliment, I cannot but regard he in that light. from Mr. Bounderby I have receive every acknowledgment of my social station, and every recognition of my family descent, that I could possibly expect. More, far more. therefore, to my patron I will be scrupulously true. and I do not consider, I will not consider, I cannot consider,' say Mrs. Sparsit, with a most extensive stock on hand of honour and morality, 'that I should be scrupulously true, if I allow name to be mention under this roof, that be unfortunately - most unfortunately - no doubt of that - connect with his.'
Bitzer knuckle his forehead again, and again beg pardon.
'no, Bitzer,' continue Mrs. Sparsit, 'say an individual, and I will hear you; say Mr. Thomas, and you must excuse I.'
'with the usual exception, ma'am,' say Bitzer, try back, 'of an individual.'
'ah - h!' Mrs. Sparsit repeat the ejaculation, the shake of the head over her tea-cup, and the long gulp, as take up the conversation again at the point where it have be interrupt.
'an individual, ma'am,' say Bitzer, 'have never be what he ought to have be, since he first come into the place. he be a dissipate, extravagant idler. he be not worth his salt, ma'am. he wouldnot get it either, if he havenot a friend and relation at court, ma'am!'
'ah - h!' say Mrs. Sparsit, with another melancholy shake of her head.
'I only hope, ma'am,' pursue Bitzer, 'that his friend and relation may not supply he with the mean of carry on. otherwise, ma'am, we know out of whose pocket that money come.'
'ah - h!' sigh Mrs. Sparsit again, with another melancholy shake of her head.
'he be to be pity, ma'am. the last party I have allude to, be to be pity, ma'am,' say Bitzer.
'yes, Bitzer,' say Mrs. Sparsit. 'I have always pity the delusion, always.'
'as to an individual, ma'am,' say Bitzer, drop his voice and draw nearer, 'he be as improvident as any of the people in this town. and you know what their improvidence be, ma'am. no one could wish to know it well than a lady of your eminence do.'
'they would do well,' return Mrs. Sparsit, 'to take example by you, Bitzer.'
'thank you, ma'am. but, since you do refer to I, now look at I, ma'am. I have put by a little, ma'am, already. that gratuity which I receive at Christmas, ma'am: I never touch it. I donot even go the length of my wage, though theybe not high, ma'am. why cannot they do as I have do, ma'am? what one person can do, another can do.'
this, again, be among the fiction of Coketown. any capitalist there, who have make sixty thousand pound out of sixpence, always profess to wonder why the sixty thousand nearest Hands donot each make sixty thousand pound out of sixpence, and more or less reproach they every one for not accomplish the little feat. what I do you can do. why donot you go and do it?
'as to their wanting recreation, ma'am,' say Bitzer, 'itbe stuff and nonsense. I donot want recreation. I never do, and I never shall; I donot like them. as to their combine together; there be many of they, I have no doubt, that by watch and inform upon one another could earn a trifle now and then, whether in money or good will, and improve their livelihood. then, why donot they improve it, ma'am! itbe the first consideration of a rational creature, and itbe what they pretend to want.'
'pretend indeed!' say Mrs. Sparsit.
'I be sure we be constantly hear, ma'am, till it become quite nauseous, concern their wife and family,' say Bitzer. 'why look at I, ma'am! I donot want a wife and family. why should they?'
'because they be improvident,' say Mrs. Sparsit.
'yes, ma'am,' return Bitzer, 'thatbe where it be. if they be more provident and less perverse, ma'am, what would they do? they would say, "while my hat cover my family," or "while my bonnet cover my family," - as the case might be, ma'am - "I have only one to feed, and thatbe the person I most like to feed."'
'to be sure,' assent Mrs. Sparsit, eat muffin.
'thank you, ma'am,' say Bitzer, knuckle his forehead again, in return for the favour of Mrs. Sparsit's improve conversation. 'would you wish a little more hot water, ma'am, or be there anything else that I could fetch you?'
'nothing just now, Bitzer.'
'thank you, ma'am. I shouldnot wish to disturb you at your meal, ma'am, particularly tea, know your partiality for it,' say Bitzer, crane a little to look over into the street from where he stand; 'but therebe a gentleman be look up here for a minute or so, ma'am, and he have come across as if he be go to knock. that be his knock, ma'am, no doubt.'
he step to the window; and look out, and draw in his head again, confirm himself with, 'yes, ma'am. would you wish the gentleman to be show in, ma'am?'
'I donot know who it can be,' say Mrs. Sparsit, wipe her mouth and arrange her mitten.
'a stranger, ma'am, evidently.'
'what a stranger can want at the Bank at this time of the evening, unless he come upon some business for which he be too late, I donot know,' say Mrs. Sparsit, 'but I hold a charge in this establishment from Mr. Bounderby, and I will never shrink from it. if to see he be any part of the duty I have accept, I will see he. use your own discretion, Bitzer.'
here the visitor, all unconscious of Mrs. Sparsit's magnanimous word, repeat his knock so loudly that the light porter hasten down to open the door; while Mrs. Sparsit take the precaution of conceal her little table, with all its appliance upon it, in a cupboard, and then decamp up-stair, that she might appear, if needful, with the great dignity.
'if you please, ma'am, the gentleman would wish to see you,' say Bitzer, with his light eye at Mrs. Sparsit's keyhole. so, Mrs. Sparsit, who have improve the interval by touch up her cap, take her classical feature down-stair again, and enter the board- room in the manner of a roman matron go outside the city wall to treat with an invade general.
the visitor have stroll to the window, and be then engage in look carelessly out, be as unmove by this impressive entry as man could possibly be. he stand whistle to himself with all imaginable coolness, with his hat still on, and a certain air of exhaustion upon he, in part arise from excessive summer, and in part from excessive gentility. for it be to be see with half an eye that he be a thorough gentleman, make to the model of the time; weary of everything, and put no more faith in anything than Lucifer.
'I believe, sir,' quoth Mrs. Sparsit, 'you wish to see I.'
'I beg your pardon,' he say, turn and remove his hat; 'pray excuse I.'
'Humph!' think Mrs. Sparsit, as she make a stately bend. 'five and thirty, good-look, good figure, good tooth, good voice, good breeding, well-dress, dark hair, bold eye.' all which Mrs. Sparsit observe in her womanly way - like the Sultan who put his head in the pail of water - merely in dip down and come up again.
'please to be seat, sir,' say Mrs. Sparsit.
'thank you. allow I.' he place a chair for she, but remain himself carelessly lounge against the table. 'I leave my servant at the railway look after the luggage - very heavy train and vast quantity of it in the van - and stroll on, look about I. exceedingly odd place. will you allow I to ask you if itbe always as black as this?'
'in general much blacker,' return Mrs. Sparsit, in her uncompromise way.
'be it possible! excuse I: you be not a native, I think?'
'no, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit. 'it be once my good or ill fortune, as it may be - before I become a widow - to move in a very different sphere. my husband be a Powler.'
'beg your pardon, really!' say the stranger. 'be - ?'
Mrs. Sparsit repeat, 'a Powler.'
'Powler Family,' say the stranger, after reflect a few moment. Mrs. Sparsit signify assent. the stranger seem a little more fatigued than before.
'you must be very much bored here?' be the inference he draw from the communication.
'I be the servant of circumstance, sir,' say Mrs. Sparsit, 'and I have long adapt myself to the govern power of my life.'
'very philosophical,' return the stranger, 'and very exemplary and laudable, and - ' it seem to be scarcely worth his while to finish the sentence, so he play with his watch-chain wearily.
'may I be permit to ask, sir,' say Mrs. Sparsit, 'to what I be indebted for the favour of - '
'assuredly,' say the stranger. 'much oblige to you for remind I. I be the bearer of a letter of introduction to Mr. Bounderby, the banker. walk through this extraordinarily black town, while they be get dinner ready at the hotel, I ask a fellow whom I meet; one of the work people; who appear to have be take a shower-bath of something fluffy, which I assume to be the raw material - '
Mrs. Sparsit incline her head.
' - raw material - where Mr. Bounderby, the banker, might reside. upon which, mislead no doubt by the word Banker, he direct I to the Bank. fact be, I presume, that Mr. Bounderby the Banker do not reside in the edifice in which I have the honour of offer this explanation?'
'no, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit, 'he do not.'
'thank you. I have no intention of deliver my letter at the present moment, nor have I. but stroll on to the Bank to kill time, and have the good fortune to observe at the window,' towards which he languidly wave his hand, then slightly bow, 'a lady of a very superior and agreeable appearance, I consider that I could not do well than take the liberty of ask that lady where Mr. Bounderby the Banker do live. which I accordingly venture, with all suitable apology, to do.'
the inattention and indolence of his manner be sufficiently relieve, to Mrs. Sparsit's thinking, by a certain gallantry at ease, which offer her homage too. here he be, for instance, at this moment, all but sit on the table, and yet lazily bend over she, as if he acknowledge an attraction in she that make her charming - in her way.
'bank, I know, be always suspicious, and officially must be,' say the stranger, whose lightness and smoothness of speech be pleasant likewise; suggest matter far more sensible and humorous than it ever contain - which be perhaps a shrewd device of the founder of this numerous sect, whosoever may have be that great man: 'therefore I may observe that my letter - here it be - be from the member for this place - gradgrind - whom I have have the pleasure of know in London.'
Mrs. Sparsit recognize the hand, intimate that such confirmation be quite unnecessary, and give Mr. Bounderby's address, with all needful clue and direction in aid.
'thousand thank,' say the stranger. 'of course you know the Banker well?'
'yes, sir,' rejoin Mrs. Sparsit. 'in my dependent relation towards he, I have know he ten year.'
'quite an eternity! I think he marry Gradgrind's daughter?'
'yes,' say Mrs. Sparsit, suddenly compress her mouth, 'he have that - honour.'
'the lady be quite a philosopher, I be tell?'
'indeed, sir,' say Mrs. Sparsit. 'be she?'
'excuse my impertinent curiosity,' pursue the strange, flutter over Mrs. Sparsit's eyebrow, with a propitiatory air, 'but you know the family, and know the world. I be about to know the family, and may have much to do with they. be the lady so very alarming? her father give she such a portentously hard-head reputation, that I have a burn desire to know. be she absolutely unapproachable? repellently and stunningly clever? I see, by your meaning smile, you think not. you have pour balm into my anxious soul. as to age, now. forty? five and thirty?'
Mrs. Sparsit laugh outright. 'a chit,' say she. 'not twenty when she be marry.'
'I give you my honour, Mrs. Powler,' return the stranger, detach himself from the table, 'that I never be so astonished in my life!'
it really do seem to impress he, to the utmost extent of his capacity of be impressed. he look at his informant for full a quarter of a minute, and appear to have the surprise in his mind all the time. 'I assure you, Mrs. Powler,' he then say, much exhausted, 'that the father's manner prepare I for a grim and stony maturity. I be oblige to you, of all thing, for correct so absurd a mistake. pray excuse my intrusion. many thank. good day!'
he bow himself out; and Mrs. Sparsit, hide in the window curtain, see he languish down the street on the shady side of the way, observe of all the town.
'what do you think of the gentleman, Bitzer?' she ask the light porter, when he come to take away.
'spend a deal of money on his dress, ma'am.'
'it must be admit,' say Mrs. Sparsit, 'that itbe very tasteful.'
'yes, ma'am,' return Bitzer, 'if thatbe worth the money.'
'besides which, ma'am,' resume Bitzer, while he be polish the table, 'he look to I as if he game.'
'itbe immoral to game,' say Mrs. Sparsit.
'itbe ridiculous, ma'am,' say Bitzer, 'because the chance be against the player.'
whether it be that the heat prevent Mrs. Sparsit from work, or whether it be that her hand be out, she do no work that night. she sit at the window, when the sun begin to sink behind the smoke; she sit there, when the smoke be burn red, when the colour fade from it, when darkness seem to rise slowly out of the ground, and creep upward, upward, up to the house-top, up the church steeple, up to the summit of the factory chimney, up to the sky. without a candle in the room, Mrs. Sparsit sit at the window, with her hand before she, not think much of the sound of evening; the whooping of boy, the barking of dog, the rumbling of wheel, the step and voice of passenger, the shrill street cry, the clog upon the pavement when it be their hour for go by, the shutting-up of shop-shutter. not until the light porter announce that her nocturnal sweetbread be ready, do Mrs. Sparsit arouse herself from her reverie, and convey her dense black eyebrow - by that time crease with meditation, as if they need iron out-up-stair.
'o, you Fool!' say Mrs. Sparsit, when she be alone at her supper. whom she mean, she do not say; but she could scarcely have mean the sweetbread.
CHAPTER II - MR. JAMES HARTHOUSE
the Gradgrind party want assistance in cut the throat of the Graces. they go about recruiting; and where could they enlist recruit more hopefully, than among the fine gentleman who, have find out everything to be worth nothing, be equally ready for anything?
moreover, the healthy spirit who have mount to this sublime height be attractive to many of the Gradgrind school. they like fine gentleman; they pretend that they do not, but they do. they become exhausted in imitation of they; and they yaw-yaw in their speech like they; and they serve out, with an enervated air, the little mouldy ration of political economy, on which they regale their disciple. there never before be see on earth such a wonderful hybrid race as be thus produce.
among the fine gentleman not regularly belong to the Gradgrind school, there be one of a good family and a well appearance, with a happy turn of humour which have tell immensely with the House of Commons on the occasion of his entertain it with his (and the Board of Directors) view of a railway accident, in which the most careful officer ever know, employ by the most liberal manager ever hear of, assist by the fine mechanical contrivance ever devise, the whole in action on the good line ever construct, have kill five people and wound thirty-two, by a casualty without which the excellence of the whole system would have be positively incomplete. among the slain be a cow, and among the scatter article unowne, a widow's cap. and the honourable member have so tickle the House (which have a delicate sense of humour) by put the cap on the cow, that it become impatient of any serious reference to the Coroner's Inquest, and bring the railway off with Cheers and Laughter.
now, this gentleman have a young brother of still well appearance than himself, who have try life as a Cornet of Dragoons, and find it a bore; and have afterwards try it in the train of an english minister abroad, and find it a bore; and have then stroll to Jerusalem, and get bored there; and have then go yacht about the world, and get bored everywhere. to whom this honourable and jocular, member fraternally say one day, 'Jem, therebe a good opening among the hard fact fellow, and they want man. I wonder you donot go in for statistic.' Jem, rather take by the novelty of the idea, and very hard up for a change, be as ready to 'go in' for statistic as for anything else. so, he go in. he coach himself up with a blue-book or two; and his brother put it about among the hard fact fellow, and say, 'if you want to bring in, for any place, a handsome dog who can make you a devilish good speech, look after my brother Jem, for hebe your man.' after a few dash in the public meeting way, Mr. Gradgrind and a council of political sage approve of Jem, and it be resolve to send he down to Coketown, to become know there and in the neighbourhood. hence the letter Jem have last night show to Mrs. Sparsit, which Mr. Bounderby now hold in his hand; superscribe, 'Josiah Bounderby, Esquire, Banker, Coketown. specially to introduce James Harthouse, Esquire. Thomas Gradgrind.'
within an hour of the receipt of this dispatch and Mr. James Harthouse's card, Mr. Bounderby put on his hat and go down to the Hotel. there he find Mr. James Harthouse look out of window, in a state of mind so disconsolate, that he be already half- dispose to 'go in' for something else.
'my name, sir,' say his visitor, 'be Josiah Bounderby, of Coketown.'
Mr. James Harthouse be very happy indeed (though he scarcely look so) to have a pleasure he have long expect.
'Coketown, sir,' say Bounderby, obstinately take a chair, 'be not the kind of place you have be accustom to. therefore, if you will allow I - or whether you will or not, for I be a plain man - Iwill tell you something about it before we go any far.'
Mr. Harthouse would be charm.
'donot be too sure of that,' say Bounderby. 'I donot promise it. first of all, you see our smoke. thatbe meat and drink to we. itbe the healthy thing in the world in all respect, and particularly for the lung. if you be one of those who want we to consume it, I differ from you. we be not go to wear the bottom of our boiler out any fast than we wear them out now, for all the humbug sentiment in Great Britain and Ireland.'
by way of 'go in' to the full extent, Mr. Harthouse rejoin, 'Mr. Bounderby, I assure you I be entirely and completely of your way of thinking. on conviction.'
'I be glad to hear it,' say Bounderby. 'now, you have hear a lot of talk about the work in our mill, no doubt. you have? very good. Iwill state the fact of it to you. itbe the pleasantest work there be, and itbe the light work there be, and itbe the best- pay work there be. More than that, we couldnot improve the mill themselves, unless we lay down Turkey carpet on the floor. which webe not a-go to do.'
'Mr. Bounderby, perfectly right.'
'lastly,' say Bounderby, 'as to our Hands. therebe not a Hand in this town, sir, man, woman, or child, but have one ultimate object in life. that object be, to be feed on turtle soup and venison with a gold spoon. now, theybe not a-go - none of them - ever to be feed on turtle soup and venison with a gold spoon. and now you know the place.'
Mr. Harthouse profess himself in the high degree instruct and refresh, by this condensed epitome of the whole Coketown question.
'why, you see,' reply Mr. Bounderby, 'it suit my disposition to have a full understanding with a man, particularly with a public man, when I make his acquaintance. I have only one thing more to say to you, Mr. Harthouse, before assure you of the pleasure with which I shall respond, to the utmost of my poor ability, to my friend Tom Gradgrind's letter of introduction. you be a man of family. donot you deceive yourself by suppose for a moment that I be a man of family. I be a bit of dirty riff-raff, and a genuine scrap of tag, rag, and bobtail.'
if anything could have exalt Jem's interest in Mr. Bounderby, it would have be this very circumstance. or, so he tell he.
'so now,' say Bounderby, 'we may shake hand on equal term. I say, equal term, because although I know what I be, and the exact depth of the gutter I have lift myself out of, well than any man do, I be as proud as you be. I be just as proud as you be. have now assert my independence in a proper manner, I may come to how do you find yourself, and I hope yoube pretty well.'
the well, Mr. Harthouse give he to understand as they shake hand, for the salubrious air of Coketown. Mr. Bounderby receive the answer with favour.
'perhaps you know,' say he, 'or perhaps you donot know, I marry Tom Gradgrind's daughter. if you have nothing well to do than to walk up town with I, I shall be glad to introduce you to Tom Gradgrind's daughter.'
'Mr. Bounderby,' say Jem, 'you anticipate my dearest wish.'
they go out without further discourse; and Mr. Bounderby pilot the new acquaintance who so strongly contrast with he, to the private red brick dwelling, with the black outside shutter, the green inside blind, and the black street door up the two white step. in the drawing-room of which mansion, there presently enter to they the most remarkable girl Mr. James Harthouse have ever see. she be so constrained, and yet so careless; so reserved, and yet so watchful; so cold and proud, and yet so sensitively ashamed of her husband's braggart humility - from which she shrink as if every example of it be a cut or a blow; that it be quite a new sensation to observe she. in face she be no less remarkable than in manner. her feature be handsome; but their natural play be so locked up, that it seem impossible to guess at their genuine expression. utterly indifferent, perfectly self- reliant, never at a loss, and yet never at her ease, with her figure in company with they there, and her mind apparently quite alone - it be of no use 'go in' yet awhile to comprehend this girl, for she baffle all penetration.
from the mistress of the house, the visitor glance to the house itself. there be no mute sign of a woman in the room. no graceful little adornment, no fanciful little device, however trivial, anywhere express her influence. cheerless and comfortless, boastfully and doggedly rich, there the room star at its present occupant, unsoftene and unrelieved by the least trace of any womanly occupation. as Mr. Bounderby stand in the midst of his household god, so those unrelenting divinity occupy their place around Mr. Bounderby, and they be worthy of one another, and well match.
'this, sir,' say Bounderby, 'be my wife, Mrs. Bounderby: Tom Gradgrind's eld daughter. Loo, Mr. James Harthouse. Mr. Harthouse have join your father's muster-roll. if he be not Torn Gradgrind's colleague before long, I believe we shall at least hear of he in connexion with one of our neighbouring town. you observe, Mr. Harthouse, that my wife be my junior. I donot know what she see in I to marry I, but she see something in I, I suppose, or she wouldnot have marry I. she have lot of expensive knowledge, sir, political and otherwise. if you want to cram for anything, I should be trouble to recommend you to a well adviser than Loo Bounderby.'
to a more agreeable adviser, or one from whom he would be more likely to learn, Mr. Harthouse could never be recommend.
'come!' say his host. 'if yoube in the complimentary line, youwill get on here, for youwill meet with no competition. I have never be in the way of learn compliment myself, and I donot profess to understand the art of pay them. in fact, despise them. but, your bringing-up be different from mine; mine be a real thing, by George! yoube a gentleman, and I donot pretend to be one. I be Josiah Bounderby of Coketown, and thatbe enough for I. however, though I be not influence by manner and station, Loo Bounderby may be. she havenot my advantage - disadvantage you would call them, but I call them advantage - so youwill not waste your power, I dare say.'
'Mr. Bounderby,' say Jem, turn with a smile to Louisa, 'be a noble animal in a comparatively natural state, quite free from the harness in which a conventional hack like myself work.'
'you respect Mr. Bounderby very much,' she quietly return. 'it be natural that you should.'
he be disgracefully throw out, for a gentleman who have see so much of the world, and think, 'now, how be I to take this?'
'you be go to devote yourself, as I gather from what Mr. Bounderby have say, to the service of your country. you have make up your mind,' say Louisa, still stand before he where she have first stop - in all the singular contrariety of her self- possession, and her be obviously very ill at ease - 'to show the nation the way out of all its difficulty.'
'Mrs. Bounderby,' he return, laugh, 'upon my honour, no. I will make no such pretence to you. I have see a little, here and there, up and down; I have find it all to be very worthless, as everybody have, and as some confess they have, and some do not; and I be go in for your respected father's opinion - really because I have no choice of opinion, and may as well back they as anything else.'
'have you none of your own?' ask Louisa.
'I have not so much as the slight predilection leave. I assure you I attach not the least importance to any opinion. the result of the variety of boredom I have undergo, be a conviction (unless conviction be too industrious a word for the lazy sentiment I entertain on the subject), that any set of idea will do just as much good as any other set, and just as much harm as any other set. therebe an english family with a charming italian motto. what will be, will be. itbe the only truth go!'
this vicious assumption of honesty in dishonesty - a vice so dangerous, so deadly, and so common - seem, he observe, a little to impress she in his favour. he follow up the advantage, by say in his pleasantest manner: a manner to which she might attach as much or as little meaning as she please: 'the side that can prove anything in a line of unit, ten, hundred, and thousand, Mrs. Bounderby, seem to I to afford the most fun, and to give a man the good chance. I be quite as much attach to it as if I believe it. I be quite ready to go in for it, to the same extent as if I believe it. and what more could I possibly do, if I do believe it!'
'you be a singular politician,' say Louisa.
'pardon I; I have not even that merit. we be the large party in the state, I assure you, Mrs. Bounderby, if we all fall out of our adopt rank and be review together.'
Mr. Bounderby, who have be in danger of burst in silence, interpose here with a project for postpone the family dinner till half-past six, and take Mr. James Harthouse in the meantime on a round of visit to the voting and interesting notability of Coketown and its vicinity. the round of visit be make; and Mr. James Harthouse, with a discreet use of his blue coaching, come off triumphantly, though with a considerable accession of boredom.
in the evening, he find the dinner-table lay for four, but they sit down only three. it be an appropriate occasion for Mr. Bounderby to discuss the flavour of the hap'orth of stew eel he have purchase in the street at eight year old; and also of the inferior water, specially use for lay the dust, with which he have wash down that repast. he likewise entertain his guest over the soup and fish, with the calculation that he (Bounderby) have eat in his youth at least three horse under the guise of polony and saveloy. these recital, Jem, in a languid manner, receive with 'charming!' every now and then; and they probably would have decide he to 'go in' for Jerusalem again to-morrow morning, have he be less curious respect Louisa.
'be there nothing,' he think, glance at she as she sit at the head of the table, where her youthful figure, small and slight, but very graceful, look as pretty as it look misplaced; 'be there nothing that will move that face?'
yes! by Jupiter, there be something, and here it be, in an unexpected shape. Tom appear. she change as the door open, and break into a beam smile.
a beautiful smile. Mr. James Harthouse might not have think so much of it, but that he have wonder so long at her impassive face. she put out her hand - a pretty little soft hand; and her finger close upon her brother's, as if she would have carry they to her lip.
'ay, ay?' think the visitor. 'this whelp be the only creature she care for. so, so!'
the whelp be present, and take his chair. the appellation be not flattering, but not unmerite.
'when I be your age, young Tom,' say Bounderby, 'I be punctual, or I get no dinner!'
'when you be my age,' resume Tom, 'you havenot a wrong balance to get right, and havenot to dress afterwards.'
'never mind that now,' say Bounderby.
'well, then,' grumble Tom. 'donot begin with I.'
'Mrs. Bounderby,' say Harthouse, perfectly hear this under- strain as it go on; 'your brother's face be quite familiar to I. can I have see he abroad? or at some public school, perhaps?'
'no,' she resume, quite interested, 'he have never be abroad yet, and be educate here, at home. Tom, love, I be tell Mr. Harthouse that he never see you abroad.'
'no such luck, sir,' say Tom.
there be little enough in he to brighten her face, for he be a sullen young fellow, and ungracious in his manner even to she. so much the great must have be the solitude of her heart, and her need of some one on whom to bestow it. 'so much the more be this whelp the only creature she have ever care for,' think Mr. James Harthouse, turn it over and over. 'so much the more. so much the more.'
both in his sister's presence, and after she have leave the room, the whelp take no pain to hide his contempt for Mr. Bounderby, whenever he could indulge it without the observation of that independent man, by make wry face, or shut one eye. without respond to these telegraphic communication, Mr. Harthouse encourage he much in the course of the evening, and show an unusual liking for he. at last, when he rise to return to his hotel, and be a little doubtful whether he know the way by night, the whelp immediately proffer his service as guide, and turn out with he to escort he thither.
CHAPTER iii - the WHELP
it be very remarkable that a young gentleman who have be bring up under one continuous system of unnatural restraint, should be a hypocrite; but it be certainly the case with Tom. it be very strange that a young gentleman who have never be leave to his own guidance for five consecutive minute, should be incapable at last of govern himself; but so it be with Tom. it be altogether unaccountable that a young gentleman whose imagination have be strangle in his cradle, should be still inconvenience by its ghost in the form of grovel sensuality; but such a monster, beyond all doubt, be Tom.
'do you smoke?' ask Mr. James Harthouse, when they come to the hotel.
'I believe you!' say Tom.
he could do no less than ask Tom up; and Tom could do no less than go up. what with a cool drink adapt to the weather, but not so weak as cool; and what with a rare tobacco than be to be buy in those part; Tom be soon in a highly free and easy state at his end of the sofa, and more than ever disposed to admire his new friend at the other end.
Tom blow his smoke aside, after he have be smoke a little while, and take an observation of his friend. 'he donot seem to care about his dress,' think Tom, 'and yet how capitally he do it. what an easy swell he be!'
Mr. James Harthouse, happen to catch Tom's eye, remark that he drink nothing, and fill his glass with his own negligent hand.
'thank'ee,' say Tom. 'Thank'ee. well, Mr. Harthouse, I hope you have have about a dose of old Bounderby to-night.' Tom say this with one eye shut up again, and look over his glass knowingly, at his entertainer.
'a very good fellow indeed!' return Mr. James Harthouse.
'you think so, donot you?' say Tom. and shut up his eye again.
Mr. James Harthouse smile; and rise from his end of the sofa, and lounge with his back against the chimney-piece, so that he stand before the empty fire-grate as he smoke, in front of Tom and look down at he, observe:
'what a comical brother-in-law you be!'
'what a comical brother-in-law old Bounderby be, I think you mean,' say Tom.
'you be a piece of caustic, Tom,' retort Mr. James Harthouse.
there be something so very agreeable in be so intimate with such a waistcoat; in be call Tom, in such an intimate way, by such a voice; in be on such off-hand term so soon, with such a pair of whisker; that Tom be uncommonly pleased with himself.
'oh! I donot care for old Bounderby,' say he, 'if you mean that. I have always call old Bounderby by the same name when I have talk about he, and I have always think of he in the same way. I be not go to begin to be polite now, about old Bounderby. it would be rather late in the day.'
'donot mind I,' return James; 'but take care when his wife be by, you know.'
'his wife?' say Tom. 'my sister Loo? o yes!' and he laugh, and take a little more of the cool drink.
James Harthouse continue to lounge in the same place and attitude, smoke his cigar in his own easy way, and look pleasantly at the whelp, as if he know himself to be a kind of agreeable demon who have only to hover over he, and he must give up his whole soul if require. it certainly do seem that the whelp yield to this influence. he look at his companion sneakingly, he look at he admiringly, he look at he boldly, and put up one leg on the sofa.
'my sister Loo?' say Tom. 'she never care for old Bounderby.'
'thatbe the past tense, Tom,' return Mr. James Harthouse, strike the ash from his cigar with his little finger. 'we be in the present tense, now.'
'Verb neuter, not to care. indicative mood, present tense. first person singular, I do not care; second person singular, thou dost not care; third person singular, she do not care,' return Tom.
'good! very quaint!' say his friend. 'though you donot mean it.'
'but I do mean it,' cry Tom. 'upon my honour! why, you willnot tell I, Mr. Harthouse, that you really suppose my sister Loo do care for old Bounderby.'
'my dear fellow,' return the other, 'what be I bind to suppose, when I find two married people live in harmony and happiness?'
Tom have by this time get both his leg on the sofa. if his second leg have not be already there when he be call a dear fellow, he would have put it up at that great stage of the conversation. feel it necessary to do something then, he stretch himself out at great length, and, recline with the back of his head on the end of the sofa, and smoke with an infinite assumption of negligence, turn his common face, and not too sober eye, towards the face look down upon he so carelessly yet so potently.
'you know our governor, Mr. Harthouse,' say Tom, 'and therefore, you neednot be surprised that Loo marry old Bounderby. she never have a lover, and the governor propose old Bounderby, and she take he.'
'very dutiful in your interesting sister,' say Mr. James Harthouse.
'yes, but she wouldnot have be as dutiful, and it would not have come off as easily,' return the whelp, 'if it havenot be for I.'
the tempter merely lift his eyebrow; but the whelp be oblige to go on.
'I persuade she,' he say, with an edify air of superiority. 'I be stick into old Bounderby's bank (where I never want to be), and I know I should get into scrape there, if she put old Bounderby's pipe out; so I tell she my wish, and she come into they. she would do anything for I. it be very game of she, benot it?'
'it be charming, Tom!'
'not that it be altogether so important to she as it be to I,' continue Tom coolly, 'because my liberty and comfort, and perhaps my get on, depend on it; and she have no other lover, and stay at home be like stay in jail - especially when I be go. it benot as if she give up another lover for old Bounderby; but still it be a good thing in she.'
'perfectly delightful. and she get on so placidly.'
'oh,' return Tom, with contemptuous patronage, 'shebe a regular girl. a girl can get on anywhere. she have settle down to the life, and she donot mind. it do just as well as another. besides, though Loo be a girl, shebe not a common sort of girl. she can shut herself up within herself, and think - as I have often know her sit and watch the fire - for an hour at a stretch.'
'ay, ay? have resource of her own,' say Harthouse, smoke quietly.
'not so much of that as you may suppose,' return Tom; 'for our governor have she cram with all sort of dry bone and sawdust. itbe his system.'
'form his daughter on his own model?' suggest Harthouse.
'his daughter? ah! and everybody else. why, he form I that way!' say Tom.
'impossible!'
'he do, though,' say Tom, shake his head. 'I mean to say, Mr. Harthouse, that when I first leave home and go to old Bounderby's, I be as flat as a warming-pan, and know no more about life, than any oyster do.'
'come, Tom! I can hardly believe that. a joke's a joke.'
'upon my soul!' say the whelp. 'I be serious; I be indeed!' he smoke with great gravity and dignity for a little while, and then add, in a highly complacent tone, 'oh! I have pick up a little since. I donot deny that. but I have do it myself; no thank to the governor.'
'and your intelligent sister?'
'my intelligent sister be about where she be. she use to complain to I that she have nothing to fall back upon, that girl usually fall back upon; and I donot see how she be to have get over that since. but she donot mind,' he sagaciously add, puff at his cigar again. 'girl can always get on, somehow.'
'call at the Bank yesterday evening, for Mr. Bounderby's address, I find an ancient lady there, who seem to entertain great admiration for your sister,' observe Mr. James Harthouse, throw away the last small remnant of the cigar he have now smoke out.
'Mother Sparsit!' say Tom. 'what! you have see she already, have you?'
his friend nod. Tom take his cigar out of his mouth, to shut up his eye (which have grow rather unmanageable) with the great expression, and to tap his nose several time with his finger.
'Mother Sparsit's feeling for Loo be more than admiration, I should think,' say Tom. 'say affection and devotion. Mother Sparsit never set her cap at Bounderby when he be a bachelor. oh no!'
these be the last word speak by the whelp, before a giddy drowsiness come upon he, follow by complete oblivion. he be rouse from the latter state by an uneasy dream of be stir up with a boot, and also of a voice say: 'come, itbe late. be off!'
'well!' he say, scramble from the sofa. 'I must take my leave of you though. I say. your be very good tobacco. but itbe too mild.'
'yes, itbe too mild,' return his entertainer.
'itbe - itbe ridiculously mild,' say Tom. 'wherebe the door! good night!'
'he have another odd dream of be take by a waiter through a mist, which, after give he some trouble and difficulty, resolve itself into the main street, in which he stand alone. he then walk home pretty easily, though not yet free from an impression of the presence and influence of his new friend - as if he be lounge somewhere in the air, in the same negligent attitude, regard he with the same look.
the whelp go home, and go to bed. if he have have any sense of what he have do that night, and have be less of a whelp and more of a brother, he might have turn short on the road, might have go down to the ill-smell river that be dye black, might have go to bed in it for good and all, and have curtain his head for ever with its filthy water.
CHAPTER IV - MEN and brother
'OH, my friend, the down-trodden operative of Coketown! oh, my friend and fellow-countryman, the slave of an iron-handed and a grind despotism! oh, my friend and fellow-sufferer, and fellow-workman, and fellow-man! I tell you that the hour be come, when we must rally round one another as one united power, and crumble into dust the oppressor that too long have batten upon the plunder of our family, upon the sweat of our brow, upon the labour of our hand, upon the strength of our sinew, upon the God- create glorious right of Humanity, and upon the holy and eternal privilege of Brotherhood!'
'good!' 'hear, hear, hear!' 'hurrah!' and other cry, arise in many voice from various part of the densely crowded and suffocatingly close Hall, in which the orator, perch on a stage, deliver himself of this and what other froth and fume he have in he. he have declaim himself into a violent heat, and be as hoarse as he be hot. by dint of roaring at the top of his voice under a flaring gaslight, clench his fist, knit his brow, set his tooth, and pound with his arm, he have take so much out of himself by this time, that he be bring to a stop, and call for a glass of water.
as he stand there, try to quench his fiery face with his drink of water, the comparison between the orator and the crowd of attentive face turn towards he, be extremely to his disadvantage. judge he by Nature's evidence, he be above the mass in very little but the stage on which he stand. in many great respect he be essentially below they. he be not so honest, he be not so manly, he be not so good-humour; he substitute cunning for their simplicity, and passion for their safe solid sense. an ill-make, high-shoulder man, with lower brow, and his feature crush into an habitually sour expression, he contrast most unfavourably, even in his mongrel dress, with the great body of his hearer in their plain work clothe. strange as it always be to consider any assembly in the act of submissively resign itself to the dreariness of some complacent person, lord or commoner, whom three-fourth of it could, by no human mean, raise out of the slough of inanity to their own intellectual level, it be particularly strange, and it be even particularly affect, to see this crowd of earnest face, whose honesty in the main no competent observer free from bias could doubt, so agitated by such a leader. good! hear, hear! Hurrah! the eagerness both of attention and intention, exhibit in all the countenance, make they a most impressive sight. there be no carelessness, no languor, no idle curiosity; none of the many shade of indifference to be see in all other assembly, visible for one moment there. that every man feel his condition to be, somehow or other, bad than it might be; that every man consider it incumbent on he to join the rest, towards the making of it well; that every man feel his only hope to be in his allying himself to the comrade by whom he be surround; and that in this belief, right or wrong (unhappily wrong then), the whole of that crowd be gravely, deeply, faithfully in earnest; must have be as plain to any one who choose to see what be there, as the bare beam of the roof and the whitened brick wall. nor could any such spectator fail to know in his own breast, that these man, through their very delusion, show great quality, susceptible of be turn to the happy and good account; and that to pretend (on the strength of sweeping axiom, howsoever cut and dry) that they go astray wholly without cause, and of their own irrational will, be to pretend that there could be smoke without fire, death without birth, harvest without seed, anything or everything produce from nothing.
the orator have refresh himself, wipe his corrugated forehead from left to right several time with his handkerchief fold into a pad, and concentrate all his revive force, in a sneer of great disdain and bitterness.
'but oh, my friend and brother! oh, man and Englishmen, the down-trodden operative of Coketown! what shall we say of that man - that working-man, that I should find it necessary so to libel the glorious name - who, be practically and well acquainted with the grievance and wrong of you, the injure pith and marrow of this land, and have hear you, with a noble and majestic unanimity that will make tyrant tremble, resolve for to subscribe to the fund of the United Aggregate Tribunal, and to abide by the injunction issue by that body for your benefit, whatever they may be - what, I ask you, will you say of that working-man, since such I must acknowledge he to be, who, at such a time, desert his post, and sell his flag; who, at such a time, turn a traitor and a craven and a recreant, who, at such a time, be not ashamed to make to you the dastardly and humiliating avowal that he will hold himself aloof, and will not be one of those associate in the gallant stand for Freedom and for right?'
the assembly be divide at this point. there be some groan and hiss, but the general sense of honour be much too strong for the condemnation of a man unheard. 'be sure yoube right, Slackbridge!' 'put he up!' 'letus hear he!' such thing be say on many side. finally, one strong voice call out, 'be the man heer? if the man's heer, Slackbridge, letus hear the man himseln, 'stead o' yo.' which be receive with a round of applause.
Slackbridge, the orator, look about he with a wither smile; and, hold out his right hand at arm's length (as the manner of all Slackbridges be), to still the thunder sea, wait until there be a profound silence.
'oh, my friend and fellow-man!' say Slackbridge then, shake his head with violent scorn, 'I do not wonder that you, the prostrate son of labour, be incredulous of the existence of such a man. but he who sell his birthright for a mess of pottage exist, and Judas Iscariot exist, and Castlereagh exist, and this man exist!'
here, a brief press and confusion near the stage, end in the man himself stand at the orator's side before the concourse. he be pale and a little move in the face - his lip especially show it; but he stand quiet, with his left hand at his chin, wait to be hear. there be a chairman to regulate the proceeding, and this functionary now take the case into his own hand.
'my friend,' say he, 'by virtue o' my office as your president, I ask o' our friend Slackbridge, who may be a little over hetter in this business, to take his seat, while this man Stephen Blackpool be heern. you all know this man Stephen Blackpool. you know he awlung o' his misfort'n, and his good name.'
with that, the chairman shake he frankly by the hand, and sit down again. Slackbridge likewise sit down, wipe his hot forehead - always from left to right, and never the reverse way.
'my friend,' Stephen begin, in the midst of a dead calm; 'I ha' hed whatbe be spok'n o' I, and 'tis lickly that I shallnot mend it. but Iwould liefer youwould hearn the truth concernin myseln, fro my lip than fro onny other man's, though I never cud'n speak afore so monny, wi'out bein moydert and muddle.'
Slackbridge shake his head as if he would shake it off, in his bitterness.
'Ibe th' one single Hand in Bounderby's mill, o' a' the man theer, as donot coom in wi' th' propose reg'lation. I canna coom in wi' them. my friend, I doubt their do yo onny good. licker theywill do yo hurt.'
Slackbridge laugh, fold his arm, and frown sarcastically.
'but 't an't sommuch for that as I stand out. if that be aw, Iwould coom in wi' th' rest. but I ha' my reason - mine, yo see - for be hinder; not on'y now, but awlus - awlus - life long!'
Slackbridge jump up and stand beside he, gnashing and tearing. 'oh, my friend, what but this do I tell you? oh, my fellow- countryman, what warning but this do I give you? and how show this recreant conduct in a man on whom unequal law be know to have fall heavy? oh, you englishman, I ask you how do this subornation show in one of yourself, who be thus consent to his own undoing and to your, and to your child's and your child's child's?'
there be some applause, and some cry of Shame upon the man; but the great part of the audience be quiet. they look at Stephen's worn face, render more pathetic by the homely emotion it evince; and, in the kindness of their nature, they be more sorry than indignant.
''tis this Delegate's trade for t' speak,' say Stephen, 'an' hebe pay for 't, an' he know his work. let he keep to 't. let he give no heed to what I ha had'n to bear. thatbe not for he. thatbe not for nobbody but I.'
there be a propriety, not to say a dignity in these word, that make the hearer yet more quiet and attentive. the same strong voice call out, 'Slackbridge, let the man be heern, and howd thee tongue!' then the place be wonderfully still.
'my brother,' say Stephen, whose low voice be distinctly hear, 'and my fellow-workman - for that yo be to I, though not, as I know on, to this delegate here - I ha but a word to sen, and I could sen nommore if I be to speak till strike o' day. I know weel, aw whatbe afore I. I know weel that yo aw resolve to ha nommore ado wi' a man who be not wi' yo in this matther. I know weel that if I be a lyin parisht I' th' road, yo'd feel it right to pass I by, as a forrenner and strange. what I ha getn, I mun mak th' well on.'
'Stephen Blackpool,' say the chairman, rise, 'think on 't agen. think on 't once agen, lad, afore thou'rt shun by aw owd friend.'
there be an universal murmur to the same effect, though no man articulate a word. every eye be fix on Stephen's face. to repent of his determination, would be to take a load from all their mind. he look around he, and know that it be so. not a grain of anger with they be in his heart; he know they, far below their surface weakness and misconception, as no one but their fellow- labourer could.
'I ha thowt on 't, above a bit, sir. I simply canna coom in. I mun go th' way as lay afore I. I mun tak my leave o' aw heer.'
he make a sort of reverence to they by hold up his arm, and stand for the moment in that attitude; not speak until they slowly drop at his side.
'Monnybe the pleasant word as soom heer have spok'n wi' I; monnybe the face I see heer, as I first see when I be yoong and light heart'n than now. I ha' never have no fratch afore, sin ever I be bear, wi' any o' my like; Gonnows I ha' none now thatbe o' my makin'. Yo'll can' I traitor and that - yo I mean t' say,' address slackbridge, 'but 'tis easy to can' than mak' out. so let be.'
he have move away a pace or two to come down from the platform, when he remember something he have not say, and return again.
'haply,' he say, turn his furrowed face slowly about, that he might as it be individually address the whole audience, those both near and distant; 'haply, when this question have be tak'n up and discoose, therewill be a threat to turn out if Ibe let to work among yo. I hope I shall die ere ever such a time coom, and I shall work solitary among yo unless it coom - truly, I mun do 't, my friend; not to brave yo, but to live. I ha nobbut work to live by; and wheerever can I go, I who ha work sin I be no heighth at aw, in Coketown heer? I mak' no complaint o' bein turn to the wa', o' bein outcasten and overlooken fro this time forrard, but hope I shall be let to work. if there be any right for I at aw, my friend, I think 'tis that.'
not a word be speak. not a sound be audible in the building, but the slight rustle of man move a little apart, all along the centre of the room, to open a mean of pass out, to the man with whom they have all bind themselves to renounce companionship. look at no one, and go his way with a lowly steadiness upon he that assert nothing and seek nothing, Old Stephen, with all his trouble on his head, leave the scene.
then Slackbridge, who have keep his oratorical arm extend during the go out, as if he be repress with infinite solicitude and by a wonderful moral power the vehement passion of the multitude, apply himself to raise their spirit. have not the Roman Brutus, oh, my british countryman, condemn his son to death; and have not the spartan mother, oh my soon to be victorious friend, drive their fly child on the point of their enemy' sword? then be it not the sacred duty of the man of Coketown, with forefather before they, an admire world in company with they, and a posterity to come after they, to hurl out traitor from the tent they have pitch in a sacred and a God-like cause? the wind of heaven answer yes; and bear Yes, east, west, north, and south. and consequently three cheer for the United Aggregate Tribunal!
Slackbridge act as fugleman, and give the time. the multitude of doubtful face (a little conscience-stricken) brighten at the sound, and take it up. private feeling must yield to the common cause. Hurrah! the roof yet vibrate with the cheering, when the assembly disperse.
thus easily do Stephen Blackpool fall into the loneliest of life, the life of solitude among a familiar crowd. the stranger in the land who look into ten thousand face for some answer look and never find it, be in cheer society as compare with he who pass ten avert face daily, that be once the countenance of friend. such experience be to be Stephen's now, in every wake moment of his life; at his work, on his way to it and from it, at his door, at his window, everywhere. by general consent, they even avoid that side of the street on which he habitually walk; and leave it, of all the work man, to he only.
he have be for many year, a quiet silent man, associate but little with other man, and use to companionship with his own thought. he have never know before the strength of the want in his heart for the frequent recognition of a nod, a look, a word; or the immense amount of relief that have be pour into it by drop through such small mean. it be even hard than he could have believe possible, to separate in his own conscience his abandonment by all his fellow from a baseless sense of shame and disgrace.
the first four day of his endurance be day so long and heavy, that he begin to be appal by the prospect before he. not only do he see no Rachael all the time, but he avoid every chance of see she; for, although he know that the prohibition do not yet formally extend to the woman work in the factory, he find that some of they with whom he be acquaint be change to he, and he fear to try other, and dread that Rachael might be even single out from the rest if she be see in his company. so, he have be quite alone during the four day, and have speak to no one, when, as he be leave his work at night, a young man of a very light complexion accost he in the street.
'your name's Blackpool, benot it?' say the young man.
Stephen colour to find himself with his hat in his hand, in his gratitude for be speak to, or in the suddenness of it, or both. he make a feint of adjust the lining, and say, 'yes.'
'you be the Hand they have send to Coventry, I mean?' say Bitzer, the very light young man in question.
Stephen answer 'yes,' again.
'I suppose so, from their all appear to keep away from you. Mr. Bounderby want to speak to you. you know his house, donot you?'
Stephen say 'yes,' again.
'then go straight up there, will you?' say Bitzer. 'yoube expect, and have only to tell the servant itbe you. I belong to the Bank; so, if you go straight up without I (I be send to fetch you), youwill save I a walk.'
Stephen, whose way have be in the contrary direction, turn about, and betook himself as in duty bind, to the red brick castle of the giant Bounderby.
CHAPTER V - MEN and master
'well, Stephen,' say Bounderby, in his windy manner, 'whatbe this I hear? what have these pest of the earth be do to you? come in, and speak up.'
it be into the drawing-room that he be thus bid. a tea-table be set out; and Mr. Bounderby's young wife, and her brother, and a great gentleman from London, be present. to whom Stephen make his obeisance, close the door and stand near it, with his hat in his hand.
'this be the man I be tell you about, Harthouse,' say Mr. Bounderby. the gentleman he address, who be talk to Mrs. Bounderby on the sofa, get up, say in an indolent way, 'oh really?' and dawdle to the hearthrug where Mr. Bounderby stand.
'now,' say Bounderby, 'speak up!'
after the four day he have pass, this address fall rudely and discordantly on Stephen's ear. besides be a rough handling of his wounded mind, it seem to assume that he really be the self- interested deserter he have be call.
'what be it, sir,' say Stephen, 'as yo be pleased to want wi' I?'
'why, I have tell you,' return Bounderby. 'speak up like a man, since you be a man, and tell we about yourself and this combination.'
'Wi' yor pardon, sir,' say Stephen Blackpool, 'I ha' nowt to sen about it.'
Mr. Bounderby, who be always more or less like a wind, find something in his way here, begin to blow at it directly.
'now, look here, Harthouse,' say he, 'herebe a speciman of them. when this man be here once before, I warn this man against the mischievous stranger who be always about - and who ought to be hang wherever they be find - and I tell this man that he be go in the wrong direction. now, would you believe it, that although they have put this mark upon he, he be such a slave to they still, that hebe afraid to open his lip about they?' 'I se as I have nowt to sen, sir; not as I be fearfo' o' openin' my lip.'
'you say! ah! I know what you say; more than that, I know what you mean, you see. not always the same thing, by the Lord Harry! quite different thing. you have well tell we at once, that that fellow Slackbridge be not in the town, stir up the people to mutiny; and that he be not a regular qualified leader of the people: that be, a most confounded scoundrel. you have well tell we so at once; you cannot deceive I. you want to tell we so. why donot you?'
'Ibe as sooary as yo, sir, when the people's leader be bad,' say Stephen, shake his head. 'they tak such as offer. haply 'tis na' the sma' o' their misfortun when they can get no well.' the wind begin to get boisterous.
'now, youwill think this pretty well, Harthouse,' say Mr. Bounderby. 'youwill think this tolerably strong. youwill say, upon my soul this be a tidy speciman of what my friend have to deal with; but this be nothing, sir! you shall hear I ask this man a question. pray, Mr. Blackpool' - wind spring up very fast - 'may I take the liberty of ask you how it happen that you refuse to be in this combination?'
'how 't happen?'
'ah!' say Mr. Bounderby, with his thumb in the arm of his coat, and jerk his head and shut his eye in confidence with the opposite wall: 'how it happen.'
'Iwould leefer not coom to 't, sir; but sin you put th' question - an' not want'n t' be ill-manner'n - Iwill answer. I ha pass a promess.'
'not to I, you know,' say Bounderby. (gusty weather with deceitful calm. one now prevail.)
'o no, sir. not to yo.'
'as for I, any consideration for I have have just nothing at all to do with it,' say Bounderby, still in confidence with the wall. 'if only Josiah Bounderby of Coketown have be in question, you would have join and make no bone about it?'
'why yes, sir. 'tis true.'
'though he know,' say Mr. Bounderby, now blow a gale, 'that there be a set of rascal and rebel whom transportation be too good for! now, Mr. Harthouse, you have be knock about in the world some time. do you ever meet with anything like that man out of this blessed country?' and Mr. Bounderby point he out for inspection, with an angry finger.
'Nay, ma'am,' say Stephen Blackpool, staunchly protest against the word that have be use, and instinctively address himself to Louisa, after glance at her face. 'not rebel, nor yet rascal. nowt o' th' kind, ma'am, nowt o' th' kind. theyhave not doon I a kindness, ma'am, as I know and feel. but therebe not a dozen man amoong them, ma'am - a dozen? not six - but what believe as he have doon his duty by the rest and by himseln. God forbid as I, that ha' know, and had'n experience o' these man aw my life - I, that ha' ett'n an' droonken wi' them, an' seet'n wi' them, and toil'n wi' them, and lov'n them, should fail fur to stan by them wi' the truth, let them ha' doon to I what they may!'
he speak with the rugged earnestness of his place and character - deepen perhaps by a proud consciousness that he be faithful to his class under all their mistrust; but he fully remember where he be, and do not even raise his voice.
'no, ma'am, no. theybe true to one another, faithfo' to one another, 'fectionate to one another, e'en to death. be poor amoong them, be sick amoong them, grieve amoong them for onny o' th' monny cause that carry grief to the poor man's door, an' theywill be tender wi' yo, gentle wi' yo, comfortable wi' yo, Chrisen wi' yo. be sure o' that, ma'am. theywould be rive to bit, ere ever theywould be different.'
'in short,' say Mr. Bounderby, 'itbe because they be so full of virtue that they have turn you adrift. go through with it while you be about it. out with it.'
'how 'tis, ma'am,' resume Stephen, appear still to find his natural refuge in Louisa's face, 'that what be good in we fok, seem to turn we most to trouble an' misfort'n an' mistake, I dunno. but 'tis so. I know 'tis, as I know the heavens be over I ahint the smoke. webe patient too, an' want in general to do right. an' I canna think the fawt be aw wi' us.'
'now, my friend,' say Mr. Bounderby, whom he could not have exasperate more, quite unconscious of it though he be, than by seem to appeal to any one else, 'if you will favour I with your attention for half a minute, I should like to have a word or two with you. you say just now, that you have nothing to tell we about this business. you be quite sure of that before we go any far.'
'Sir, I be sure on 't.'
'herebe a gentleman from London present,' Mr. Bounderby make a backhand point at Mr. James Harthouse with his thumb, 'a Parliament gentleman. I should like he to hear a short bit of dialogue between you and I, instead of take the substance of it - for I know precious well, beforehand, what it will be; nobody know well than I do, take notice! - instead of receive it on trust from my mouth.'
Stephen bend his head to the gentleman from London, and show a rather more troubled mind than usual. he turn his eye involuntarily to his former refuge, but at a look from that quarter (expressive though instantaneous) he settle they on Mr. Bounderby's face.
'now, what do you complain of?' ask Mr. Bounderby.
'I ha' not coom here, sir,' Stephen remind he, 'to complain. I coom for that I be send for.'
'what,' repeat Mr. Bounderby, fold his arm, 'do you people, in a general way, complain of?'
Stephen look at he with some little irresolution for a moment, and then seem to make up his mind.
'Sir, I be never good at showin o 't, though I ha had'n my share in feel o 't. 'Deed we be in a muddle, sir. look round town - so rich as 'tis - and see the number o' people as have be broughten into bein heer, fur to weave, an' to card, an' to piece out a livin', aw the same one way, somehow, 'twixt their cradle and their graf. look how we live, an' wheer we live, an' in what number, an' by what chance, and wi' what sameness; and look how the mill be awlu a goin, and how they never work we no nigh to ony dis'ant object - ceptin awlus, death. look how you consider of we, and write of we, and talk of we, and go up wi' yor deputation to secretary o' state 'bout we, and how yo be awlus right, and how we be awlus wrong, and never had'n no reason in we sin ever we be bear. look how this ha growen an' growen, sir, big an' big, broad an' broad, hard an' hard, fro year to year, fro generation unto generation. who can look on 't, sir, and fairly tell a man 'tis not a muddle?'
'of course,' say Mr. Bounderby. 'now perhaps youwill let the gentleman know, how you would set this muddle (as yoube so fond of call it) to right.'
'I donno, sir. I canna be expecten to 't. 'tis not I as should be looken to for that, sir. 'tis they as be put ower I, and ower aw the rest of we. what do they tak upon themseln, sir, if not to do't?'
'Iwill tell you something towards it, at any rate,' return Mr. Bounderby. 'we will make an example of half a dozen Slackbridges. wewill indict the blackguard for felony, and get them ship off to penal settlement.'
Stephen gravely shake his head.
'donot tell I we willnot, man,' say Mr. Bounderby, by this time blow a hurricane, 'because we will, I tell you!'
'Sir,' return Stephen, with the quiet confidence of absolute certainty, 'if yo be t' tak a hundred Slackbridges - aw as there be, and aw the number ten time towd - an' was t' sew them up in separate sack, an' sink them in the deep ocean as be make ere ever dry land coom to be, yo'd leave the muddle just wheer 'tis. mischeevous stranger!' say Stephen, with an anxious smile; 'when ha we not heern, I be sure, sin ever we can call to mind, o' th' mischeevous stranger! 'tis not by they the trouble's make, sir. 'tis not wi' they 't commence. I ha no favour for them - I ha no reason to favour them - but 'tis hopeless and useless to dream o' takin they fro their trade, 'stead o' takin their trade fro they! aw thatbe now about I in this room be heer afore I coom, an' will be heer when I be go. put that clock aboard a ship an' pack it off to Norfolk Island, an' the time will go on just the same. so 'tis wi' Slackbridge every bit.'
revert for a moment to his former refuge, he observe a cautionary movement of her eye towards the door. step back, he put his hand upon the lock. but he have not speak out of his own will and desire; and he feel it in his heart a noble return for his late injurious treatment to be faithful to the last to those who have repudiate he. he stay to finish what be in his mind.
'Sir, I canna, wi' my little learn an' my common way, tell the genelman what will well aw this - though some work man o' this town could, above my power - but I can tell he what I know will never do 't. the strong hand will never do 't. Vict'ry and triumph will never do 't. agree fur to mak one side unnat'rally awlus and for ever right, and toother side unnat'rally awlus and for ever wrong, will never, never do 't. nor yet lettin alone will never do 't. let thousand upon thousand alone, aw lead the like life and aw faw'en into the like muddle, and they will be as one, and yo will be as anoother, wi' a black unpassable world betwixt yo, just as long or short a time as sich-like misery can last. not drawin nigh to fok, wi' kindness and patience an' cheery way, that so draw nigh to one another in their monny trouble, and so cherish one another in their distress wi' what they need themseln - like, I humbly believe, as no people the genelman ha see in aw his travel can beat - will never do 't till th' Sun turn t' ice. Most o' aw, rat them as so much power, and reg'latin them as if they be figure in a soom, or machine: wi'out love and liken, wi'out memory and inclination, wi'out soul to weary and soul to hope - when aw go quiet, draggin on wi' them as if theywould nowt o' th' kind, and when aw go onquiet, reproachin them for their want o' sitch humanly feelin in their dealin wi' yo - this will never do 't, sir, till God's work be onmade.'
Stephen stand with the open door in his hand, wait to know if anything more be expect of he.
'just stop a moment,' say Mr. Bounderby, excessively red in the face. 'I tell you, the last time you be here with a grievance, that you have well turn about and come out of that. and I also tell you, if you remember, that I be up to the gold spoon look- out.'
'I be not up to 't myseln, sir; I do assure yo.'
'now itbe clear to I,' say Mr. Bounderby, 'that you be one of those chap who have always get a grievance. and you go about, sow it and raise crop. thatbe the business of your life, my friend.'
Stephen shake his head, mutely protest that indeed he have other business to do for his life.
'you be such a waspish, raspish, ill-condition chap, you see,' say Mr. Bounderby, 'that even your own Union, the man who know you well, will have nothing to do with you. I never think those fellow could be right in anything; but I tell you what! I so far go along with they for a novelty, that Iwill have nothing to do with you either.'
Stephen raise his eye quickly to his face.
'you can finish off what yoube at,' say Mr. Bounderby, with a mean nod, 'and then go elsewhere.'
'Sir, yo know weel,' say Stephen expressively, 'that if I canna get work wi' yo, I canna get it elsewheer.'
the reply be, 'what I know, I know; and what you know, you know. I have no more to say about it.'
Stephen glance at Louisa again, but her eye be raise to his no more; therefore, with a sigh, and say, barely above his breath, 'heaven help we aw in this world!' he depart.
CHAPTER VI - fade AWAY
it be fall dark when Stephen come out of Mr. Bounderby's house. the shadow of night have gather so fast, that he do not look about he when he close the door, but plod straight along the street. nothing be further from his thought than the curious old woman he have encounter on his previous visit to the same house, when he hear a step behind he that he know, and turning, see she in Rachael's company.
he see Rachael first, as he have hear she only.
'ah, Rachael, my dear! Missus, thou wi' she!'
'well, and now you be surprised to be sure, and with reason I must say,' the old woman return. 'here I be again, you see.'
'but how wi' Rachael?' say Stephen, fall into their step, walk between they, and look from the one to the other.
'why, I come to be with this good lass pretty much as I come to be with you,' say the old woman, cheerfully, take the reply upon herself. 'my visit time be later this year than usual, for I have be rather trouble with shortness of breath, and so put it off till the weather be fine and warm. for the same reason I donot make all my journey in one day, but divide it into two day, and get a bed to-night at the Travellers' Coffee House down by the railroad (a nice clean house), and go back parliamentary, at six in the morning. well, but what have this to do with this good lass, say you? Ibe go to tell you. I have hear of Mr. Bounderby be marry. I read it in the paper, where it look grand - oh, it look fine!' the old woman dwelt on it with strange enthusiasm: 'and I want to see his wife. I have never see she yet. now, if youwill believe I, she havenot come out of that house since noon to- day. so not to give she up too easily, I be wait about, a little last bit more, when I pass close to this good lass two or three time; and her face be so friendly I speak to she, and she speak to I. there!' say the old woman to Stephen, 'you can make all the rest out for yourself now, a deal short than I can, I dare say!'
once again, Stephen have to conquer an instinctive propensity to dislike this old woman, though her manner be as honest and simple as a manner possibly could be. with a gentleness that be as natural to he as he know it to be to Rachael, he pursue the subject that interest she in her old age.
'well, missus,' say he, 'I ha see the lady, and she be young and hansom. Wi' fine dark thinkin eye, and a still way, Rachael, as I ha never see the like on.'
'young and handsome. yes!' cry the old woman, quite delighted. 'as bonny as a rose! and what a happy wife!'
'Aye, missus, I suppose she be,' say Stephen. but with a doubtful glance at Rachael.
'suppose she be? she must be. shebe your master's wife,' return the old woman.
Stephen nod assent. 'though as to master,' say he, glance again at Rachael, 'not master onny more. thatbe aw enden 'twixt he and I.'
'have you leave his work, Stephen?' ask Rachael, anxiously and quickly.
'why, Rachael,' he reply, 'whether I ha lef'n his work, or whether his work ha lef'n I, coom t' th' same. his work and I be part. 'tis as weel so - well, I be thinkin when yo coom up wi' I. it would ha brought'n trouble upon trouble if I have stay theer. haply 'tis a kindness to monny that I go; haply 'tis a kindness to myseln; anyways it mun be do. I mun turn my face fro Coketown fur th' time, and seek a fort'n, dear, by beginnin fresh.'
'where will you go, Stephen?'
'I donno t'night,' say he, lift off his hat, and smooth his thin hair with the flat of his hand. 'but Ibe not goin t'night, Rachael, nor yet t'morrow. 'tan't easy overmuch t' know wheer t' turn, but a good heart will coom to I.'
Herein, too, the sense of even think unselfishly aid he. before he have so much as close Mr. Bounderby's door, he have reflect that at least his be oblige to go away be good for she, as it would save she from the chance of be bring into question for not withdraw from he. though it would cost he a hard pang to leave she, and though he could think of no similar place in which his condemnation would not pursue he, perhaps it be almost a relief to be force away from the endurance of the last four day, even to unknown difficulty and distress.
so he say, with truth, 'Ibe more leetsome, Rachael, under 't, than I could'n ha believe.' it be not her part to make his burden heavy. she answer with her comforting smile, and the three walk on together.
Age, especially when it strive to be self-reliant and cheerful, find much consideration among the poor. the old woman be so decent and content, and make so light of her infirmity, though they have increase upon she since her former interview with Stephen, that they both take an interest in she. she be too sprightly to allow of their walking at a slow pace on her account, but she be very grateful to be talk to, and very willing to talk to any extent: so, when they come to their part of the town, she be more brisk and vivacious than ever.
'come to my poor place, missus,' say Stephen, 'and tak a coop o' tea. Rachael will coom then; and arterward Iwill see thee safe t' thy Travellers' lodgin. 't may be long, Rachael, ere ever I ha th' chance o' thy coompany agen.'
they comply, and the three go on to the house where he lodge. when they turn into a narrow street, Stephen glance at his window with a dread that always haunt his desolate home; but it be open, as he have leave it, and no one be there. the evil spirit of his life have flit away again, month ago, and he have hear no more of she since. the only evidence of her last return now, be the scantier moveable in his room, and the grayer hair upon his head.
he light a candle, set out his little tea-board, get hot water from below, and bring in small portion of tea and sugar, a loaf, and some butter from the near shop. the bread be new and crusty, the butter fresh, and the sugar lump, of course - in fulfilment of the standard testimony of the Coketown magnate, that these people live like prince, sir. Rachael make the tea (so large a party necessitate the borrowing of a cup), and the visitor enjoy it mightily. it be the first glimpse of sociality the host have have for many day. he too, with the world a wide heath before he, enjoy the meal - again in corroboration of the magnate, as exemplify the utter want of calculation on the part of these people, sir.
'I ha never thowt yet, missus,' say Stephen, 'o' askin thy name.'
the old lady announce herself as 'Mrs. Pegler.'
'a widder, I think?' say Stephen.
'oh, many long year!' Mrs. Pegler's husband (one of the good on record) be already dead, by Mrs. Pegler's calculation, when Stephen be bear.
''twere a bad job, too, to lose so good a one,' say Stephen. 'Onny child?'
Mrs. Pegler's cup, rattle against her saucer as she hold it, denote some nervousness on her part. 'no,' she say. 'not now, not now.'
'dead, Stephen,' Rachael softly hint.
'Ibe sooary I ha spok'n on 't,' say Stephen, 'I ought t' hadn in my mind as I might touch a sore place. I - I blame myseln.'
while he excuse himself, the old lady's cup rattle more and more. 'I have a son,' she say, curiously distressed, and not by any of the usual appearance of sorrow; 'and he do well, wonderfully well. but he be not to be speak of if you please. he be - ' put down her cup, she move her hand as if she would have add, by her action, 'dead!' then she say aloud, 'I have lose he.'
Stephen have not yet get the well of his have give the old lady pain, when his landlady come stumble up the narrow stair, and call he to the door, whisper in his ear. Mrs. Pegler be by no mean deaf, for she catch a word as it be utter.
'Bounderby!' she cry, in a suppress voice, start up from the table. 'oh hide I! donot let I be see for the world. donot let he come up till Ihave get away. pray, pray!' she tremble, and be excessively agitated; get behind Rachael, when Rachael try to reassure she; and not seem to know what she be about.
'but hearken, missus, hearken,' say Stephen, astonish. "Tisn't Mr. Bounderby; 'tis his wife. Yo'r not fearfo' o' she. Yo be hey-go-mad about she, but an hour sin.'
'but be you sure itbe the lady, and not the gentleman?' she ask, still tremble.
'certain sure!'
'well then, pray donot speak to I, nor yet take any notice of I,' say the old woman. 'let I be quite to myself in this corner.'
Stephen nod; look to Rachael for an explanation, which she be quite unable to give he; take the candle, go downstairs, and in a few moment return, light Louisa into the room. she be follow by the whelp.
Rachael have rise, and stand apart with her shawl and bonnet in her hand, when Stephen, himself profoundly astonish by this visit, put the candle on the table. then he too stand, with his double hand upon the table near it, wait to be address.
for the first time in her life Louisa have come into one of the dwelling of the Coketown Hands; for the first time in her life she be face to face with anything like individuality in connection with they. she know of their existence by hundred and by thousand. she know what result in work a give number of they would produce in a give space of time. she know they in crowd pass to and from their nest, like ant or beetle. but she know from her read infinitely more of the way of toil insect than of these toil man and woman.
something to be work so much and pay so much, and there end; something to be infallibly settle by law of supply and demand; something that blunder against those law, and flounder into difficulty; something that be a little pinched when wheat be dear, and over-eat itself when wheat be cheap; something that increase at such a rate of percentage, and yield such another percentage of crime, and such another percentage of pauperism; something wholesale, of which vast fortune be make; something that occasionally rise like a sea, and do some harm and waste (chiefly to itself), and fall again; this she know the Coketown Hands to be. but, she have scarcely think more of separate they into unit, than of separate the sea itself into its component drop.
she stand for some moment look round the room. from the few chair, the few book, the common print, and the bed, she glance to the two woman, and to Stephen.
'I have come to speak to you, in consequence of what pass just now. I should like to be serviceable to you, if you will let I. be this your wife?'
Rachael raise her eye, and they sufficiently answer no, and drop again.
'I remember,' say Louisa, redden at her mistake; 'I recollect, now, to have hear your domestic misfortune speak of, though I be not attend to the particular at the time. it be not my meaning to ask a question that would give pain to any one here. if I should ask any other question that may happen to have that result, give I credit, if you please, for be in ignorance how to speak to you as I ought.'
as Stephen have but a little while ago instinctively address himself to she, so she now instinctively address herself to Rachael. her manner be short and abrupt, yet falter and timid.
'he have tell you what have pass between himself and my husband? you would be his first resource, I think.'
'I have hear the end of it, young lady,' say Rachael.
'do I understand, that, be reject by one employer, he would probably be reject by all? I think he say as much?'
'the chance be very small, young lady - next to nothing - for a man who get a bad name among they.'
'what shall I understand that you mean by a bad name?' 'the name of be troublesome.'
'then, by the prejudice of his own class, and by the prejudice of the other, he be sacrifice alike? be the two so deeply separate in this town, that there be no place whatever for an honest workman between they?'
Rachael shake her head in silence.
'he fall into suspicion,' say Louisa, 'with his fellow-weaver, because - he have make a promise not to be one of they. I think it must have be to you that he make that promise. might I ask you why he make it?'
Rachael burst into tear. 'I donot seek it of he, poor lad. I pray he to avoid trouble for his own good, little thinking hewould come to it through I. but I know hewould die a hundred death, ere ever hewould break his word. I know that of he well.'
Stephen have remain quietly attentive, in his usual thoughtful attitude, with his hand at his chin. he now speak in a voice rather less steady than usual.
'no one, except myseln, can ever know what honour, an' what love, an' respect, I bear to Rachael, or wi' what cause. when I pass that promess, I towd her true, she be th' Angel o' my life. 'twere a solemn promess. 'tis go fro' I, for ever.'
Louisa turn her head to he, and bent it with a deference that be new in she. she look from he to Rachael, and her feature soften. 'what will you do?' she ask he. and her voice have soften too.
'Weel, ma'am,' say Stephen, make the good of it, with a smile; 'when I ha finish off, I mun quit this part, and try another. fortnet or misfortnet, a man can but try; therebe nowt to be do wi'out tryin' - cept lay down and die.'
'how will you travel?'
'Afoot, my kind ledy, afoot.'
Louisa colour, and a purse appear in her hand. the rustling of a bank-note be audible, as she unfold one and lay it on the table.
'Rachael, will you tell he - for you know how, without offence - that this be freely his, to help he on his way? will you entreat he to take it?'
'I canna do that, young lady,' she answer, turn her head aside. 'bless you for think o' the poor lad wi' such tenderness. but 'tis for he to know his heart, and what be right accord to it.'
Louisa look, in part incredulous, in part frighten, in part overcome with quick sympathy, when this man of so much self- command, who have be so plain and steady through the late interview, lose his composure in a moment, and now stand with his hand before his face. she stretch out her, as if she would have touch he; then check herself, and remain still.
'not e'en Rachael,' say Stephen, when he stand again with his face uncover, 'could mak sitch a kind offerin, by onny word, kinder. T' show that Ibe not a man wi'out reason and gratitude, Iwill tak two pound. Iwill borrow 't for t' pay 't back. 'twill be the sweetest work as ever I ha do, that put it in my power t' acknowledge once more my lastin thankfulness for this present action.'
she be fain to take up the note again, and to substitute the much small sum he have name. he be neither courtly, nor handsome, nor picturesque, in any respect; and yet his manner of accept it, and of express his thank without more word, have a grace in it that Lord Chesterfield could not have teach his son in a century.
Tom have sit upon the bed, swing one leg and suck his walking- stick with sufficient unconcern, until the visit have attain this stage. see his sister ready to depart, he get up, rather hurriedly, and put in a word.
'just wait a moment, Loo! before we go, I should like to speak to he a moment. something come into my head. if youwill step out on the stair, Blackpool, Iwill mention it. never mind a light, man!' Tom be remarkably impatient of his move towards the cupboard, to get one. 'it donot want a light.'
Stephen follow he out, and Tom close the room door, and hold the lock in his hand.
'I say!' he whisper. 'I think I can do you a good turn. donot ask I what it be, because it may not come to anything. but therebe no harm in my trying.'
his breath fall like a flame of fire on Stephen's ear, it be so hot.
'that be our light porter at the Bank,' say Tom, 'who bring you the message to-night. I call he our light porter, because I belong to the Bank too.'
Stephen think, 'what a hurry he be in!' he speak so confusedly.
'well!' say Tom. 'now look here! when be you off?'
'T' day's Monday,' reply Stephen, consider. 'why, sir, Friday or Saturday, nigh 'bout.'
'Friday or Saturday,' say Tom. 'now look here! I be not sure that I can do you the good turn I want to do you - thatbe my sister, you know, in your room - but I may be able to, and if I should not be able to, therebe no harm do. so I tell you what. youwill know our light porter again?'
'yes, sure,' say Stephen.
'very well,' return Tom. 'when you leave work of a night, between this and your go away, just hang about the Bank an hour or so, will you? donot take on, as if you mean anything, if he should see you hang about there; because I shallnot put he up to speak to you, unless I find I can do you the service I want to do you. in that case hewill have a note or a message for you, but not else. now look here! you be sure you understand.'
he have worm a finger, in the darkness, through a button-hole of Stephen's coat, and be screw that corner of the garment tight up round and round, in an extraordinary manner.
'I understand, sir,' say Stephen.
'now look here!' repeat Tom. 'be sure you donot make any mistake then, and donot forget. I shall tell my sister as we go home, what I have in view, and shewill approve, I know. now look here! yoube all right, be you? you understand all about it? very well then. come along, Loo!'
he push the door open as he call to she, but do not return into the room, or wait to be light down the narrow stair. he be at the bottom when she begin to descend, and be in the street before she could take his arm.
Mrs. Pegler remain in her corner until the brother and sister be go, and until Stephen come back with the candle in his hand. she be in a state of inexpressible admiration of Mrs. Bounderby, and, like an unaccountable old woman, weep, 'because she be such a pretty dear.' yet Mrs. Pegler be so flurried lest the object of her admiration should return by chance, or anybody else should come, that her cheerfulness be end for that night. it be late too, to people who rise early and work hard; therefore the party break up; and Stephen and Rachael escort their mysterious acquaintance to the door of the Travellers' Coffee House, where they part from she.
they walk back together to the corner of the street where Rachael live, and as they draw nearer and near to it, silence creep upon they. when they come to the dark corner where their unfrequent meeting always end, they stop, still silent, as if both be afraid to speak.
'I shall strive t' see thee agen, Rachael, afore I go, but if not - '
'thou wilt not, Stephen, I know. 'tis well that we make up our mind to be open wi' one another.'
'Thou'rt awlus right. 'tis bold and well. I ha be thinkin then, Rachael, that as 'tis but a day or two that remain, 'twere well for thee, my dear, not t' be see wi' I. 't might bring thee into trouble, fur no good.'
''tis not for that, Stephen, that I mind. but thou know'st our old agreement. 'tis for that.'
'well, well,' say he. "tis well, onnyway.'
'thou'lt write to I, and tell I all that happen, Stephen?'
'yes. what can I say now, but Heaven be wi' thee, Heaven bless thee, Heaven thank thee and reward thee!'
'may it bless thee, Stephen, too, in all thy wandering, and send thee peace and rest at last!'
'I towd thee, my dear,' say Stephen Blackpool - 'that night - that I would never see or think o' onnything that anger I, but thou, so much well than I, should'st be beside it. Thou'rt beside it now. Thou mak'st I see it wi' a well eye. bless thee. good night. good-bye!'
it be but a hurried parting in a common street, yet it be a sacred remembrance to these two common people. utilitarian economist, skeleton of schoolmaster, Commissioners of Fact, genteel and use-up infidel, gabbler of many little dog'-eare creed, the poor you will have always with you. cultivate in they, while there be yet time, the utmost grace of the fancy and affection, to adorn their life so much in need of ornament; or, in the day of your triumph, when romance be utterly drive out of their soul, and they and a bare existence stand face to face, reality will take a wolfish turn, and make an end of you.
Stephen work the next day, and the next, uncheered by a word from any one, and shun in all his coming and going as before. at the end of the second day, he see land; at the end of the third, his loom stand empty.
he have overstay his hour in the street outside the Bank, on each of the two first evening; and nothing have happen there, good or bad. that he might not be remiss in his part of the engagement, he resolve to wait full two hour, on this third and last night.
there be the lady who have once keep Mr. Bounderby's house, sit at the first-floor window as he have see she before; and there be the light porter, sometimes talk with she there, and sometimes look over the blind below which have BANK upon it, and sometimes come to the door and stand on the step for a breath of air. when he first come out, Stephen think he might be look for he, and pass near; but the light porter only cast his wink eye upon he slightly, and say nothing.
two hour be a long stretch of lounge about, after a long day's labour. Stephen sit upon the step of a door, lean against a wall under an archway, stroll up and down, listen for the church clock, stop and watch child play in the street. some purpose or other be so natural to every one, that a mere loiterer always look and feel remarkable. when the first hour be out, Stephen even begin to have an uncomfortable sensation upon he of be for the time a disreputable character.
then come the lamplighter, and two lengthen line of light all down the long perspective of the street, until they be blend and lose in the distance. Mrs. Sparsit close the first-floor window, draw down the blind, and go up-stair. presently, a light go up-stair after she, pass first the fanlight of the door, and afterwards the two staircase window, on its way up. by and by, one corner of the second-floor blind be disturb, as if Mrs. Sparsit's eye be there; also the other corner, as if the light porter's eye be on that side. still, no communication be make to Stephen. much relieved when the two hour be at last accomplish, he go away at a quick pace, as a recompense for so much loitering.
he have only to take leave of his landlady, and lie down on his temporary bed upon the floor; for his bundle be make up for to- morrow, and all be arrange for his departure. he mean to be clear of the town very early; before the Hands be in the street.
it be barely daybreak, when, with a parting look round his room, mournfully wonder whether he should ever see it again, he go out. the town be as entirely desert as if the inhabitant have abandon it, rather than hold communication with he. everything look wan at that hour. even the come sun make but a pale waste in the sky, like a sad sea.
by the place where Rachael live, though it be not in his way; by the red brick street; by the great silent factory, not tremble yet; by the railway, where the danger-light be wan in the strengthening day; by the railway's crazy neighbourhood, half pull down and half build up; by scatter red brick villa, where the besmoke evergreen be sprinkle with a dirty powder, like untidy snuff-taker; by coal-dust path and many variety of ugliness; Stephen get to the top of the hill, and look back.
Day be shin radiantly upon the town then, and the bell be go for the morning work. domestic fire be not yet light, and the high chimney have the sky to themselves. puff out their poisonous volume, they would not be long in hide it; but, for half an hour, some of the many window be golden, which show the Coketown people a sun eternally in eclipse, through a medium of smoke glass.
so strange to turn from the chimney to the bird. so strange, to have the road-dust on his foot instead of the coal-grit. so strange to have live to his time of life, and yet to be begin like a boy this summer morning! with these musing in his mind, and his bundle under his arm, Stephen take his attentive face along the high road. and the tree arch over he, whisper that he leave a true and love heart behind.
CHAPTER VII - GUNPOWDER
MR. JAMES HARTHOUSE, 'go in' for his adopt party, soon begin to score. with the aid of a little more coach for the political sage, a little more genteel listlessness for the general society, and a tolerable management of the assumed honesty in dishonesty, most effective and most patronize of the polite deadly sin, he speedily come to be consider of much promise. the not be trouble with earnestness be a grand point in his favour, enable he to take to the hard fact fellow with as good a grace as if he have be bear one of the tribe, and to throw all other tribe overboard, as conscious hypocrite.
'whom none of we believe, my dear Mrs. Bounderby, and who do not believe themselves. the only difference between we and the professor of virtue or benevolence, or philanthropy - never mind the name - be, that we know it be all meaningless, and say so; while they know it equally and will never say so.'
why should she be shock or warn by this reiteration? it be not so unlike her father's principle, and her early training, that it need startle she. where be the great difference between the two school, when each chain she down to material reality, and inspire she with no faith in anything else? what be there in her soul for James Harthouse to destroy, which Thomas Gradgrind have nurture there in its state of innocence!
it be even the bad for she at this pass, that in her mind - implant there before her eminently practical father begin to form it - a struggle disposition to believe in a wide and nobler humanity than she have ever hear of, constantly strove with doubt and resentment. with doubt, because the aspiration have be so lay waste in her youth. with resentment, because of the wrong that have be do she, if it be indeed a whisper of the truth. upon a nature long accustom to self-suppression, thus tear and divide, the Harthouse philosophy come as a relief and justification. everything be hollow and worthless, she have miss nothing and sacrifice nothing. what do it matter, she have say to her father, when he propose her husband. what do it matter, she say still. with a scornful self-reliance, she ask herself, what do anything matter - and go on.
towards what? step by step, onward and downward, towards some end, yet so gradually, that she believe herself to remain motionless. as to Mr. Harthouse, whither he tend, he neither consider nor care. he have no particular design or plan before he: no energetic wickedness ruffle his lassitude. he be as much amuse and interested, at present, as it become so fine a gentleman to be; perhaps even more than it would have be consistent with his reputation to confess. soon after his arrival he languidly write to his brother, the honourable and jocular member, that the bounderby be 'great fun;' and far, that the female Bounderby, instead of be the Gorgon he have expect, be young, and remarkably pretty. after that, he write no more about they, and devote his leisure chiefly to their house. he be very often in their house, in his flitting and visiting about the Coketown district; and be much encourage by Mr. Bounderby. it be quite in Mr. Bounderby's gusty way to boast to all his world that he donot care about your highly connected people, but that if his wife Tom Gradgrind's daughter do, she be welcome to their company.
Mr. James Harthouse begin to think it would be a new sensation, if the face which change so beautifully for the whelp, would change for he.
he be quick enough to observe; he have a good memory, and do not forget a word of the brother's revelation. he interwove they with everything he see of the sister, and he begin to understand she. to be sure, the well and profounder part of her character be not within his scope of perception; for in nature, as in sea, depth answer unto depth; but he soon begin to read the rest with a student's eye.
Mr. Bounderby have take possession of a house and ground, about fifteen mile from the town, and accessible within a mile or two, by a railway stride on many arch over a wild country, undermine by desert coal-shafts, and spot at night by fire and black shape of stationary engine at pit' mouth. this country, gradually soften towards the neighbourhood of Mr. Bounderby's retreat, there mellow into a rustic landscape, golden with heath, and snowy with hawthorn in the spring of the year, and tremulous with leaf and their shadow all the summer time. the bank have foreclose a mortgage effect on the property thus pleasantly situate, by one of the Coketown magnate, who, in his determination to make a short cut than usual to an enormous fortune, overspeculate himself by about two hundred thousand pound. these accident do sometimes happen in the well regulated family of Coketown, but the bankrupt have no connexion whatever with the improvident class.
it afford Mr. Bounderby supreme satisfaction to instal himself in this snug little estate, and with demonstrative humility to grow cabbage in the flower-garden. he delight to live, barrack- fashion, among the elegant furniture, and he bully the very picture with his origin. 'why, sir,' he would say to a visitor, 'I be tell that nickit,' the late owner, 'give seven hundred pound for that Seabeach. now, to be plain with you, if I ever, in the whole course of my life, take seven look at it, at a hundred pound a look, it will be as much as I shall do. no, by George! I donot forget that I be Josiah Bounderby of Coketown. for year upon year, the only picture in my possession, or that I could have get into my possession, by any mean, unless I steal them, be the engraving of a man shave himself in a boot, on the black bottle that I be overjoyed to use in clean boot with, and that I sell when they be empty for a farthing a-piece, and glad to get it!'
then he would address Mr. Harthouse in the same style.
'Harthouse, you have a couple of horse down here. bring half a dozen more if you like, and wewill find room for them. therebe stable in this place for a dozen horse; and unless Nickits be belie, he keep the full number. a round dozen of them, sir. when that man be a boy, he go to Westminster School. go to Westminster School as a King's Scholar, when I be principally live on garbage, and sleep in market basket. why, if I want to keep a dozen horse - which I donot, for one's enough for I - I couldnot bear to see them in their stall here, and think what my own lodging use to be. I couldnot look at them, sir, and not order them out. yet so thing come round. you see this place; you know what sort of a place it be; you be aware that therebe not a completer place of its size in this kingdom or elsewhere - I donot care where - and here, get into the middle of it, like a maggot into a nut, be Josiah Bounderby. while nickit (as a man come into my office, and tell I yesterday), Nickits, who use to act in Latin, in the Westminster School play, with the chief- justice and nobility of this country applaud he till they be black in the face, be drivel at this minute - drivelling, sir! - in a fifth floor, up a narrow dark back street in Antwerp.'
it be among the leafy shadow of this retirement, in the long sultry summer day, that Mr. Harthouse begin to prove the face which have set he wonder when he first see it, and to try if it would change for he.
'Mrs. Bounderby, I esteem it a most fortunate accident that I find you alone here. I have for some time have a particular wish to speak to you.'
it be not by any wonderful accident that he find she, the time of day be that at which she be always alone, and the place be her favourite resort. it be an opening in a dark wood, where some felled tree lay, and where she would sit watch the fallen leaf of last year, as she have watch the fall ash at home.
he sit down beside she, with a glance at her face.
'your brother. my young friend Tom - '
her colour brighten, and she turn to he with a look of interest. 'I never in my life,' he think, 'see anything so remarkable and so captivating as the lighting of those feature!' his face betray his thought - perhaps without betray he, for it might have be accord to its instruction so to do.
'pardon I. the expression of your sisterly interest be so beautiful - Tom should be so proud of it - I know this be inexcusable, but I be so compel to admire.'
'be so impulsive,' she say composedly.
'Mrs. Bounderby, no: you know I make no pretence with you. you know I be a sordid piece of human nature, ready to sell myself at any time for any reasonable sum, and altogether incapable of any arcadian proceeding whatever.'
'I be wait,' she return, 'for your further reference to my brother.'
'you be rigid with I, and I deserve it. I be as worthless a dog as you will find, except that I be not false - not false. but you surprise and start I from my subject, which be your brother. I have an interest in he.'
'have you an interest in anything, Mr. Harthouse?' she ask, half incredulously and half gratefully.
'if you have ask I when I first come here, I should have say no. I must say now - even at the hazard of appear to make a pretence, and of justly awaken your incredulity - yes.'
she make a slight movement, as if she be try to speak, but could not find voice; at length she say, 'Mr. Harthouse, I give you credit for be interested in my brother.'
'thank you. I claim to deserve it. you know how little I do claim, but I will go that length. you have do so much for he, you be so fond of he; your whole life, Mrs. Bounderby, express such charming self-forgetfulness on his account - pardon I again - I be run wide of the subject. I be interested in he for his own sake.'
she have make the slight action possible, as if she would have rise in a hurry and go away. he have turn the course of what he say at that instant, and she remain.
'Mrs. Bounderby,' he resume, in a light manner, and yet with a show of effort in assume it, which be even more expressive than the manner he dismiss; 'it be no irrevocable offence in a young fellow of your brother's year, if he be heedless, inconsiderate, and expensive - a little dissipate, in the common phrase. be he?'
'yes.'
'allow I to be frank. do you think he game at all?'
'I think he make bet.' Mr. Harthouse wait, as if that be not her whole answer, she add, 'I know he do.'
'of course he lose?'
'yes.'
'everybody do lose who bet. may I hint at the probability of your sometimes supply he with money for these purpose?'
she sit, look down; but, at this question, raise her eye searchingly and a little resentfully.
'acquit I of impertinent curiosity, my dear Mrs. Bounderby. I think Tom may be gradually fall into trouble, and I wish to stretch out a help hand to he from the depth of my wicked experience. - shall I say again, for his sake? be that necessary?'
she seem to try to answer, but nothing come of it.
'candidly to confess everything that have occur to I,' say James Harthouse, again glide with the same appearance of effort into his more airy manner; 'I will confide to you my doubt whether he have have many advantage. whether - forgive my plainness - whether any great amount of confidence be likely to have be establish between himself and his most worthy father.'
'I do not,' say Louisa, flush with her own great remembrance in that wise, 'think it likely.'
'or, between himself, and - I may trust to your perfect understanding of my meaning, I be sure - and his highly esteemed brother-in-law.' she flush deep and deep, and be burn red when she reply in a fainter voice, 'I do not think that likely, either.'
'Mrs. Bounderby,' say Harthouse, after a short silence, 'may there be a well confidence between yourself and I? Tom have borrow a considerable sum of you?'
'you will understand, Mr. Harthouse,' she return, after some indecision: she have be more or less uncertain, and trouble throughout the conversation, and yet have in the main preserve her self-contain manner; 'you will understand that if I tell you what you press to know, it be not by way of complaint or regret. I would never complain of anything, and what I have do I do not in the least regret.'
'so spirited, too!' think James Harthouse.
'when I marry, I find that my brother be even at that time heavily in debt. heavily for he, I mean. heavily enough to oblige I to sell some trinket. they be no sacrifice. I sell they very willingly. I attach no value to they. they, be quite worthless to I.'
either she see in his face that he know, or she only fear in her conscience that he know, that she speak of some of her husband's gift. she stop, and redden again. if he have not know it before, he would have know it then, though he have be a much dull man than he be.
'since then, I have give my brother, at various time, what money I could spare: in short, what money I have have. confide in you at all, on the faith of the interest you profess for he, I will not do so by half. since you have be in the habit of visit here, he have want in one sum as much as a hundred pound. I have not be able to give it to he. I have feel uneasy for the consequence of his be so involved, but I have keep these secret until now, when I trust they to your honour. I have hold no confidence with any one, because - you anticipate my reason just now.' she abruptly break off.
he be a ready man, and he see, and seize, an opportunity here of present her own image to she, slightly disguise as her brother.
'Mrs. Bounderby, though a graceless person, of the world worldly, I feel the utmost interest, I assure you, in what you tell I. I cannot possibly be hard upon your brother. I understand and share the wise consideration with which you regard his error. with all possible respect both for Mr. Gradgrind and for Mr. Bounderby, I think I perceive that he have not be fortunate in his training. breed at a disadvantage towards the society in which he have his part to play, he rush into these extreme for himself, from opposite extreme that have long be force - with the very good intention we have no doubt - upon he. Mr. Bounderby's fine bluff english independence, though a most charming characteristic, do not - as we have agree - invite confidence. if I might venture to remark that it be the least in the world deficient in that delicacy to which a youth mistaken, a character misconceive, and ability misdirect, would turn for relief and guidance, I should express what it present to my own view.'
as she sit look straight before she, across the change light upon the grass into the darkness of the wood beyond, he see in her face her application of his very distinctly utter word.
'all allowance,' he continue, 'must be make. I have one great fault to find with Tom, however, which I cannot forgive, and for which I take he heavily to account.'
Louisa turn her eye to his face, and ask he what fault be that?
'perhaps,' he return, 'I have say enough. perhaps it would have be well, on the whole, if no allusion to it have escape I.'
'you alarm I, Mr. Harthouse. pray let I know it.'
'to relieve you from needless apprehension - and as this confidence regard your brother, which I prize I be sure above all possible thing, have be establish between we - I obey. I cannot forgive he for not be more sensible in every word, look, and act of his life, of the affection of his good friend; of the devotion of his good friend; of her unselfishness; of her sacrifice. the return he make she, within my observation, be a very poor one. what she have do for he demand his constant love and gratitude, not his ill- humour and caprice. careless fellow as I be, I be not so indifferent, Mrs. Bounderby, as to be regardless of this vice in your brother, or incline to consider it a venial offence.'
the wood float before she, for her eye be suffuse with tear. they rise from a deep well, long conceal, and her heart be fill with acute pain that find no relief in they.
'in a word, it be to correct your brother in this, Mrs. Bounderby, that I must aspire. my well knowledge of his circumstance, and my direction and advice in extricate they - rather valuable, I hope, as come from a scapegrace on a much large scale - will give I some influence over he, and all I gain I shall certainly use towards this end. I have say enough, and more than enough. I seem to be protest that I be a sort of good fellow, when, upon my honour, I have not the least intention to make any protestation to that effect, and openly announce that I be nothing of the sort. yonder, among the tree,' he add, have lift up his eye and look about; for he have watch she closely until now; 'be your brother himself; no doubt, just come down. as he seem to be loiter in this direction, it may be as well, perhaps, to walk towards he, and throw ourselves in his way. he have be very silent and doleful of late. perhaps, his brotherly conscience be touch - if there be such thing as conscience. though, upon my honour, I hear of they much too often to believe in they.'
he assist she to rise, and she take his arm, and they advance to meet the whelp. he be idly beat the branch as he lounge along: or he stoop viciously to rip the moss from the tree with his stick. he be startle when they come upon he while he be engage in this latter pastime, and his colour change.
'Halloa!' he stammer; 'I donot know you be here.'
'whose name, Tom,' say Mr. Harthouse, put his hand upon his shoulder and turn he, so that they all three walk towards the house together, 'have you be carve on the tree?'
'whose name?' return Tom. 'oh! you mean what girl's name?'
'you have a suspicious appearance of inscribe some fair creature's on the bark, Tom.'
'not much of that, Mr. Harthouse, unless some fair creature with a slash fortune at her own disposal would take a fancy to I. or she might be as ugly as she be rich, without any fear of lose I. Iwould carve her name as often as she like.'
'I be afraid you be mercenary, Tom.'
'mercenary,' repeat Tom. 'who be not mercenary? ask my sister.'
'have you so prove it to be a failing of mine, Tom?' say Louisa, show no other sense of his discontent and ill-nature.
'you know whether the cap fit you, Loo,' return her brother sulkily. 'if it do, you can wear it.'
'Tom be misanthropical to-day, as all bored people be now and then,' say Mr. Harthouse. 'donot believe he, Mrs. Bounderby. he know much well. I shall disclose some of his opinion of you, privately express to I, unless he relent a little.'
'at all event, Mr. Harthouse,' say Tom, soften in his admiration of his patron, but shake his head sullenly too, 'you cannot tell she that I ever praise she for be mercenary. I may have praise she for be the contrary, and I should do it again, if I have as good reason. however, never mind this now; itbe not very interesting to you, and I be sick of the subject.'
they walk on to the house, where Louisa quit her visitor's arm and go in. he stand look after she, as she ascend the step, and pass into the shadow of the door; then put his hand upon her brother's shoulder again, and invite he with a confidential nod to a walk in the garden.
'Tom, my fine fellow, I want to have a word with you.'
they have stop among a disorder of rose - it be part of Mr. Bounderby's humility to keep Nickits's rose on a reduce scale - and Tom sit down on a terrace-parapet, pluck bud and pick they to piece; while his powerful Familiar stand over he, with a foot upon the parapet, and his figure easily rest on the arm support by that knee. they be just visible from her window. perhaps she see they.
'Tom, whatbe the matter?'
'oh! Mr. Harthouse,' say Tom with a groan, 'I be hard up, and bother out of my life.'
'my good fellow, so be I.'
'you!' return Tom. 'you be the picture of independence. Mr. Harthouse, I be in a horrible mess. you have no idea what a state I have get myself into - what a state my sister might have get I out of, if she would only have do it.'
he take to bite the rosebud now, and tear they away from his tooth with a hand that tremble like an infirm old man's. after one exceedingly observant look at he, his companion relapse into his light air.
'Tom, you be inconsiderate: you expect too much of your sister. you have have money of she, you dog, you know you have.'
'well, Mr. Harthouse, I know I have. how else be I to get it? here's old Bounderby always boast that at my age he live upon twopence a month, or something of that sort. herebe my father draw what he call a line, and tie I down to it from a baby, neck and heel. herebe my mother who never have anything of her own, except her complaint. what be a fellow to do for money, and where be I to look for it, if not to my sister?'
he be almost cry, and scatter the bud about by dozen. Mr. Harthouse take he persuasively by the coat.
'but, my dear Tom, if your sister have not get it - '
'not get it, Mr. Harthouse? I donot say she have get it. I may have want more than she be likely to have get. but then she ought to get it. she could get it. itbe of no use pretend to make a secret of matter now, after what I have tell you already; you know she donot marry old Bounderby for her own sake, or for his sake, but for my sake. then why donot she get what I want, out of he, for my sake? she be not oblige to say what she be go to do with it; she be sharp enough; she could manage to coax it out of he, if she choose. then why donot she choose, when I tell she of what consequence it be? but no. there she sit in his company like a stone, instead of make herself agreeable and get it easily. I donot know what you may call this, but I call it unnatural conduct.'
there be a piece of ornamental water immediately below the parapet, on the other side, into which Mr. James Harthouse have a very strong inclination to pitch Mr. Thomas Gradgrind junior, as the injured man of Coketown threaten to pitch their property into the Atlantic. but he preserve his easy attitude; and nothing more solid go over the stone balustrades than the accumulate rosebud now float about, a little surface-island.
'my dear Tom,' say Harthouse, 'let I try to be your banker.'
'for God's sake,' reply Tom, suddenly, 'donot talk about banker!' and very white he look, in contrast with the rose. very white.
Mr. Harthouse, as a thoroughly well-breed man, accustom to the good society, be not to be surprised - he could as soon have be affect - but he raise his eyelid a little more, as if they be lift by a feeble touch of wonder. albeit it be as much against the precept of his school to wonder, as it be against the doctrine of the Gradgrind College.
'what be the present need, Tom? three figure? out with they. say what they be.'
'Mr. Harthouse,' return Tom, now actually cry; and his tear be well than his injury, however pitiful a figure he make: 'itbe too late; the money be of no use to I at present. I should have have it before to be of use to I. but I be very much oblige to you; yoube a true friend.'
a true friend! 'Whelp, whelp!' think Mr. Harthouse, lazily; 'what an ass you be!'
'and I take your offer as a great kindness,' say Tom, grasp his hand. 'as a great kindness, Mr. Harthouse.'
'well,' return the other, 'it may be of more use by and by. and, my good fellow, if you will open your bedevilment to I when they come thick upon you, I may show you well way out of they than you can find for yourself.'
'thank you,' say Tom, shake his head dismally, and chew rosebuds. 'I wish I have know you soon, Mr. Harthouse.'
'now, you see, Tom,' say Mr. Harthouse in conclusion, himself toss over a rose or two, as a contribution to the island, which be always drift to the wall as if it want to become a part of the mainland: 'every man be selfish in everything he do, and I be exactly like the rest of my fellow-creature. I be desperately intent;' the languor of his desperation be quite tropical; 'on your softening towards your sister - which you ought to do; and on your be a more loving and agreeable sort of brother - which you ought to be.'
'I will be, Mr. Harthouse.'
'no time like the present, Tom. begin at once.'
'certainly I will. and my sister Loo shall say so.'
'have make which bargain, Tom,' say Harthouse, clap he on the shoulder again, with an air which leave he at liberty to infer - as he do, poor fool - that this condition be impose upon he in mere careless good nature to lessen his sense of obligation, 'we will tear ourselves asunder until dinner-time.'
when Tom appear before dinner, though his mind seem heavy enough, his body be on the alert; and he appear before Mr. Bounderby come in. 'I donot mean to be cross, Loo,' he say, give she his hand, and kiss she. 'I know you be fond of I, and you know I be fond of you.'
after this, there be a smile upon Louisa's face that day, for some one else. alas, for some one else!
'so much the less be the whelp the only creature that she care for,' think James Harthouse, reverse the reflection of his first day's knowledge of her pretty face. 'so much the less, so much the less.'
CHAPTER VIII - EXPLOSION
the next morning be too bright a morning for sleep, and James Harthouse rise early, and sit in the pleasant bay window of his dressing-room, smoke the rare tobacco that have have so wholesome an influence on his young friend. repose in the sunlight, with the fragrance of his eastern pipe about he, and the dreamy smoke vanish into the air, so rich and soft with summer odour, he reckon up his advantage as an idle winner might count his gain. he be not at all bored for the time, and could give his mind to it.
he have establish a confidence with she, from which her husband be exclude. he have establish a confidence with she, that absolutely turn upon her indifference towards her husband, and the absence, now and at all time, of any congeniality between they. he have artfully, but plainly, assure she that he know her heart in its last most delicate recess; he have come so near to she through its tender sentiment; he have associate himself with that feeling; and the barrier behind which she live, have melt away. all very odd, and very satisfactory!
and yet he have not, even now, any earnest wickedness of purpose in he. publicly and privately, it be much well for the age in which he live, that he and the legion of whom he be one be designedly bad, than indifferent and purposeless. it be the drift iceberg set with any current anywhere, that wreck the ship.
when the devil goeth about like a roar lion, he goeth about in a shape by which few but savage and hunter be attract. but, when he be trim, smooth, and varnish, accord to the mode; when he be aweary of vice, and aweary of virtue, use up as to brimstone, and use up as to bliss; then, whether he take to the serve out of red tape, or to the kindling of red fire, he be the very Devil.
so James Harthouse recline in the window, indolently smoking, and reckon up the step he have take on the road by which he happen to be travel. the end to which it lead be before he, pretty plainly; but he trouble himself with no calculation about it. what will be, will be.
as he have rather a long ride to take that day - for there be a public occasion 'to do' at some distance, which afford a tolerable opportunity of go in for the Gradgrind man - he dress early and go down to breakfast. he be anxious to see if she have relapse since the previous evening. no. he resume where he have leave off. there be a look of interest for he again.
he get through the day as much (or as little) to his own satisfaction, as be to be expect under the fatigue circumstance; and come rid back at six o'clock. there be a sweep of some half-mile between the lodge and the house, and he be rid along at a foot pace over the smooth gravel, once Nickits's, when Mr. Bounderby burst out of the shrubbery, with such violence as to make his horse shy across the road.
'Harthouse!' cry Mr. Bounderby. 'have you hear?'
'heard what?' say Harthouse, soothe his horse, and inwardly favour Mr. Bounderby with no good wish.
'then you havenot hear!'
'I have hear you, and so have this brute. I have hear nothing else.'
Mr. Bounderby, red and hot, plant himself in the centre of the path before the horse's head, to explode his bombshell with more effect.
'the Bank's rob!'
'you donot mean it!'
'rob last night, sir. rob in an extraordinary manner. rob with a false key.'
'of much?'
Mr. Bounderby, in his desire to make the most of it, really seem mortify by be oblige to reply, 'why, no; not of very much. but it might have be.'
'of how much?'
'oh! as a sum - if you stick to a sum - of not more than a hundred and fifty pound,' say Bounderby, with impatience. 'but itbe not the sum; itbe the fact. itbe the fact of the Bank be rob, thatbe the important circumstance. I be surprised you donot see it.'
'my dear Bounderby,' say James, dismounting, and give his bridle to his servant, 'I do see it; and be as overcome as you can possibly desire I to be, by the spectacle afford to my mental view. nevertheless, I may be allow, I hope, to congratulate you - which I do with all my soul, I assure you - on your not have sustain a great loss.'
'thank'ee,' reply Bounderby, in a short, ungracious manner. 'but I tell you what. it might have be twenty thousand pound.'
'I suppose it might.'
'suppose it might! by the Lord, you may suppose so. by George!' say Mr. Bounderby, with sundry menacing nod and shake of his head. 'it might have be twice twenty. therebe no knowing what it would have be, or wouldnot have be, as it be, but for the fellow' be disturb.'
Louisa have come up now, and Mrs. Sparsit, and Bitzer.
'here's Tom Gradgrind's daughter know pretty well what it might have be, if you donot,' bluster Bounderby. 'drop, sir, as if she be shoot when I tell she! never know she do such a thing before. do her credit, under the circumstance, in my opinion!'
she still look faint and pale. James Harthouse beg she to take his arm; and as they move on very slowly, ask she how the robbery have be commit.
'why, I be go to tell you,' say Bounderby, irritably give his arm to Mrs. Sparsit. 'if you havenot be so mighty particular about the sum, I should have begin to tell you before. you know this lady (for she be a lady), Mrs. Sparsit?'
'I have already have the honour - '
'very well. and this young man, Bitzer, you see he too on the same occasion?' Mr. Harthouse incline his head in assent, and Bitzer knuckle his forehead.
'very well. they live at the Bank. you know they live at the Bank, perhaps? very well. yesterday afternoon, at the close of business hour, everything be put away as usual. in the iron room that this young fellow sleep outside of, there be never mind how much. in the little safe in young Tom's closet, the safe use for petty purpose, there be a hundred and fifty odd pound.'
'a hundred and fifty-four, seven, one,' say Bitzer.
'come!' retort Bounderby, stop to wheel round upon he, 'letus have none of your interruption. itbe enough to be rob while yoube snore because yoube too comfortable, without be put right with your four seven one. I donot snore, myself, when I be your age, let I tell you. I havenot victual enough to snore. and I donot four seven one. not if I know it.'
Bitzer knuckle his forehead again, in a sneaking manner, and seem at once particularly impressed and depress by the instance last give of Mr. Bounderby's moral abstinence.
'a hundred and fifty odd pound,' resume Mr. Bounderby. 'that sum of money, young Tom lock in his safe, not a very strong safe, but thatbe no matter now. everything be leave, all right. some time in the night, while this young fellow snore - Mrs. Sparsit, ma'am, you say you have hear he snore?'
'Sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit, 'I cannot say that I have hear he precisely snore, and therefore must not make that statement. but on winter evening, when he have fall asleep at his table, I have hear he, what I should prefer to describe as partially choke. I have hear he on such occasion produce sound of a nature similar to what may be sometimes hear in dutch clock. not,' say Mrs. Sparsit, with a lofty sense of give strict evidence, 'that I would convey any imputation on his moral character. far from it. I have always consider Bitzer a young man of the most upright principle; and to that I beg to bear my testimony.'
'well!' say the exasperate Bounderby, 'while he be snore, or choke, or Dutch-clocking, or something or other - be asleep - some fellow, somehow, whether previously conceal in the house or not remain to be see, get to young Tom's safe, force it, and abstract the content. be then disturb, they make off; let themselves out at the main door, and double-lock it again (it be double-locked, and the key under Mrs. Sparsit's pillow) with a false key, which be pick up in the street near the Bank, about twelve o'clock to-day. no alarm take place, till this chap, Bitzer, turn out this morning, and begin to open and prepare the office for business. then, look at Tom's safe, he see the door ajar, and find the lock force, and the money go.'
'where be Tom, by the by?' ask Harthouse, glance round.
'he have be help the police,' say Bounderby, 'and stay behind at the Bank. I wish these fellow have try to rob I when I be at his time of life. they would have be out of pocket if they have invest eighteenpence in the job; I can tell them that.'
'be anybody suspect?'
'suspect? I should think there be somebody suspect. Egod!' say Bounderby, relinquish Mrs. Sparsit's arm to wipe his heated head. 'Josiah Bounderby of Coketown be not to be plunder and nobody suspect. no, thank you!'
might Mr. Harthouse inquire who be suspect?
'well,' say Bounderby, stop and face about to confront they all, 'Iwill tell you. itbe not to be mention everywhere; itbe not to be mention anywhere: in order that the scoundrel concern (therebe a gang of them) may be throw off their guard. so take this in confidence. now wait a bit.' Mr. Bounderby wipe his head again. 'what should you say to;' here he violently explode: 'to a Hand be in it?'
'I hope,' say Harthouse, lazily, 'not our friend Blackpot?'
'say Pool instead of Pot, sir,' return Bounderby, 'and thatbe the man.'
Louisa faintly utter some word of incredulity and surprise.
'o yes! I know!' say Bounderby, immediately catch at the sound. 'I know! I be use to that. I know all about it. they be the fine people in the world, these fellow be. they have get the gift of the gab, they have. they only want to have their right explain to they, they do. but I tell you what. show I a dissatisfied hand, and Iwill show you a man thatbe fit for anything bad, I donot care what it be.'
another of the popular fiction of Coketown, which some pain have be take to disseminate - and which some people really believe.
'but I be acquaint with these chap,' say Bounderby. 'I can read them off, like book. Mrs. Sparsit, ma'am, I appeal to you. what warning do I give that fellow, the first time he set foot in the house, when the express object of his visit be to know how he could knock Religion over, and floor the Established Church? Mrs. Sparsit, in point of high connexion, you be on a level with the aristocracy, - do I say, or do I not say, to that fellow, "you cannot hide the truth from I: you be not the kind of fellow I like; youwill come to no good"?'
'assuredly, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit, 'you do, in a highly impressive manner, give he such an admonition.'
'when he shock you, ma'am,' say Bounderby; 'when he shock your feeling?'
'yes, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit, with a meek shake of her head, 'he certainly do so. though I do not mean to say but that my feeling may be weak on such point - more foolish if the term be prefer - than they might have be, if I have always occupy my present position.'
Mr. Bounderby star with a bursting pride at Mr. Harthouse, as much as to say, 'I be the proprietor of this female, and shebe worth your attention, I think.' then, resume his discourse.
'you can recall for yourself, Harthouse, what I say to he when you see he. I donot mince the matter with he. I be never mealy with them. I know them. very well, sir. three day after that, he bolt. go off, nobody know where: as my mother do in my infancy - only with this difference, that he be a bad subject than my mother, if possible. what do he do before he go? what do you say;' Mr. Bounderby, with his hat in his hand, give a beat upon the crown at every little division of his sentence, as if it be a tambourine; 'to his be see - night after night - watch the Bank? - to his lurking about there - after dark? - to its striking Mrs. Sparsit - that he could be lurk for no good - to her call Bitzer's attention to he, and their both take notice of he - and to its appearing on inquiry to-day - that he be also notice by the neighbour?' have come to the climax, Mr. Bounderby, like an oriental dancer, put his tambourine on his head.
'suspicious,' say James Harthouse, 'certainly.'
'I think so, sir,' say Bounderby, with a defiant nod. 'I think so. but there be more of them in it. therebe an old woman. one never hear of these thing till the mischief's do; all sort of defect be find out in the stable door after the horse be steal; therebe an old woman turn up now. an old woman who seem to have be fly into town on a broomstick, every now and then. she watch the place a whole day before this fellow begin, and on the night when you see he, she steal away with he and hold a council with he - I suppose, to make her report on go off duty, and be damn to she.'
there be such a person in the room that night, and she shrink from observation, think Louisa.
'this be not all of them, even as we already know them,' say Bounderby, with many nod of hide meaning. 'but I have say enough for the present. youwill have the goodness to keep it quiet, and mention it to no one. it may take time, but we shall have them. itbe policy to give them line enough, and therebe no objection to that.'
'of course, they will be punish with the utmost rigour of the law, as notice-board observe,' reply James Harthouse, 'and serve they right. fellow who go in for bank must take the consequence. if there be no consequence, we should all go in for bank.' he have gently take Louisa's parasol from her hand, and have put it up for she; and she walk under its shade, though the sun do not shine there.
'for the present, Loo Bounderby,' say her husband, 'herebe Mrs. Sparsit to look after. Mrs. Sparsit's nerve have be act upon by this business, and shewill stay here a day or two. so make her comfortable.'
'thank you very much, sir,' that discreet lady observe, 'but pray do not let my comfort be a consideration. anything will do for I.'
it soon appear that if Mrs. Sparsit have a failing in her association with that domestic establishment, it be that she be so excessively regardless of herself and regardful of other, as to be a nuisance. on be show her chamber, she be so dreadfully sensible of its comfort as to suggest the inference that she would have prefer to pass the night on the mangle in the laundry. true, the Powlers and the scadgerse be accustom to splendour, 'but it be my duty to remember,' Mrs. Sparsit be fond of observe with a lofty grace: particularly when any of the domestic be present, 'that what I be, I be no long. indeed,' say she, 'if I could altogether cancel the remembrance that Mr. Sparsit be a Powler, or that I myself be relate to the Scadgers family; or if I could even revoke the fact, and make myself a person of common descent and ordinary connexion; I would gladly do so. I should think it, under exist circumstance, right to do so.' the same hermitical state of mind lead to her renunciation of make dish and wine at dinner, until fairly command by Mr. Bounderby to take they; when she say, 'indeed you be very good, sir;' and depart from a resolution of which she have make rather formal and public announcement, to 'wait for the simple mutton.' she be likewise deeply apologetic for want the salt; and, feel amiably bind to bear out Mr. Bounderby to the full extent in the testimony he have bear to her nerve, occasionally sit back in her chair and silently weep; at which period a tear of large dimension, like a crystal ear-ring, might be observe (or rather, must be, for it insist on public notice) slide down her roman nose.
but Mrs. Sparsit's great point, first and last, be her determination to pity Mr. Bounderby. there be occasion when in look at he she be involuntarily move to shake her head, as who would say, 'alas, poor Yorick!' after allow herself to be betray into these evidence of emotion, she would force a lambent brightness, and would be fitfully cheerful, and would say, 'you have still good spirit, sir, I be thankful to find;' and would appear to hail it as a blessed dispensation that Mr. Bounderby bear up as he do. one idiosyncrasy for which she often apologize, she find it excessively difficult to conquer. she have a curious propensity to call Mrs. Bounderby 'Miss Gradgrind,' and yield to it some three or four score time in the course of the evening. her repetition of this mistake cover Mrs. Sparsit with modest confusion; but indeed, she say, it seem so natural to say Miss Gradgrind: whereas, to persuade herself that the young lady whom she have have the happiness of know from a child could be really and truly Mrs. Bounderby, she find almost impossible. it be a further singularity of this remarkable case, that the more she think about it, the more impossible it appear; 'the difference,' she observe, 'be such.'
in the drawing-room after dinner, Mr. Bounderby try the case of the robbery, examine the witness, make note of the evidence, find the suspect person guilty, and sentence they to the extreme punishment of the law. that do, Bitzer be dismiss to town with instruction to recommend Tom to come home by the mail- train.
when candle be bring, Mrs. Sparsit murmur, 'donot be low, sir. pray let I see you cheerful, sir, as I use to do.' Mr. Bounderby, upon whom these consolation have begin to produce the effect of make he, in a bull-head blundering way, sentimental, sigh like some large sea-animal. 'I cannot bear to see you so, sir,' say Mrs. Sparsit. 'try a hand at backgammon, sir, as you use to do when I have the honour of live under your roof.' 'I havenot play backgammon, ma'am,' say Mr. Bounderby, 'since that time.' 'no, sir,' say Mrs. Sparsit, soothingly, 'I be aware that you have not. I remember that Miss Gradgrind take no interest in the game. but I shall be happy, sir, if you will condescend.'
they play near a window, open on the garden. it be a fine night: not moonlight, but sultry and fragrant. louisa and Mr. Harthouse stroll out into the garden, where their voice could be hear in the stillness, though not what they say. Mrs. Sparsit, from her place at the backgammon board, be constantly strain her eye to pierce the shadow without. 'whatbe the matter, ma'am? ' say Mr. Bounderby; 'you donot see a fire, do you?' 'oh dear no, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit, 'I be think of the dew.' 'what have you get to do with the dew, ma'am?' say Mr. Bounderby. 'itbe not myself, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit, 'I be fearful of Miss Gradgrind's take cold.' 'she never take cold,' say Mr. Bounderby. 'really, sir?' say Mrs. Sparsit. and be affect with a cough in her throat.
when the time draw near for retire, Mr. Bounderby take a glass of water. 'oh, sir?' say Mrs. Sparsit. 'not your sherry warm, with lemon-peel and nutmeg?' 'why, I have get out of the habit of take it now, ma'am,' say Mr. Bounderby. 'the morebe the pity, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit; 'you be lose all your good old habit. cheer up, sir! if Miss Gradgrind will permit I, I will offer to make it for you, as I have often do.'
Miss Gradgrind readily permit Mrs. Sparsit to do anything she please, that considerate lady make the beverage, and hand it to Mr. Bounderby. 'it will do you good, sir. it will warm your heart. it be the sort of thing you want, and ought to take, sir.' and when Mr. Bounderby say, 'your health, ma'am!' she answer with great feeling, 'thank you, sir. the same to you, and happiness also.' finally, she wish he good night, with great pathos; and Mr. Bounderby go to bed, with a maudlin persuasion that he have be cross in something tender, though he could not, for his life, have mention what it be.
long after Louisa have undressed and lain down, she watch and wait for her brother's come home. that could hardly be, she know, until an hour past midnight; but in the country silence, which do anything but calm the trouble of her thought, time lag wearily. at last, when the darkness and stillness have seem for hour to thicken one another, she hear the bell at the gate. she feel as though she would have be glad that it ring on until daylight; but it cease, and the circle of its last sound spread out fainter and wide in the air, and all be dead again.
she wait yet some quarter of an hour, as she judge. then she arise, put on a loose robe, and go out of her room in the dark, and up the staircase to her brother's room. his door be shut, she softly open it and speak to he, approach his bed with a noiseless step.
she kneel down beside it, pass her arm over his neck, and draw his face to her. she know that he only feign to be asleep, but she say nothing to he.
he start by and by as if he be just then awaken, and ask who that be, and what be the matter?
'Tom, have you anything to tell I? if ever you love I in your life, and have anything conceal from every one besides, tell it to I.'
'I donot know what you mean, Loo. you have be dream.'
'my dear brother:' she lay her head down on his pillow, and her hair flow over he as if she would hide he from every one but herself: 'be there nothing that you have to tell I? be there nothing you can tell I if you will? you can tell I nothing that will change I. o Tom, tell I the truth!'
'I donot know what you mean, Loo!'
'as you lie here alone, my dear, in the melancholy night, so you must lie somewhere one night, when even I, if I be live then, shall have leave you. as I be here beside you, barefoot, unclothed, undistinguishable in darkness, so must I lie through all the night of my decay, until I be dust. in the name of that time, Tom, tell I the truth now!'
'what be it you want to know?'
'you may be certain;' in the energy of her love she take he to her bosom as if he be a child; 'that I will not reproach you. you may be certain that I will be compassionate and true to you. you may be certain that I will save you at whatever cost. o Tom, have you nothing to tell I? Whisper very softly. say only "yes," and I shall understand you!'
she turn she ear to his lip, but he remain doggedly silent.
'not a word, Tom?'
'how can I say yes, or how can I say no, when I donot know what you mean? Loo, you be a brave, kind girl, worthy I begin to think of a well brother than I be. but I have nothing more to say. go to bed, go to bed.'
'you be tired,' she whisper presently, more in her usual way.
'yes, I be quite tired out.'
'you have be so hurried and disturb to-day. have any fresh discovery be make?'
'only those you have hear of, from - he.'
'Tom, have you say to any one that we make a visit to those people, and that we see those three together?'
'no. donot you yourself particularly ask I to keep it quiet when you ask I to go there with you?'
'yes. but I do not know then what be go to happen.'
'nor I neither. how could I?'
he be very quick upon she with this retort.
'ought I to say, after what have happen,' say his sister, stand by the bed - she have gradually withdraw herself and rise, 'that I make that visit? should I say so? must I say so?'
'Good Heavens, Loo,' return her brother, 'you be not in the habit of ask my advice. say what you like. if you keep it to yourself, I shall keep it to myself. if you disclose it, therebe an end of it.'
it be too dark for either to see the other's face; but each seem very attentive, and to consider before speak.
'Tom, do you believe the man I give the money to, be really implicate in this crime?'
'I donot know. I donot see why he shouldnot be.'
'he seem to I an honest man.'
'another person may seem to you dishonest, and yet not be so.' there be a pause, for he have hesitate and stop.
'in short,' resume Tom, as if he have make up his mind, 'if you come to that, perhaps I be so far from be altogether in his favour, that I take he outside the door to tell he quietly, that I think he might consider himself very well off to get such a windfall as he have get from my sister, and that I hop he would make good use of it. you remember whether I take he out or not. I say nothing against the man; he may be a very good fellow, for anything I know; I hope he be.'
'be he offend by what you say?'
'no, he take it pretty well; he be civil enough. where be you, Loo?' he sit up in bed and kiss she. 'good night, my dear, good night.'
'you have nothing more to tell I?'
'no. what should I have? you wouldnot have I tell you a lie!'
'I wouldnot have you do that to-night, Tom, of all the night in your life; many and much happy as I hope they will be.'
'thank you, my dear Loo. I be so tired, that I be sure I wonder I donot say anything to get to sleep. go to bed, go to bed.'
kiss she again, he turn round, draw the coverlet over his head, and lie as still as if that time have come by which she have adjure he. she stand for some time at the bedside before she slowly move away. she stop at the door, look back when she have open it, and ask he if he have call she? but he lie still, and she softly close the door and return to her room.
then the wretched boy look cautiously up and find she go, creep out of bed, fasten his door, and throw himself upon his pillow again: tear his hair, morosely cry, grudgingly love she, hatefully but impenitently spurn himself, and no less hatefully and unprofitably spurn all the good in the world.
CHAPTER IX - hear the LAST of it
MRS. SPARSIT, lie by to recover the tone of her nerve in Mr. Bounderby's retreat, keep such a sharp look-out, night and day, under her coriolanian eyebrow, that her eye, like a couple of lighthouse on an iron-bind coast, might have warn all prudent mariner from that bold rock her roman nose and the dark and craggy region in its neighbourhood, but for the placidity of her manner. although it be hard to believe that her retire for the night could be anything but a form, so severely wide awake be those classical eye of her, and so impossible do it seem that her rigid nose could yield to any relaxing influence, yet her manner of sit, smooth her uncomfortable, not to say, gritty mitten (they be construct of a cool fabric like a meat-safe), or of amble to unknown place of destination with her foot in her cotton stirrup, be so perfectly serene, that most observer would have be constrain to suppose she a dove, embody by some freak of nature, in the earthly tabernacle of a bird of the hook-beak order.
she be a most wonderful woman for prowl about the house. how she get from story to story be a mystery beyond solution. a lady so decorous in herself, and so highly connected, be not to be suspect of drop over the banister or slide down they, yet her extraordinary facility of locomotion suggest the wild idea. another noticeable circumstance in Mrs. Sparsit be, that she be never hurry. she would shoot with consummate velocity from the roof to the hall, yet would be in full possession of her breath and dignity on the moment of her arrival there. neither be she ever see by human vision to go at a great pace.
she take very kindly to Mr. Harthouse, and have some pleasant conversation with he soon after her arrival. she make he her stately curtsey in the garden, one morning before breakfast.
'it appear but yesterday, sir,' say Mrs. Sparsit, 'that I have the honour of receive you at the Bank, when you be so good as to wish to be make acquainted with Mr. Bounderby's address.'
'an occasion, I be sure, not to be forget by myself in the course of age,' say Mr. Harthouse, incline his head to Mrs. Sparsit with the most indolent of all possible air.
'we live in a singular world, sir,' say Mrs. Sparsit.
'I have have the honour, by a coincidence of which I be proud, to have make a remark, similar in effect, though not so epigrammatically express.'
'a singular world, I would say, sir,' pursue Mrs. Sparsit; after acknowledge the compliment with a drooping of her dark eyebrow, not altogether so mild in its expression as her voice be in its dulcet tone; 'as regard the intimacy we form at one time, with individual we be quite ignorant of, at another. I recall, sir, that on that occasion you go so far as to say you be actually apprehensive of Miss Gradgrind.'
'your memory do I more honour than my insignificance deserve. I avail myself of your oblige hint to correct my timidity, and it be unnecessary to add that they be perfectly accurate. Mrs. Sparsit's talent for - in fact for anything require accuracy - with a combination of strength of mind - and family - be too habitually develop to admit of any question.' he be almost fall asleep over this compliment; it take he so long to get through, and his mind wander so much in the course of its execution.
'you find Miss Gradgrind - I really cannot call she Mrs. Bounderby; itbe very absurd of I - as youthful as I describe she?' ask Mrs. Sparsit, sweetly.
'you draw her portrait perfectly,' say Mr. Harthouse. 'present her dead image.'
'very engaging, sir,' say Mrs. Sparsit, cause her mitten slowly to revolve over one another.
'highly so.'
'it use to be consider,' say Mrs. Sparsit, 'that Miss Gradgrind be want in animation, but I confess she appear to I considerably and strikingly improve in that respect. ay, and indeed here be Mr. Bounderby!' cry Mrs. Sparsit, nod her head a great many time, as if she have be talk and think of no one else. 'how do you find yourself this morning, sir? pray let we see you cheerful, sir.'
now, these persistent assuagement of his misery, and lightening of his load, have by this time begin to have the effect of make Mr. Bounderby soft than usual towards Mrs. Sparsit, and hard than usual to most other people from his wife downward. so, when Mrs. Sparsit say with forced lightness of heart, 'you want your breakfast, sir, but I dare say Miss Gradgrind will soon be here to preside at the table,' Mr. Bounderby reply, 'if I wait to be take care of by my wife, ma'am, I believe you know pretty well I should wait till Doomsday, so Iwill trouble you to take charge of the teapot.' Mrs. Sparsit comply, and assume her old position at table.
this again make the excellent woman vastly sentimental. she be so humble withal, that when Louisa appear, she rise, protest she never could think of sit in that place under exist circumstance, often as she have have the honour of make Mr. Bounderby's breakfast, before Mrs. Gradgrind - she beg pardon, she mean to say Miss Bounderby - she hop to be excuse, but she really could not get it right yet, though she trust to become familiar with it by and by - have assume her present position. it be only (she observe) because Miss Gradgrind happen to be a little late, and Mr. Bounderby's time be so very precious, and she know it of old to be so essential that he should breakfast to the moment, that she have take the liberty of comply with his request; long as his will have be a law to she.
'there! stop where you be, ma'am,' say Mr. Bounderby, 'stop where you be! Mrs. Bounderby will be very glad to be relieve of the trouble, I believe.'
'donot say that, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit, almost with severity, 'because that be very unkind to Mrs. Bounderby. and to be unkind be not to be you, sir.'
'you may set your mind at rest, ma'am. - you can take it very quietly, cannot you, Loo?' say Mr. Bounderby, in a bluster way to his wife.
'of course. it be of no moment. why should it be of any importance to I?'
'why should it be of any importance to any one, Mrs. Sparsit, ma'am?' say Mr. Bounderby, swell with a sense of slight. 'you attach too much importance to these thing, ma'am. by George, youwill be corrupt in some of your notion here. you be old- fashion, ma'am. you be behind Tom Gradgrind's child's time.'
'what be the matter with you?' ask Louisa, coldly surprised. 'what have give you offence?'
'offence!' repeat Bounderby. 'do you suppose if there be any offence give I, I shouldnot name it, and request to have it correct? I be a straightforward man, I believe. I donot go beat about for side-wind.'
'I suppose no one ever have occasion to think you too diffident, or too delicate,' Louisa answer he composedly: 'I have never make that objection to you, either as a child or as a woman. I donot understand what you would have.'
'have?' return Mr. Bounderby. 'nothing. otherwise, donot you, Loo Bounderby, know thoroughly well that I, Josiah Bounderby of Coketown, would have it?'
she look at he, as he strike the table and make the teacup ring, with a proud colour in her face that be a new change, Mr. Harthouse think. 'you be incomprehensible this morning,' say Louisa. 'pray take no further trouble to explain yourself. I be not curious to know your meaning. what do it matter?'
nothing more be say on this theme, and Mr. Harthouse be soon idly gay on indifferent subject. but from this day, the Sparsit action upon Mr. Bounderby throw Louisa and James Harthouse more together, and strengthen the dangerous alienation from her husband and confidence against he with another, into which she have fall by degree so fine that she could not retrace they if she try. but whether she ever try or no, lie hide in her own closed heart.
Mrs. Sparsit be so much affect on this particular occasion, that, assist Mr. Bounderby to his hat after breakfast, and be then alone with he in the hall, she imprint a chaste kiss upon his hand, murmur 'my benefactor!' and retire, overwhelm with grief. yet it be an indubitable fact, within the cognizance of this history, that five minute after he have leave the house in the self-same hat, the same descendant of the scadgerse and connexion by matrimony of the Powlers, shake her right-hand mitten at his portrait, make a contemptuous grimace at that work of art, and say 'serve you right, you Noodle, and I be glad of it.'
Mr. Bounderby have not be long go, when Bitzer appear. Bitzer have come down by train, shriek and rattle over the long line of arch that bestrode the wild country of past and present coal- pit, with an express from Stone Lodge. it be a hasty note to inform Louisa that Mrs. Gradgrind lie very ill. she have never be well within her daughter's knowledge; but, she have decline within the last few day, have continue sink all through the night, and be now as nearly dead, as her limited capacity of be in any state that imply the ghost of an intention to get out of it, allow.
accompany by the light of porter, fit colourless servitor at Death's door when Mrs. Gradgrind knock, Louisa rumble to Coketown, over the coal-pit past and present, and be whirl into its smoky jaw. she dismiss the messenger to his own device, and ride away to her old home.
she have seldom be there since her marriage. her father be usually sift and sift at his parliamentary cinder-heap in London (without be observe to turn up many precious article among the rubbish), and be still hard at it in the national dust- yard. her mother have take it rather as a disturbance than otherwise, to be visit, as she recline upon her sofa; young people, Louisa feel herself all unfit for; Sissy she have never soften to again, since the night when the stroller's child have raise her eye to look at Mr. Bounderby's intend wife. she have no inducement to go back, and have rarely go.
Neither, as she approach her old home now, do any of the good influence of old home descend upon she. the dream of childhood - its airy fable; its graceful, beautiful, humane, impossible adornment of the world beyond: so good to be believe in once, so good to be remember when outgrown, for then the least among they rise to the stature of a great charity in the heart, suffer little child to come into the midst of it, and to keep with their pure hand a garden in the stony way of this world, wherein it be well for all the child of Adam that they should oftener sun themselves, simple and trustful, and not worldly-wise - what have she to do with these? remembrance of how she have journey to the little that she know, by the enchant road of what she and million of innocent creature have hop and imagine; of how, first come upon Reason through the tender light of Fancy, she have see it a beneficent god, defer to god as great as itself; not a grim Idol, cruel and cold, with its victim bind hand to foot, and its big dumb shape set up with a sightless stare, never to be move by anything but so many calculated ton of leverage - what have she to do with these? her remembrance of home and childhood be remembrance of the drying up of every spring and fountain in her young heart as it gush out. the golden water be not there. they be flow for the fertilization of the land where grape be gather from thorn, and fig from thistle.
she go, with a heavy, harden kind of sorrow upon she, into the house and into her mother's room. since the time of she leave home, Sissy have live with the rest of the family on equal term. Sissy be at her mother's side; and Jane, her sister, now ten or twelve year old, be in the room.
there be great trouble before it could be make known to Mrs. Gradgrind that her eld child be there. she recline, prop up, from mere habit, on a couch: as nearly in her old usual attitude, as anything so helpless could be keep in. she have positively refuse to take to her bed; on the ground that if she do, she would never hear the last of it.
her feeble voice sound so far away in her bundle of shawl, and the sound of another voice address she seem to take such a long time in get down to her ear, that she might have be lie at the bottom of a well. the poor lady be near truth than she ever have be: which have much to do with it.
on be tell that Mrs. Bounderby be there, she reply, at cross- purpose, that she have never call he by that name since he marry Louisa; that pende her choice of an objectionable name, she have call he J; and that she could not at present depart from that regulation, not be yet provide with a permanent substitute. Louisa have sit by she for some minute, and have speak to she often, before she arrive at a clear understanding who it be. she then seem to come to it all at once.
'well, my dear,' say Mrs. Gradgrind, 'and I hope you be go on satisfactorily to yourself. it be all your father's doing. he set his heart upon it. and he ought to know.'
'I want to hear of you, mother; not of myself.'
'you want to hear of I, my dear? thatbe something new, I be sure, when anybody want to hear of I. not at all well, Louisa. very faint and giddy.'
'be you in pain, dear mother?'
'I think therebe a pain somewhere in the room,' say Mrs. Gradgrind, 'but I couldnot positively say that I have get it.'
after this strange speech, she lie silent for some time. Louisa, hold her hand, could feel no pulse; but kiss it, could see a slight thin thread of life in flutter motion.
'you very seldom see your sister,' say Mrs. Gradgrind. 'she grow like you. I wish you would look at she. Sissy, bring she here.'
she be bring, and stand with her hand in her sister's. Louisa have observe she with her arm round Sissy's neck, and she feel the difference of this approach.
'do you see the likeness, Louisa?'
'yes, mother. I should think she like I. but - '
'eh! yes, I always say so,' Mrs. Gradgrind cry, with unexpected quickness. 'and that remind I. I - I want to speak to you, my dear. Sissy, my good girl, leave we alone a minute.' Louisa have relinquish the hand: have think that her sister's be a well and bright face than hers have ever be: have see in it, not without a rise feeling of resentment, even in that place and at that time, something of the gentleness of the other face in the room; the sweet face with the trust eye, make pale than watch and sympathy make it, by the rich dark hair.
leave alone with her mother, Louisa see she lie with an awful lull upon her face, like one who be float away upon some great water, all resistance over, content to be carry down the stream. she put the shadow of a hand to her lip again, and recall she.
'you be go to speak to I, mother.'
'eh? yes, to be sure, my dear. you know your father be almost always away now, and therefore I must write to he about it.'
'about what, mother? donot be trouble. about what?'
'you must remember, my dear, that whenever I have say anything, on any subject, I have never hear the last of it: and consequently, that I have long leave off say anything.'
'I can hear you, mother.' but, it be only by dint of bend down to her ear, and at the same time attentively watch the lip as they move, that she could link such faint and broken sound into any chain of connexion.
'you learn a great deal, Louisa, and so do your brother. ology of all kind from morning to night. if there be any ology left, of any description, that have not be wear to rag in this house, all I can say be, I hope I shall never hear its name.'
'I can hear you, mother, when you have strength to go on.' this, to keep she from float away.
'but there be something - not an Ology at all - that your father have miss, or forget, Louisa. I donot know what it be. I have often sit with Sissy near I, and think about it. I shall never get its name now. but your father may. it make I restless. I want to write to he, to find out for God's sake, what it be. give I a pen, give I a pen.'
even the power of restlessness be go, except from the poor head, which could just turn from side to side.
she fancy, however, that her request have be comply with, and that the pen she could not have hold be in her hand. it matter little what figure of wonderful no-meaning she begin to trace upon her wrapper. the hand soon stop in the midst of they; the light that have always be feeble and dim behind the weak transparency, go out; and even Mrs. Gradgrind, emerge from the shadow in which man walketh and disquieteth himself in vain, take upon she the dread solemnity of the sage and patriarch.
CHAPTER X - MRS. SPARSIT's STAIRCASE
MRS. SPARSIT's nerve be slow to recover their tone, the worthy woman make a stay of some week in duration at Mr. Bounderby's retreat, where, notwithstanding her anchorite turn of mind base upon she become consciousness of her altered station, she resign herself with noble fortitude to lodge, as one may say, in clover, and feed on the fat of the land. during the whole term of this recess from the guardianship of the Bank, Mrs. Sparsit be a pattern of consistency; continue to take such pity on Mr. Bounderby to his face, as be rarely take on man, and to call his portrait a Noodle to its face, with the great acrimony and contempt.
Mr. Bounderby, have get it into his explosive composition that Mrs. Sparsit be a highly superior woman to perceive that he have that general cross upon he in his desert (for he have not yet settle what it be), and far that Louisa would have object to she as a frequent visitor if it have comport with his greatness that she should object to anything he choose to do, resolve not to lose sight of Mrs. Sparsit easily. so when her nerve be string up to the pitch of again consume sweetbread in solitude, he say to she at the dinner-table, on the day before her departure, 'I tell you what, ma'am; you shall come down here of a Saturday, while the fine weather last, and stay till Monday.' to which Mrs. Sparsit return, in effect, though not of the Mahomedan persuasion: 'to hear be to obey.'
now, Mrs. Sparsit be not a poetical woman; but she take an idea in the nature of an allegorical fancy, into her head. much watching of Louisa, and much consequent observation of her impenetrable demeanour, which keenly whet and sharpen Mrs. Sparsit's edge, must have give she as it be a lift, in the way of inspiration. she erect in her mind a mighty staircase, with a dark pit of shame and ruin at the bottom; and down those stair, from day to day and hour to hour, she see Louisa come.
it become the business of Mrs. Sparsit's life, to look up at her staircase, and to watch Louisa come down. sometimes slowly, sometimes quickly, sometimes several step at one bout, sometimes stop, never turn back. if she have once turn back, it might have be the death of Mrs. Sparsit in spleen and grief.
she have be descend steadily, to the day, and on the day, when Mr. Bounderby issue the weekly invitation record above. Mrs. Sparsit be in good spirit, and incline to be conversational.
'and pray, sir,' say she, 'if I may venture to ask a question appertain to any subject on which you show reserve - which be indeed hardy in I, for I well know you have a reason for everything you do - have you receive intelligence respect the robbery?'
'why, ma'am, no; not yet. under the circumstance, I donot expect it yet. Rome benot build in a day, ma'am.'
'very true, sir,' say Mrs. Sparsit, shake her head.
'nor yet in a week, ma'am.'
'no, indeed, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit, with a gentle melancholy upon she.
'in a similar manner, ma'am,' say Bounderby, 'I can wait, you know. if Romulus and Remus could wait, Josiah Bounderby can wait. they be well off in their youth than I be, however. they have a she-wolf for a nurse; I have only a she-wolf for a grandmother. she donot give any milk, ma'am; she give bruise. she be a regular Alderney at that.'
'ah!' Mrs. Sparsit sigh and shudder.
'no, ma'am,' continue Bounderby, 'I have not hear anything more about it. itbe in hand, though; and young Tom, who rather stick to business at present - something new for he; he havenot the schooling I have - be help. my injunction be, keep it quiet, and let it seem to blow over. do what you like under the rose, but donot give a sign of what yoube about; or half a hundred of them will combine together and get this fellow who have bolt, out of reach for good. keep it quiet, and the thief will grow in confidence by little and little, and we shall have them.'
'very sagacious indeed, sir,' say Mrs. Sparsit. 'very interesting. the old woman you mention, sir - '
'the old woman I mention, ma'am,' say Bounderby, cut the matter short, as it be nothing to boast about, 'be not lay hold of; but, she may take she oath she will be, if that be any satisfaction to her villainous old mind. in the mean time, ma'am, I be of opinion, if you ask I my opinion, that the less she be talk about, the well.'
the same evening, Mrs. Sparsit, in her chamber window, rest from her packing operation, look towards her great staircase and see Louisa still descend.
she sit by Mr. Harthouse, in an alcove in the garden, talk very low; he stand lean over she, as they whisper together, and his face almost touch her hair. 'if not quite!' say Mrs. Sparsit, strain her hawk's eye to the utmost. Mrs. Sparsit be too distant to hear a word of their discourse, or even to know that they be speak softly, otherwise than from the expression of their figure; but what they say be this:
'you recollect the man, Mr. Harthouse?'
'oh, perfectly!'
'his face, and his manner, and what he say?'
'perfectly. and an infinitely dreary person he appear to I to be. lengthy and prosy in the extreme. it be know to hold forth, in the humble-virtue school of eloquence; but, I assure you I think at the time, "my good fellow, you be over-do this!"'
'it have be very difficult to I to think ill of that man.'
'my dear louisa - as Tom say.' which he never do say. 'you know no good of the fellow?'
'no, certainly.'
'nor of any other such person?'
'how can I,' she return, with more of her first manner on she than he have lately see, 'when I know nothing of they, man or woman?'
'my dear Louisa, then consent to receive the submissive representation of your devoted friend, who know something of several variety of his excellent fellow-creatures - for excellent they be, I be quite ready to believe, in spite of such little foible as always help themselves to what they can get hold of. this fellow talk. well; every fellow talk. he profess morality. well; all sort of humbug profess morality. from the House of Commons to the House of Correction, there be a general profession of morality, except among our people; it really be that exception which make our people quite revive. you see and hear the case. here be one of the fluffy class pull up extremely short by my esteemed friend Mr. Bounderby - who, as we know, be not possess of that delicacy which would soften so tight a hand. the member of the fluffy class be injure, exasperate, leave the house grumbling, meet somebody who propose to he to go in for some share in this Bank business, go in, put something in his pocket which have nothing in it before, and relieve his mind extremely. really he would have be an uncommon, instead of a common, fellow, if he have not avail himself of such an opportunity. or he may have originate it altogether, if he have the cleverness.'
'I almost feel as though it must be bad in I,' return Louisa, after sit thoughtful awhile, 'to be so ready to agree with you, and to be so lightened in my heart by what you say.'
'I only say what be reasonable; nothing bad. I have talk it over with my friend Tom more than once - of course I remain on term of perfect confidence with Tom - and he be quite of my opinion, and I be quite of his. will you walk?'
they stroll away, among the lane begin to be indistinct in the twilight - she lean on his arm - and she little think how she be go down, down, down, Mrs. Sparsit's staircase.
night and day, Mrs. Sparsit keep it stand. when Louisa have arrive at the bottom and disappear in the gulf, it might fall in upon she if it would; but, until then, there it be to be, a building, before Mrs. Sparsit's eye. and there Louisa always be, upon it.
and always glide down, down, down!
Mrs. Sparsit see James Harthouse come and go; she hear of he here and there; she see the change of the face he have study; she, too, remark to a nicety how and when it cloud, how and when it clear; she keep her black eye wide open, with no touch of pity, with no touch of compunction, all absorb in interest. in the interest of see she, ever draw, with no hand to stay she, near and nearer to the bottom of this new Giant's Staircase.
with all her deference for Mr. Bounderby as contradistinguish from his portrait, Mrs. Sparsit have not the small intention of interrupt the descent. eager to see it accomplish, and yet patient, she wait for the last fall, as for the ripeness and fulness of the harvest of her hope. hush in expectancy, she keep her wary gaze upon the stair; and seldom so much as darkly shake her right mitten (with her fist in it), at the figure come down.
CHAPTER XI - LOWER and LOWER
the figure descend the great stair, steadily, steadily; always verge, like a weight in deep water, to the black gulf at the bottom.
Mr. Gradgrind, apprise of his wife's decease, make an expedition from London, and bury she in a business-like manner. he then return with promptitude to the national cinder-heap, and resume his sifting for the odd and end he want, and his throwing of the dust about into the eye of other people who want other odd and end - in fact resume his parliamentary duty.
in the meantime, Mrs. Sparsit keep unwinke watch and ward. separate from her staircase, all the week, by the length of iron road divide Coketown from the country house, she yet maintain her cat-like observation of Louisa, through her husband, through her brother, through James Harthouse, through the outside of letter and packet, through everything animate and inanimate that at any time go near the stair. 'your foot on the last step, my lady,' say Mrs. Sparsit, apostrophize the descend figure, with the aid of her threaten mitten, 'and all your art shall never blind I.'
art or nature though, the original stock of Louisa's character or the graft of circumstance upon it, - her curious reserve do baffle, while it stimulate, one as sagacious as Mrs. Sparsit. there be time when Mr. James Harthouse be not sure of she. there be time when he could not read the face he have study so long; and when this lonely girl be a great mystery to he, than any woman of the world with a ring of satellite to help she.
so the time go on; until it happen that Mr. Bounderby be call away from home by business which require his presence elsewhere, for three or four day. it be on a Friday that he intimate this to Mrs. Sparsit at the Bank, add: 'but youwill go down to-morrow, ma'am, all the same. youwill go down just as if I be there. it will make no difference to you.'
'pray, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit, reproachfully, 'let I beg you not to say that. your absence will make a vast difference to I, sir, as I think you very well know.'
'well, ma'am, then you must get on in my absence as well as you can,' say Mr. Bounderby, not displeased.
'Mr. Bounderby,' retort Mrs. Sparsit, 'your will be to I a law, sir; otherwise, it might be my inclination to dispute your kind command, not feel sure that it will be quite so agreeable to Miss Gradgrind to receive I, as it ever be to your own munificent hospitality. but you shall say no more, sir. I will go, upon your invitation.'
'why, when I invite you to my house, ma'am,' say Bounderby, open his eye, 'I should hope you want no other invitation.'
'no, indeed, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit, 'I should hope not. say no more, sir. I would, sir, I could see you gay again.'
'what do you mean, ma'am?' bluster Bounderby.
'Sir,' rejoin Mrs. Sparsit, 'there be willnot to be an elasticity in you which I sadly miss. be buoyant, sir!'
Mr. Bounderby, under the influence of this difficult adjuration, back up by her compassionate eye, could only scratch his head in a feeble and ridiculous manner, and afterwards assert himself at a distance, by be hear to bully the small fry of business all the morning.
'Bitzer,' say Mrs. Sparsit that afternoon, when her patron be go on his journey, and the Bank be close, 'present my compliment to young Mr. Thomas, and ask he if he would step up and partake of a lamb chop and walnut ketchup, with a glass of India ale?' young Mr. Thomas be usually ready for anything in that way, return a gracious answer, and follow on its heel. 'Mr. Thomas,' say Mrs. Sparsit, 'these plain viand be on table, I think you might be tempt.'
'Thank'ee, Mrs. Sparsit,' say the whelp. and gloomily fall to.
'how be Mr. Harthouse, Mr. Tom?' ask Mrs. Sparsit.
'oh, hebe all right,' say Tom.
'where may he be at present?' Mrs. Sparsit ask in a light conversational manner, after mentally devote the whelp to the Furies for be so uncommunicative.
'he be shoot in Yorkshire,' say Tom. 'send Loo a basket half as big as a church, yesterday.'
'the kind of gentleman, now,' say Mrs. Sparsit, sweetly, 'whom one might wager to be a good shot!'
'crack,' say Tom.
he have long be a down-look young fellow, but this characteristic have so increase of late, that he never raise his eye to any face for three second together. Mrs. Sparsit consequently have ample mean of watch his look, if she be so inclined.
'Mr. Harthouse be a great favourite of mine,' say Mrs. Sparsit, 'as indeed he be of most people. may we expect to see he again shortly, Mr. Tom?'
'why, I expect to see he to-morrow,' return the whelp.
'good news!' cry Mrs. Sparsit, blandly.
'I have get an appointment with he to meet he in the evening at the station here,' say Tom, 'and I be go to dine with he afterwards, I believe. he be not come down to the country house for a week or so, be due somewhere else. at least, he say so; but I shouldnot wonder if he be to stop here over Sunday, and stray that way.'
'which remind I!' say Mrs. Sparsit. 'would you remember a message to your sister, Mr. Tom, if I be to charge you with one?'
'well? Iwill try,' return the reluctant whelp, 'if it benot a long un.'
'it be merely my respectful compliment,' say Mrs. Sparsit, 'and I fear I may not trouble she with my society this week; be still a little nervous, and well perhaps by my poor self.'
'oh! if thatbe all,' observed Tom, 'it wouldnot much matter, even if I be to forget it, for Loo's not likely to think of you unless she see you.'
have pay for his entertainment with this agreeable compliment, he relapse into a hangdog silence until there be no more India ale leave, when he say, 'well, Mrs. Sparsit, I must be off!' and go off.
next day, Saturday, Mrs. Sparsit sit at her window all day long look at the customer come in and out, watch the postman, keep an eye on the general traffic of the street, revolve many thing in her mind, but, above all, keep her attention on her staircase. the evening come, she put on her bonnet and shawl, and go quietly out: have her reason for hover in a furtive way about the station by which a passenger would arrive from Yorkshire, and for prefer to peep into it round pillar and corner, and out of lady' waiting-room window, to appear in its precinct openly.
Tom be in attendance, and loiter about until the expected train come in. it bring no Mr. Harthouse. Tom wait until the crowd have disperse, and the bustle be over; and then refer to a post list of train, and take counsel with porter. that do, he stroll away idly, stop in the street and look up it and down it, and lift his hat off and put it on again, and yawn and stretch himself, and exhibit all the symptom of mortal weariness to be expect in one who have still to wait until the next train should come in, an hour and forty minute hence.
'this be a device to keep he out of the way,' say Mrs. Sparsit, start from the dull office window whence she have watch he last. 'Harthouse be with his sister now!'
it be the conception of an inspire moment, and she shoot off with her utmost swiftness to work it out. the station for the country house be at the opposite end of the town, the time be short, the road not easy; but she be so quick in pounce on a disengage coach, so quick in dart out of it, produce her money, seize her ticket, and diving into the train, that she be bear along the arch span the land of coal-pit past and present, as if she have be catch up in a cloud and whirl away.
all the journey, immovable in the air though never leave behind; plain to the dark eye of her mind, as the electric wire which rule a colossal strip of music-paper out of the evening sky, be plain to the dark eye of her body; Mrs. Sparsit see her staircase, with the figure come down. very near the bottom now. upon the brink of the abyss.
an overcast September evening, just at nightfall, see beneath its drooping eyelid Mrs. Sparsit glide out of her carriage, pass down the wooden step of the little station into a stony road, cross it into a green lane, and become hidden in a summer-growth of leaf and branch. one or two late bird sleepily chirp in their nest, and a bat heavily cross and recrosse she, and the reek of her own tread in the thick dust that feel like velvet, be all Mrs. Sparsit hear or see until she very softly close a gate.
she go up to the house, keep within the shrubbery, and go round It, peep between the leaf at the low window. Most of they be open, as they usually be in such warm weather, but there be no light yet, and all be silent. she try the garden with no well effect. she think of the wood, and steal towards it, heedless of long grass and brier: of worm, snail, and slug, and all the creep thing that be. with her dark eye and her hook nose warily in advance of she, Mrs. Sparsit softly crush her way through the thick undergrowth, so intent upon her object that she probably would have do no less, if the wood have be a wood of adder.
Hark!
the small bird might have tumble out of their nest, fascinate by the glittering of Mrs. Sparsit's eye in the gloom, as she stop and listen.
low voice close at hand. his voice and her. the appointment be a device to keep the brother away! there they be yonder, by the felled tree.
bend low among the dewy grass, Mrs. Sparsit advance close to they. she draw herself up, and stand behind a tree, like Robinson Crusoe in his ambuscade against the savage; so near to they that at a spring, and that no great one, she could have touch they both. he be there secretly, and have not show himself at the house. he have come on horseback, and must have pass through the neighbouring field; for his horse be tie to the meadow side of the fence, within a few pace.
'my dearest love,' say he, 'what could I do? know you be alone, be it possible that I could stay away?'
'you may hang your head, to make yourself the more attractive; I donot know what they see in you when you hold it up,' think Mrs. Sparsit; 'but you little think, my dearest love, whose eye be on you!'
that she hang her head, be certain. she urge he to go away, she command he to go away; but she neither turn her face to he, nor raise it. yet it be remarkable that she sit as still as ever the amiable woman in ambuscade have see she sit, at any period in her life. her hand rest in one another, like the hand of a statue; and even her manner of speak be not hurry.
'my dear child,' say Harthouse; Mrs. Sparsit see with delight that his arm embrace she; 'will you not bear with my society for a little while?'
'not here.'
'where, Louisa?
'not here.'
'but we have so little time to make so much of, and I have come so far, and be altogether so devoted, and distract. there never be a slave at once so devoted and ill-use by his mistress. to look for your sunny welcome that have warm I into life, and to be receive in your frozen manner, be heart-rending.'
'be I to say again, that I must be leave to myself here?'
'but we must meet, my dear Louisa. where shall we meet?'
they both start. the listener start, guiltily, too; for she think there be another listener among the tree. it be only rain, begin to fall fast, in heavy drop.
'shall I ride up to the house a few minute hence, innocently suppose that its master be at home and will be charm to receive I?'
'no!'
'your cruel command be implicitly to be obey; though I be the most unfortunate fellow in the world, I believe, to have be insensible to all other woman, and to have fall prostrate at last under the foot of the most beautiful, and the most engaging, and the most imperious. my dear Louisa, I cannot go myself, or let you go, in this hard abuse of your power.'
Mrs. Sparsit see he detain she with his encircle arm, and hear he then and there, within she (Mrs. Sparsit's) greedy hearing, tell she how he love she, and how she be the stake for which he ardently desire to play away all that he have in life. the object he have lately pursue, turn worthless beside she; such success as be almost in his grasp, he fling away from he like the dirt it be, compare with she. its pursuit, nevertheless, if it keep he near she, or its renunciation if it take he from she, or flight if she share it, or secrecy if she command it, or any fate, or every fate, all be alike to he, so that she be true to he, - the man who have see how cast away she be, whom she have inspire at their first meeting with an admiration, an interest, of which he have think himself incapable, whom she have receive into her confidence, who be devoted to she and adore she. all this, and more, in his hurry, and in her, in the whirl of her own gratified malice, in the dread of be discover, in the rapidly increase noise of heavy rain among the leaf, and a thunderstorm roll up - Mrs. Sparsit receive into her mind, set off with such an unavoidable halo of confusion and indistinctness, that when at length he climb the fence and lead his horse away, she be not sure where they be to meet, or when, except that they have say it be to be that night.
but one of they yet remain in the darkness before she; and while she track that one she must be right. 'oh, my dearest love,' think Mrs. Sparsit, 'you little think how well attend you be!'
Mrs. Sparsit see she out of the wood, and see she enter the house. what to do next? it rain now, in a sheet of water. Mrs. Sparsit's white stocking be of many colour, green predominating; prickly thing be in her shoe; caterpillar sling themselves, in hammock of their own making, from various part of her dress; rill run from her bonnet, and her roman nose. in such condition, Mrs. Sparsit stand hide in the density of the shrubbery, consider what next?
Lo, Louisa come out of the house! hastily cloak and muffle, and steal away. she elope! she fall from the lowermost stair, and be swallow up in the gulf.
Indifferent to the rain, and move with a quick determined step, she strike into a side-path parallel with the ride. Mrs. Sparsit follow in the shadow of the tree, at but a short distance; for it be not easy to keep a figure in view go quickly through the umbrageous darkness.
when she stop to close the side-gate without noise, Mrs. Sparsit stop. when she go on, Mrs. Sparsit go on. she go by the way Mrs. Sparsit have come, emerge from the green lane, cross the stony road, and ascend the wooden step to the railroad. a train for Coketown would come through presently, Mrs. Sparsit know; so she understand Coketown to be her first place of destination.
in Mrs. Sparsit's limp and streaming state, no extensive precaution be necessary to change her usual appearance; but, she stop under the lee of the station wall, tumble her shawl into a new shape, and put it on over her bonnet. so disguised she have no fear of be recognize when she follow up the railroad step, and pay her money in the small office. Louisa sit wait in a corner. Mrs. Sparsit sit wait in another corner. both listen to the thunder, which be loud, and to the rain, as it wash off the roof, and patter on the parapet of the arch. two or three lamp be rain out and blow out; so, both see the lightning to advantage as it quiver and zigzag on the iron track.
the seizure of the station with a fit of trembling, gradually deepen to a complaint of the heart, announce the train. fire and steam, and smoke, and red light; a hiss, a crash, a bell, and a shriek; Louisa put into one carriage, Mrs. Sparsit put into another: the little station a desert speck in the thunderstorm.
though her tooth chatter in her head from wet and cold, Mrs. Sparsit exult hugely. the figure have plunge down the precipice, and she feel herself, as it be, attend on the body. could she, who have be so active in the getting up of the funeral triumph, do less than exult? 'she will be at Coketown long before he,' think Mrs. Sparsit, 'though his horse be never so good. where will she wait for he? and where will they go together? patience. we shall see.'
the tremendous rain occasion infinite confusion, when the train stop at its destination. gutter and pipe have burst, drain have overflow, and street be under water. in the first instant of alight, Mrs. Sparsit turn her distracted eye towards the waiting coach, which be in great request. 'she will get into one,' she consider, 'and will be away before I can follow in another. at all risk of be run over, I must see the number, and hear the order give to the coachman.'
but, Mrs. Sparsit be wrong in her calculation. louisa get into no coach, and be already go. the black eye keep upon the railroad-carriage in which she have travel, settle upon it a moment too late. the door not be open after several minute, Mrs. Sparsit pass it and repasse it, see nothing, look in, and find it empty. wet through and through: with her foot squelch and squash in her shoe whenever she move; with a rash of rain upon her classical visage; with a bonnet like an over-ripe fig; with all her clothe spoil; with damp impression of every button, string, and hook-and-eye she wear, print off upon her highly connected back; with a stagnant verdure on her general exterior, such as accumulate on an old park fence in a mouldy lane; Mrs. Sparsit have no resource but to burst into tear of bitterness and say, 'I have lose she!'
CHAPTER XII - DOWN
the national dustman, after entertain one another with a great many noisy little fight among themselves, have disperse for the present, and Mr. Gradgrind be at home for the vacation.
he sit write in the room with the deadly statistical clock, prove something no doubt - probably, in the main, that the Good Samaritan be a Bad Economist. the noise of the rain do not disturb he much; but it attract his attention sufficiently to make he raise his head sometimes, as if he be rather remonstrate with the element. when it thunder very loudly, he glance towards Coketown, have it in his mind that some of the tall chimney might be strike by lightning.
the thunder be roll into distance, and the rain be pour down like a deluge, when the door of his room open. he look round the lamp upon his table, and see, with amazement, his eld daughter.
'Louisa!'
'Father, I want to speak to you.'
'what be the matter? how strange you look! and good Heaven,' say Mr. Gradgrind, wonder more and more, 'have you come here expose to this storm?'
she put her hand to her dress, as if she hardly know. 'yes.' then she uncover her head, and let her cloak and hood fall where they might, stand look at he: so colourless, so dishevelled, so defiant and despairing, that he be afraid of she.
'what be it? I conjure you, Louisa, tell I what be the matter.'
she drop into a chair before he, and put her cold hand on his arm.
'Father, you have train I from my cradle?'
'yes, Louisa.'
'I curse the hour in which I be bear to such a destiny.'
he look at she in doubt and dread, vacantly repeat: 'curse the hour? curse the hour?'
'how could you give I life, and take from I all the inappreciable thing that raise it from the state of conscious death? where be the grace of my soul? where be the sentiment of my heart? what have you do, o father, what have you do, with the garden that should have bloom once, in this great wilderness here!'
she strike herself with both her hand upon her bosom.
'if it have ever be here, its ash alone would save I from the void in which my whole life sink. I do not mean to say this; but, father, you remember the last time we converse in this room?'
he have be so wholly unprepared for what he hear now, that it be with difficulty he answer, 'yes, Louisa.'
'what have rise to my lip now, would have rise to my lip then, if you have give I a moment's help. I donot reproach you, father. what you have never nurture in I, you have never nurture in yourself; but o! if you have only do so long ago, or if you have only neglect I, what a much well and much happy creature I should have be this day!'
on hear this, after all his care, he bow his head upon his hand and groan aloud.
'Father, if you have know, when we be last together here, what even I fear while I strove against it - as it have be my task from infancy to strive against every natural prompting that have arise in my heart; if you have know that there linger in my breast, sensibility, affection, weakness capable of be cherish into strength, defy all the calculation ever make by man, and no more known to his arithmetic than his creator be, - would you have give I to the husband whom I be now sure that I hate?'
he say, 'no. no, my poor child.'
'would you have doom I, at any time, to the frost and blight that have harden and spoil I? would you have rob I - for no one's enrichment - only for the great desolation of this world - of the immaterial part of my life, the spring and summer of my belief, my refuge from what be sordid and bad in the real thing around I, my school in which I should have learn to be more humble and more trust with they, and to hope in my little sphere to make they well?'
'o no, no. no, Louisa.'
'yet, father, if I have be stone blind; if I have grope my way by my sense of touch, and have be free, while I know the shape and surface of thing, to exercise my fancy somewhat, in regard to they; I should have be a million time wise, happy, more loving, more contented, more innocent and human in all good respect, than I be with the eye I have. now, hear what I have come to say.'
he move, to support she with his arm. she rise as he do so, they stand close together: she, with a hand upon his shoulder, look fixedly in his face.
'with a hunger and thirst upon I, father, which have never be for a moment appease; with an ardent impulse towards some region where rule, and figure, and definition be not quite absolute; I have grow up, battle every inch of my way.'
'I never know you be unhappy, my child.'
'Father, I always know it. in this strife I have almost repulse and crush my well angel into a demon. what I have learn have leave I doubting, misbelieve, despise, regretting, what I have not learn; and my dismal resource have be to think that life would soon go by, and that nothing in it could be worth the pain and trouble of a contest.'
'and you so young, Louisa!' he say with pity.
'and I so young. in this condition, father - for I show you now, without fear or favour, the ordinary deaden state of my mind as I know it - you propose my husband to I. I take he. I never make a pretence to he or you that I love he. I know, and, father, you know, and he know, that I never do. I be not wholly indifferent, for I have a hope of be pleasant and useful to Tom. I make that wild escape into something visionary, and have slowly find out how wild it be. but Tom have be the subject of all the little tenderness of my life; perhaps he become so because I know so well how to pity he. it matter little now, except as it may dispose you to think more leniently of his error.'
as her father hold she in his arm, she put her other hand upon his other shoulder, and still look fixedly in his face, go on.
'when I be irrevocably marry, there rise up into rebellion against the tie, the old strife, make fiercer by all those cause of disparity which arise out of our two individual nature, and which no general law shall ever rule or state for I, father, until they shall be able to direct the anatomist where to strike his knife into the secret of my soul.'
'Louisa!' he say, and say imploringly; for he well remember what have pass between they in their former interview.
'I do not reproach you, father, I make no complaint. I be here with another object.'
'what can I do, child? ask I what you will.'
'I be come to it. Father, chance then throw into my way a new acquaintance; a man such as I have have no experience of; use to the world; light, polished, easy; make no pretence; avow the low estimate of everything, that I be half afraid to form in secret; convey to I almost immediately, though I donot know how or by what degree, that he understand I, and read my thought. I could not find that he be bad than I. there seem to be a near affinity between we. I only wonder it should be worth his while, who care for nothing else, to care so much for I.'
'for you, Louisa!'
her father might instinctively have loosen his hold, but that he feel her strength depart from she, and see a wild dilating fire in the eye steadfastly regard he.
'I say nothing of his plea for claim my confidence. it matter very little how he gain it. Father, he do gain it. what you know of the story of my marriage, he soon know, just as well.'
her father's face be ashy white, and he hold she in both his arm.
'I have do no bad, I have not disgrace you. but if you ask I whether I have love he, or do love he, I tell you plainly, father, that it may be so. I donot know.'
she take her hand suddenly from his shoulder, and press they both upon her side; while in her face, not like itself - and in her figure, draw up, resolute to finish by a last effort what she have to say - the feeling long suppress break loose.
'this night, my husband be away, he have be with I, declare himself my lover. this minute he expect I, for I could release myself of his presence by no other mean. I do not know that I be sorry, I do not know that I be ashamed, I do not know that I be degrade in my own esteem. all that I know be, your philosophy and your teaching will not save I. now, father, you have bring I to this. save I by some other mean!'
he tighten his hold in time to prevent her sink on the floor, but she cry out in a terrible voice, 'I shall die if you hold I! let I fall upon the ground!' and he lay she down there, and see the pride of his heart and the triumph of his system, lying, an insensible heap, at his foot.
END of the SECOND BOOK
BOOK the THIRD - garnering
CHAPTER i - another thing NEEDFUL
LOUISA awake from a torpor, and her eye languidly open on her old bed at home, and her old room. it seem, at first, as if all that have happen since the day when these object be familiar to she be the shadow of a dream, but gradually, as the object become more real to her sight, the event become more real to her mind.
she could scarcely move her head for pain and heaviness, her eye be strained and sore, and she be very weak. a curious passive inattention have such possession of she, that the presence of her little sister in the room do not attract her notice for some time. even when their eye have meet, and her sister have approach the bed, Louisa lie for minute look at she in silence, and suffer she timidly to hold her passive hand, before she ask:
'when be I bring to this room?'
'last night, Louisa.'
'who bring I here?'
'Sissy, I believe.'
'why do you believe so?'
'because I find she here this morning. she donot come to my bedside to wake I, as she always do; and I go to look for she. she be not in her own room either; and I go look for she all over the house, until I find she here take care of you and cool your head. will you see father? Sissy say I be to tell he when you wake.'
'what a beam face you have, Jane!' say Louisa, as her young sister - timidly still - bend down to kiss she.
'have I? I be very glad you think so. I be sure it must be Sissy's do.'
the arm Louisa have begin to twine around her neck, unbent itself. 'you can tell father if you will.' then, stay she for a moment, she say, 'it be you who make my room so cheerful, and give it this look of welcome?'
'oh no, Louisa, it be do before I come. it be - '
Louisa turn upon her pillow, and hear no more. when her sister have withdraw, she turn her head back again, and lie with her face towards the door, until it open and her father enter.
he have a jade anxious look upon he, and his hand, usually steady, tremble in her. he sit down at the side of the bed, tenderly ask how she be, and dwell on the necessity of her keep very quiet after her agitation and exposure to the weather last night. he speak in a subdued and troubled voice, very different from his usual dictatorial manner; and be often at a loss for word.
'my dear Louisa. my poor daughter.' he be so much at a loss at that place, that he stop altogether. he try again.
'my unfortunate child.' the place be so difficult to get over, that he try again.
'it would be hopeless for I, Louisa, to endeavour to tell you how overwhelmed I have be, and still be, by what break upon I last night. the ground on which I stand have cease to be solid under my foot. the only support on which I lean, and the strength of which it seem, and still do seem, impossible to question, have give way in an instant. I be stun by these discovery. I have no selfish meaning in what I say; but I find the shock of what break upon I last night, to be very heavy indeed.'
she could give he no comfort herein. she have suffer the wreck of her whole life upon the rock.
'I will not say, Louisa, that if you have by any happy chance undeceive I some time ago, it would have be well for we both; well for your peace, and well for mine. for I be sensible that it may not have be a part of my system to invite any confidence of that kind. I have prove my - my system to myself, and I have rigidly administer it; and I must bear the responsibility of its failure. I only entreat you to believe, my favourite child, that I have mean to do right.'
he say it earnestly, and to do he justice he have. in gauge fathomless deep with his little mean excise-rod, and in stagger over the universe with his rusty stiff-legged compass, he have mean to do great thing. within the limit of his short tether he have tumble about, annihilate the flower of existence with great singleness of purpose than many of the blatant personage whose company he keep.
'I be well assured of what you say, father. I know I have be your favourite child. I know you have intend to make I happy. I have never blame you, and I never shall.'
he take her outstretched hand, and retain it in his. 'my dear, I have remain all night at my table, ponder again and again on what have so painfully pass between we. when I consider your character; when I consider that what have be know to I for hour, have be conceal by you for year; when I consider under what immediate pressure it have be force from you at last; I come to the conclusion that I cannot but mistrust myself.'
he might have add more than all, when he see the face now look at he. he do add it in effect, perhaps, as he softly move her scatter hair from her forehead with his hand. such little action, slight in another man, be very noticeable in he; and his daughter receive they as if they have be word of contrition.
'but,' say Mr. Gradgrind, slowly, and with hesitation, as well as with a wretched sense of happiness, 'if I see reason to mistrust myself for the past, Louisa, I should also mistrust myself for the present and the future. to speak unreservedly to you, I do. I be far from feel convinced now, however differently I might have feel only this time yesterday, that I be fit for the trust you repose in I; that I know how to respond to the appeal you have come home to make to I; that I have the right instinct - suppose it for the moment to be some quality of that nature - how to help you, and to set you right, my child.'
she have turn upon her pillow, and lie with her face upon her arm, so that he could not see it. all her wildness and passion have subside; but, though soften, she be not in tear. her father be change in nothing so much as in the respect that he would have be glad to see she in tear.
'some person hold,' he pursue, still hesitate, 'that there be a wisdom of the Head, and that there be a wisdom of the heart. I have not suppose so; but, as I have say, I mistrust myself now. I have suppose the head to be all-sufficient. it may not be all- sufficient; how can I venture this morning to say it be! if that other kind of wisdom should be what I have neglect, and should be the instinct that be want, Louisa - '
he suggest it very doubtfully, as if he be half unwilling to admit it even now. she make he no answer, lie before he on her bed, still half-dress, much as he have see she lie on the floor of his room last night.
'louisa,' and his hand rest on her hair again, 'I have be absent from here, my dear, a good deal of late; and though your sister's training have be pursue accord to - the system,' he appear to come to that word with great reluctance always, 'it have necessarily be modify by daily association begin, in her case, at an early age. I ask you - ignorantly and humbly, my daughter - for the well, do you think?'
'Father,' she reply, without stir, 'if any harmony have be awaken in her young breast that be mute in mine until it turn to discord, let she thank Heaven for it, and go upon her happy way, take it as her great blessing that she have avoid my way.'
'o my child, my child!' he say, in a forlorn manner, 'I be an unhappy man to see you thus! what avail it to I that you do not reproach I, if I so bitterly reproach myself!' he bend his head, and speak low to she. 'Louisa, I have a misgiving that some change may have be slowly work about I in this house, by mere love and gratitude: that what the Head have leave undo and could not do, the Heart may have be do silently. can it be so?'
she make he no reply.
'I be not too proud to believe it, Louisa. how could I be arrogant, and you before I! can it be so? be it so, my dear?' he look upon she once more, lie cast away there; and without another word go out of the room. he have not be long go, when she hear a light tread near the door, and know that some one stand beside she.
she do not raise her head. a dull anger that she should be see in her distress, and that the involuntary look she have so resented should come to this fulfilment, smoulder within she like an unwholesome fire. all closely imprison force rend and destroy. the air that would be healthful to the earth, the water that would enrich it, the heat that would ripen it, tear it when cage up. so in her bosom even now; the strong quality she possess, long turn upon themselves, become a heap of obduracy, that rise against a friend.
it be well that soft touch come upon her neck, and that she understand herself to be suppose to have fall asleep. the sympathetic hand do not claim her resentment. let it lie there, let it lie.
it lie there, warm into life a crowd of gentle thought; and she rest. as she soften with the quiet, and the consciousness of be so watch, some tear make their way into her eye. the face touch her, and she know that there be tear upon it too, and she the cause of they.
as Louisa feign to rouse herself, and sit up, Sissy retire, so that she stand placidly near the bedside.
'I hope I have not disturb you. I have come to ask if you would let I stay with you?'
'why should you stay with I? my sister will miss you. you be everything to she.'
'be I?' return Sissy, shake her head. 'I would be something to you, if I might.'
'what?' say Louisa, almost sternly.
'whatever you want most, if I could be that. at all event, I would like to try to be as near it as I can. and however far off that may be, I will never tire of try. will you let I?'
'my father send you to ask I.'
'no indeed,' reply Sissy. 'he tell I that I might come in now, but he send I away from the room this morning - or at least - '
she hesitate and stop.
'at least, what?' say Louisa, with her search eye upon she.
'I think it well myself that I should be send away, for I feel very uncertain whether you would like to find I here.'
'have I always hat you so much?'
'I hope not, for I have always love you, and have always wish that you should know it. but you change to I a little, shortly before you leave home. not that I wonder at it. you know so much, and I know so little, and it be so natural in many way, go as you be among other friend, that I have nothing to complain of, and be not at all hurt.'
her colour rise as she say it modestly and hurriedly. Louisa understand the love pretence, and her heart smite she.
'may I try?' say Sissy, embolden to raise her hand to the neck that be insensibly droop towards she.
Louisa, take down the hand that would have embrace she in another moment, hold it in one of her, and answer:
'first, Sissy, do you know what I be? I be so proud and so harden, so confused and troubled, so resentful and unjust to every one and to myself, that everything be stormy, dark, and wicked to I. do not that repel you?'
'no!'
'I be so unhappy, and all that should have make I otherwise be so lay waste, that if I have be bereft of sense to this hour, and instead of be as learn as you think I, have to begin to acquire the simple truth, I could not want a guide to peace, contentment, honour, all the good of which I be quite devoid, more abjectly than I do. do not that repel you?'
'no!'
in the innocence of her brave affection, and the brimming up of her old devoted spirit, the once desert girl shine like a beautiful light upon the darkness of the other.
Louisa raise the hand that it might clasp her neck and join its fellow there. she fall upon her knee, and cling to this stroller's child look up at she almost with veneration.
'forgive I, pity I, help I! have compassion on my great need, and let I lay this head of mine upon a love heart!'
'o lie it here!' cry Sissy. 'lay it here, my dear.'
CHAPTER II - VERY RIDICULOUS
MR. JAMES HARTHOUSE pass a whole night and a day in a state of so much hurry, that the World, with its good glass in his eye, would scarcely have recognize he during that insane interval, as the brother Jem of the honourable and jocular member. he be positively agitated. he several time speak with an emphasis, similar to the vulgar manner. he go in and go out in an unaccountable way, like a man without an object. he ride like a highwayman. in a word, he be so horribly bored by exist circumstance, that he forget to go in for boredom in the manner prescribe by the authority.
after put his horse at Coketown through the storm, as if it be a leap, he wait up all night: from time to time ring his bell with the great fury, charge the porter who keep watch with delinquency in withholding letter or message that could not fail to have be entrust to he, and demand restitution on the spot. the dawn come, the morning come, and the day come, and neither message nor letter come with either, he go down to the country house. there, the report be, Mr. Bounderby away, and Mrs. Bounderby in town. leave for town suddenly last evening. not even know to be go until receipt of message, import that her return be not to be expect for the present.
in these circumstance he have nothing for it but to follow she to town. he go to the house in town. Mrs. Bounderby not there. he look in at the Bank. Mr. Bounderby away and Mrs. Sparsit away. Mrs. sparsit away? who could have be reduce to sudden extremity for the company of that griffin!
'well! I donot know,' say Tom, who have his own reason for be uneasy about it. 'she be off somewhere at daybreak this morning. shebe always full of mystery; I hate she. so I do that white chap; hebe always get his blink eye upon a fellow.'
'where be you last night, Tom?'
'where be I last night!' say Tom. 'come! I like that. I be wait for you, Mr. Harthouse, till it come down as I never see it come down before. where be I too! where be you, you mean.'
'I be prevent from come - detain.'
'detain!' murmur Tom. 'two of we be detain. I be detain look for you, till I lose every train but the mail. it would have be a pleasant job to go down by that on such a night, and have to walk home through a pond. I be oblige to sleep in town after all.'
'where?'
'where? why, in my own bed at Bounderby's.'
'do you see your sister?'
'how the deuce,' return Tom, star, 'could I see my sister when she be fifteen mile off?'
curse these quick retort of the young gentleman to whom he be so true a friend, Mr. Harthouse disembarrass himself of that interview with the smallest conceivable amount of ceremony, and debate for the hundredth time what all this could mean? he make only one thing clear. it be, that whether she be in town or out of town, whether he have be premature with she who be so hard to comprehend, or she have lose courage, or they be discover, or some mischance or mistake, at present incomprehensible, have occur, he must remain to confront his fortune, whatever it be. the hotel where he be know to live when condemn to that region of blackness, be the stake to which he be tie. as to all the rest - what will be, will be.
'so, whether I be wait for a hostile message, or an assignation, or a penitent remonstrance, or an impromptu wrestle with my friend Bounderby in the Lancashire manner - which would seem as likely as anything else in the present state of affair - Iwill dine,' say Mr. James Harthouse. 'Bounderby have the advantage in point of weight; and if anything of a british nature be to come off between we, it may be as well to be in training.'
therefore he ring the bell, and toss himself negligently on a sofa, order 'some dinner at six - with a beefsteak in it,' and get through the intervene time as well as he could. that be not particularly well; for he remain in the great perplexity, and, as the hour go on, and no kind of explanation offer itself, his perplexity augment at compound interest.
however, he take affair as coolly as it be in human nature to do, and entertain himself with the facetious idea of the training more than once. 'it wouldnot be bad,' he yawn at one time, 'to give the waiter five shilling, and throw he.' at another time it occur to he, 'or a fellow of about thirteen or fourteen stone might be hire by the hour.' but these jest do not tell materially on the afternoon, or his suspense; and, sooth to say, they both lag fearfully.
it be impossible, even before dinner, to avoid often walk about in the pattern of the carpet, look out of the window, listen at the door for footstep, and occasionally become rather hot when any step approach that room. but, after dinner, when the day turn to twilight, and the twilight turn to night, and still no communication be make to he, it begin to be as he express it, 'like the Holy Office and slow torture.' however, still true to his conviction that indifference be the genuine high-breeding (the only conviction he have), he seize this crisis as the opportunity for order candle and a newspaper.
he have be try in vain, for half an hour, to read this newspaper, when the waiter appear and say, at once mysteriously and apologetically:
'beg your pardon, sir. yoube want, sir, if you please.'
a general recollection that this be the kind of thing the Police say to the swell mob, cause Mr. Harthouse to ask the waiter in return, with bristle indignation, what the Devil he mean by 'want'?
'beg your pardon, sir. young lady outside, sir, wish to see you.'
'outside? where?'
'outside this door, sir.'
give the waiter to the personage before mention, as a block- head duly qualified for that consignment, Mr. Harthouse hurry into the gallery. a young woman whom he have never see stand there. plainly dress, very quiet, very pretty. as he conduct she into the room and place a chair for she, he observe, by the light of the candle, that she be even pretty than he have at first believe. her face be innocent and youthful, and its expression remarkably pleasant. she be not afraid of he, or in any way disconcert; she seem to have her mind entirely preoccupy with the occasion of her visit, and to have substitute that consideration for herself.
'I speak to Mr. Harthouse?' she say, when they be alone.
'to Mr. Harthouse.' he add in his mind, 'and you speak to he with the most confiding eye I ever see, and the most earnest voice (though so quiet) I ever hear.'
'if I do not understand - and I do not, sir' - say Sissy, 'what your honour as a gentleman bind you to, in other matter:' the blood really rise in his face as she begin in these word: 'I be sure I may rely upon it to keep my visit secret, and to keep secret what I be go to say. I will rely upon it, if you will tell I I may so far trust - '
'you may, I assure you.'
'I be young, as you see; I be alone, as you see. in come to you, sir, I have no advice or encouragement beyond my own hope.' he think, 'but that be very strong,' as he follow the momentary upward glance of her eye. he think besides, 'this be a very odd beginning. I donot see where we be go.'
'I think,' say Sissy, 'you have already guess whom I leave just now!'
'I have be in the great concern and uneasiness during the last four-and-twenty hour (which have appear as many year),' he return, 'on a lady's account. the hope I have be encourage to form that you come from that lady, do not deceive I, I trust.'
'I leave she within an hour.'
'at - !'
'at her father's.'
Mr. Harthouse's face lengthen in spite of his coolness, and his perplexity increase. 'then I certainly,' he think, 'do not see where we be go.'
'she hurry there last night. she arrive there in great agitation, and be insensible all through the night. I live at her father's, and be with she. you may be sure, sir, you will never see she again as long as you live.'
Mr. Harthouse draw a long breath; and, if ever man find himself in the position of not know what to say, make the discovery beyond all question that he be so circumstanced. the child-like ingenuousness with which his visitor speak, her modest fearlessness, her truthfulness which put all artifice aside, her entire forgetfulness of herself in her earnest quiet holding to the object with which she have come; all this, together with her reliance on his easily give promise - which in itself sham he - present something in which he be so inexperienced, and against which he know any of his usual weapon would fall so powerless; that not a word could he rally to his relief.
at last he say:
'so startle an announcement, so confidently make, and by such lip, be really disconcert in the last degree. may I be permit to inquire, if you be charge to convey that information to I in those hopeless word, by the lady of whom we speak?'
'I have no charge from she.'
'the drown man catch at the straw. with no disrespect for your judgment, and with no doubt of your sincerity, excuse my saying that I cling to the belief that there be yet hope that I be not condemn to perpetual exile from that lady's presence.'
'there be not the least hope. the first object of my come here, sir, be to assure you that you must believe that there be no more hope of your ever speak with she again, than there would be if she have die when she come home last night.'
'must believe? but if I cannot - or if I should, by infirmity of nature, be obstinate - and willnot - '
'it be still true. there be no hope.'
James Harthouse look at she with an incredulous smile upon his lip; but her mind look over and beyond he, and the smile be quite throw away.
he bite his lip, and take a little time for consideration.
'well! if it should unhappily appear,' he say, 'after due pain and duty on my part, that I be bring to a position so desolate as this banishment, I shall not become the lady's persecutor. but you say you have no commission from she?'
'I have only the commission of my love for she, and her love for I. I have no other trust, than that I have be with she since she come home, and that she have give I her confidence. I have no further trust, than that I know something of her character and her marriage. o Mr. Harthouse, I think you have that trust too!'
he be touch in the cavity where his heart should have be - in that nest of addled egg, where the bird of heaven would have live if they have not be whistle away - by the fervour of this reproach.
'I be not a moral sort of fellow,' he say, 'and I never make any pretension to the character of a moral sort of fellow. I be as immoral as need be. at the same time, in bring any distress upon the lady who be the subject of the present conversation, or in unfortunately compromise she in any way, or in commit myself by any expression of sentiment towards she, not perfectly reconcilable with - in fact with - the domestic hearth; or in take any advantage of her father's be a machine, or of her brother's be a whelp, or of her husband's be a bear; I beg to be allow to assure you that I have have no particularly evil intention, but have glide on from one step to another with a smoothness so perfectly diabolical, that I have not the slight idea the catalogue be half so long until I begin to turn it over. whereas I find,' say Mr. James Harthouse, in conclusion, 'that it be really in several volume.'
though he say all this in his frivolous way, the way seem, for that once, a conscious polishing of but an ugly surface. he be silent for a moment; and then proceed with a more self-possess air, though with trace of vexation and disappointment that would not be polish out.
'after what have be just now represent to I, in a manner I find it impossible to doubt - I know of hardly any other source from which I could have accept it so readily - I feel bound to say to you, in whom the confidence you have mention have be repose, that I cannot refuse to contemplate the possibility (however unexpected) of my see the lady no more. I be solely to blame for the thing have come to this - and - and, I cannot say,' he add, rather hard up for a general peroration, 'that I have any sanguine expectation of ever become a moral sort of fellow, or that I have any belief in any moral sort of fellow whatever.'
Sissy's face sufficiently show that her appeal to he be not finish.
'you speak,' he resume, as she raise her eye to he again, 'of your first object. I may assume that there be a second to be mention?'
'yes.'
'will you oblige I by confide it?'
'Mr. Harthouse,' return Sissy, with a blending of gentleness and steadiness that quite defeat he, and with a simple confidence in his be bind to do what she require, that hold he at a singular disadvantage, 'the only reparation that remain with you, be to leave here immediately and finally. I be quite sure that you can mitigate in no other way the wrong and harm you have do. I be quite sure that it be the only compensation you have leave it in your power to make. I do not say that it be much, or that it be enough; but it be something, and it be necessary. therefore, though without any other authority than I have give you, and even without the knowledge of any other person than yourself and myself, I ask you to depart from this place to-night, under an obligation never to return to it.'
if she have assert any influence over he beyond her plain faith in the truth and right of what she say; if she have conceal the least doubt or irresolution, or have harbour for the good purpose any reserve or pretence; if she have show, or feel, the light trace of any sensitiveness to his ridicule or his astonishment, or any remonstrance he might offer; he would have carry it against she at this point. but he could as easily have change a clear sky by look at it in surprise, as affect she.
'but do you know,' he ask, quite at a loss, 'the extent of what you ask? you probably be not aware that I be here on a public kind of business, preposterous enough in itself, but which I have go in for, and swear by, and be suppose to be devoted to in quite a desperate manner? you probably be not aware of that, but I assure you itbe the fact.'
it have no effect on Sissy, fact or no fact.
'besides which,' say Mr. Harthouse, take a turn or two across the room, dubiously, 'itbe so alarmingly absurd. it would make a man so ridiculous, after go in for these fellow, to back out in such an incomprehensible way.'
'I be quite sure,' repeat Sissy, 'that it be the only reparation in your power, sir. I be quite sure, or I would not have come here.'
he glance at her face, and walk about again. 'upon my soul, I donot know what to say. so immensely absurd!'
it fall to his lot, now, to stipulate for secrecy.
'if I be to do such a very ridiculous thing,' he say, stop again presently, and lean against the chimney-piece, 'it could only be in the most inviolable confidence.'
'I will trust to you, sir,' return Sissy, 'and you will trust to I.'
his lean against the chimney-piece remind he of the night with the whelp. it be the self-same chimney-piece, and somehow he feel as if he be the whelp to-night. he could make no way at all.
'I suppose a man never be place in a more ridiculous position,' he say, after look down, and look up, and laugh, and frown, and walk off, and walk back again. 'but I see no way out of it. what will be, will be. this will be, I suppose. I must take off myself, I imagine - in short, I engage to do it.'
Sissy rise. she be not surprise by the result, but she be happy in it, and her face beam brightly.
'you will permit I to say,' continue Mr. James Harthouse, 'that I doubt if any other ambassador, or ambassadress, could have address I with the same success. I must not only regard myself as be in a very ridiculous position, but as be vanquish at all point. will you allow I the privilege of remember my enemy's name?'
'my name?' say the ambassadress.
'the only name I could possibly care to know, to-night.'
'Sissy Jupe.'
'pardon my curiosity at parting. relate to the family?'
'I be only a poor girl,' return Sissy. 'I be separate from my father - he be only a stroller - and take pity on by Mr. Gradgrind. I have live in the house ever since.'
she be go.
'it want this to complete the defeat,' say Mr. James Harthouse, sink, with a resign air, on the sofa, after stand transfix a little while. 'the defeat may now be consider perfectly accomplish. only a poor girl - only a stroller - only James Harthouse make nothing of - only James Harthouse a Great Pyramid of failure.'
the Great Pyramid put it into his head to go up the Nile. he take a pen upon the instant, and write the follow note (in appropriate hieroglyphic) to his brother:
Dear Jack, - all up at Coketown. bore out of the place, and go in for camel. affectionately, JEM,
he ring the bell.
'send my fellow here.'
'go to bed, sir.'
'tell he to get up, and pack up.'
he write two more note. one, to Mr. Bounderby, announce his retirement from that part of the country, and show where he would be find for the next fortnight. the other, similar in effect, to Mr. Gradgrind. almost as soon as the ink be dry upon their superscription, he have leave the tall chimney of Coketown behind, and be in a railway carriage, tear and glare over the dark landscape.
the moral sort of fellow might suppose that Mr. James Harthouse derive some comfortable reflection afterwards, from this prompt retreat, as one of his few action that make any amend for anything, and as a token to himself that he have escape the climax of a very bad business. but it be not so, at all. a secret sense of have fail and be ridiculous - a dread of what other fellow who go in for similar sort of thing, would say at his expense if they know it - so oppress he, that what be about the very good passage in his life be the one of all other he would not have own to on any account, and the only one that make he ashamed of himself.
CHAPTER iii - VERY decided
the indefatigable Mrs. Sparsit, with a violent cold upon she, her voice reduce to a whisper, and her stately frame so rack by continual sneeze that it seem in danger of dismemberment, give chase to her patron until she find he in the metropolis; and there, majestically sweep in upon he at his hotel in St. James's Street, explode the combustible with which she be charge, and blow up. have execute her mission with infinite relish, this high-minded woman then faint away on Mr. Bounderby's coat-collar.
Mr. Bounderby's first procedure be to shake Mrs. Sparsit off, and leave she to progress as she might through various stage of suffer on the floor. he next have recourse to the administration of potent restorative, such as screw the patient's thumb, smite her hand, abundantly water her face, and insert salt in her mouth. when these attention have recover she (which they speedily do), he hustle she into a fast train without offer any other refreshment, and carry she back to Coketown more dead than alive.
regard as a classical ruin, Mrs. Sparsit be an interesting spectacle on her arrival at her journey's end; but consider in any other light, the amount of damage she have by that time sustain be excessive, and impair her claim to admiration. utterly heedless of the wear and tear of her clothe and constitution, and adamant to her pathetic sneeze, Mr. Bounderby immediately cram she into a coach, and bear she off to Stone Lodge.
'now, Tom Gradgrind,' say Bounderby, burst into his father-in- law's room late at night; 'herebe a lady here - Mrs. Sparsit - you know Mrs. Sparsit - who have something to say to you that will strike you dumb.'
'you have miss my letter!' exclaim Mr. Gradgrind, surprise by the apparition.
'miss your letter, sir!' bawl Bounderby. 'the present time be no time for letter. no man shall talk to Josiah Bounderby of Coketown about letter, with his mind in the state itbe in now.'
'Bounderby,' say Mr. Gradgrind, in a tone of temperate remonstrance, 'I speak of a very special letter I have write to you, in reference to Louisa.'
'Tom Gradgrind,' reply Bounderby, knock the flat of his hand several time with great vehemence on the table, 'I speak of a very special messenger that have come to I, in reference to Louisa. Mrs. Sparsit, ma'am, stand forward!'
that unfortunate lady hereupon essay to offer testimony, without any voice and with painful gesture expressive of an inflame throat, become so aggravating and undergo so many facial contortion, that Mr. Bounderby, unable to bear it, seize she by the arm and shake she.
'if you cannot get it out, ma'am,' say Bounderby, 'leave I to get it out. this be not a time for a lady, however highly connected, to be totally inaudible, and seemingly swallow marble. Tom Gradgrind, Mrs. Sparsit latterly find herself, by accident, in a situation to overhear a conversation out of door between your daughter and your precious gentleman-friend, Mr. James Harthouse.'
'indeed!' say Mr. Gradgrind.
'ah! indeed!' cry Bounderby. 'and in that conversation - '
'it be not necessary to repeat its tenor, Bounderby. I know what pass.'
'you do? perhaps,' say Bounderby, star with all his might at his so quiet and assuasive father-in-law, 'you know where your daughter be at the present time!'
'undoubtedly. she be here.'
'here?'
'my dear Bounderby, let I beg you to restrain these loud out- break, on all account. louisa be here. the moment she could detach herself from that interview with the person of whom you speak, and whom I deeply regret to have be the mean of introduce to you, Louisa hurry here, for protection. I myself have not be at home many hour, when I receive she - here, in this room. she hurry by the train to town, she run from town to this house, through a rag storm, and present herself before I in a state of distraction. of course, she have remain here ever since. let I entreat you, for your own sake and for her, to be more quiet.'
Mr. Bounderby silently gaze about he for some moment, in every direction except Mrs. Sparsit's direction; and then, abruptly turn upon the niece of Lady Scadgers, say to that wretched woman:
'now, ma'am! we shall be happy to hear any little apology you may think proper to offer, for go about the country at express pace, with no other luggage than a Cock-and-a-Bull, ma'am!'
'Sir,' whisper Mrs. Sparsit, 'my nerve be at present too much shaken, and my health be at present too much impaired, in your service, to admit of my do more than take refuge in tear.' (which she do.)
'well, ma'am,' say Bounderby, 'without make any observation to you that may not be make with propriety to a woman of good family, what I have get to add to that, be that there be something else in which it appear to I you may take refuge, namely, a coach. and the coach in which we come here be at the door, youwill allow I to hand you down to it, and pack you home to the Bank: where the good course for you to pursue, will be to put your foot into the hot water you can bear, and take a glass of scald rum and butter after you get into bed.' with these word, Mr. Bounderby extend his right hand to the weeping lady, and escort she to the conveyance in question, shed many plaintive sneeze by the way. he soon return alone.
'now, as you show I in your face, Tom Gradgrind, that you want to speak to I,' he resume, 'here I be. but, I be not in a very agreeable state, I tell you plainly: not relish this business, even as it be, and not consider that I be at any time as dutifully and submissively treat by your daughter, as Josiah Bounderby of Coketown ought to be treat by his wife. you have your opinion, I dare say; and I have mine, I know. if you mean to say anything to I to-night, that go against this candid remark, you have well let it alone.'
Mr. Gradgrind, it will be observe, be much soften, Mr. Bounderby take particular pain to harden himself at all point. it be his amiable nature.
'my dear Bounderby,' Mr. Gradgrind begin in reply.
'now, youwill excuse I,' say Bounderby, 'but I donot want to be too dear. that, to start with. when I begin to be dear to a man, I generally find that his intention be to come over I. I be not speak to you politely; but, as you be aware, I be not polite. if you like politeness, you know where to get it. you have your gentleman-friend, you know, and theywill serve you with as much of the article as you want. I donot keep it myself.'
'Bounderby,' urge Mr. Gradgrind, 'we be all liable to mistake - '
'I think you couldnot make them,' interrupt Bounderby.
'perhaps I think so. but, I say we be all liable to mistake and I should feel sensible of your delicacy, and grateful for it, if you would spare I these reference to Harthouse. I shall not associate he in our conversation with your intimacy and encouragement; pray do not persist in connect he with mine.'
'I never mention his name!' say Bounderby.
'well, well!' return Mr. Gradgrind, with a patient, even a submissive, air. and he sit for a little while ponder. 'Bounderby, I see reason to doubt whether we have ever quite understand Louisa.'
'who do you mean by we?'
'let I say I, then,' he return, in answer to the coarsely blurt question; 'I doubt whether I have understand Louisa. I doubt whether I have be quite right in the manner of her education.'
'there you hit it,' return Bounderby. 'there I agree with you. you have find it out at last, have you? education! Iwill tell you what education be - to be tumble out of door, neck and crop, and put upon the short allowance of everything except blow. thatbe what I call education.'
'I think your good sense will perceive,' Mr. Gradgrind remonstrate in all humility, 'that whatever the merit of such a system may be, it would be difficult of general application to girl.'
'I donot see it at all, sir,' return the obstinate Bounderby.
'well,' sigh Mr. Gradgrind, 'we will not enter into the question. I assure you I have no desire to be controversial. I seek to repair what be amiss, if I possibly can; and I hope you will assist I in a good spirit, Bounderby, for I have be very much distressed.'
'I donot understand you, yet,' say Bounderby, with determined obstinacy, 'and therefore I willnot make any promise.'
'in the course of a few hour, my dear Bounderby,' Mr. Gradgrind proceed, in the same depressed and propitiatory manner, 'I appear to myself to have become well inform as to Louisa's character, than in previous year. the enlightenment have be painfully force upon I, and the discovery be not mine. I think there be - Bounderby, you will be surprised to hear I say this - I think there be quality in Louisa, which - which have be harshly neglect, and - and a little pervert. and - and I would suggest to you, that - that if you would kindly meet I in a timely endeavour to leave she to her well nature for a while - and to encourage it to develop itself by tenderness and consideration - it - it would be the well for the happiness of all of we. Louisa,' say Mr. Gradgrind, shade his face with his hand, 'have always be my favourite child.'
the blustrous Bounderby crimson and swell to such an extent on hear these word, that he seem to be, and probably be, on the brink of a fit. with his very ear a bright purple shot with crimson, he pen up his indignation, however, and say:
'youwould like to keep she here for a time?'
'i - I have intend to recommend, my dear Bounderby, that you should allow Louisa to remain here on a visit, and be attend by Sissy (I mean of course Cecilia Jupe), who understand she, and in whom she trust.'
'I gather from all this, Tom Gradgrind,' say Bounderby, stand up with his hand in his pocket, 'that you be of opinion that therebe what people call some incompatibility between Loo Bounderby and myself.'
'I fear there be at present a general incompatibility between Louisa, and - and - and almost all the relation in which I have place she,' be her father's sorrowful reply.
'now, look you here, Tom Gradgrind,' say Bounderby the flushed, confront he with his leg wide apart, his hand deeply in his pocket, and his hair like a hayfield wherein his windy anger be boisterous. 'you have say your say; I be go to say mine. I be a Coketown man. I be Josiah Bounderby of Coketown. I know the brick of this town, and I know the work of this town, and I know the chimney of this town, and I know the smoke of this town, and I know the Hands of this town. I know them all pretty well. theybe real. when a man tell I anything about imaginative quality, I always tell that man, whoever he be, that I know what he mean. he mean turtle soup and venison, with a gold spoon, and that he want to be set up with a coach and six. thatbe what your daughter want. since you be of opinion that she ought to have what she want, I recommend you to provide it for she. because, Tom Gradgrind, she will never have it from I.'
'Bounderby,' say Mr. Gradgrind, 'I hop, after my entreaty, you would have take a different tone.'
'just wait a bit,' retort Bounderby; 'you have say your say, I believe. I hear you out; hear I out, if you please. donot make yourself a spectacle of unfairness as well as inconsistency, because, although I be sorry to see Tom Gradgrind reduce to his present position, I should be doubly sorry to see he bring so low as that. now, therebe an incompatibility of some sort or another, I be give to understand by you, between your daughter and I. Iwill give you to understand, in reply to that, that there unquestionably be an incompatibility of the first magnitude - to be sum up in this - that your daughter donot properly know her husband's merit, and be not impressed with such a sense as would become she, by George! of the honour of his alliance. thatbe plain speak, I hope.'
'Bounderby,' urge Mr. Gradgrind, 'this be unreasonable.'
'be it?' say Bounderby. 'I be glad to hear you say so. because when Tom Gradgrind, with his new light, tell I that what I say be unreasonable, I be convince at once it must be devilish sensible. with your permission I be go on. you know my origin; and you know that for a good many year of my life I donot want a shoeing-horn, in consequence of not have a shoe. yet you may believe or not, as you think proper, that there be lady - bear lady - belong to family - Families! - who next to worship the ground I walk on.'
he discharge this like a Rocket, at his father-in-law's head.
'whereas your daughter,' proceed Bounderby, 'be far from be a bear lady. that you know, yourself. not that I care a pinch of candle-snuff about such thing, for you be very well aware I donot; but that such be the fact, and you, Tom Gradgrind, cannot change it. why do I say this?'
'not, I fear,' observe Mr. Gradgrind, in a low voice, 'to spare I.'
'hear I out,' say Bounderby, 'and refrain from cut in till your turn come round. I say this, because highly connect female have be astonish to see the way in which your daughter have conduct herself, and to witness her insensibility. they have wonder how I have suffer it. and I wonder myself now, and I willnot suffer it.'
'Bounderby,' return Mr. Gradgrind, rise, 'the less we say to- night the well, I think.'
'on the contrary, Tom Gradgrind, the more we say to-night, the well, I think. that be,' the consideration check he, 'till I have say all I mean to say, and then I donot care how soon we stop. I come to a question that may shorten the business. what do you mean by the proposal you make just now?'
'what do I mean, Bounderby?'
'by your visit proposition,' say Bounderby, with an inflexible jerk of the hayfield.
'I mean that I hope you may be induce to arrange in a friendly manner, for allow Louisa a period of repose and reflection here, which may tend to a gradual alteration for the well in many respect.'
'to a softening down of your idea of the incompatibility?' say Bounderby.
'if you put it in those term.'
'what make you think of this?' say Bounderby.
'I have already say, I fear Louisa have not be understand. be it ask too much, Bounderby, that you, so far her elder, should aid in try to set she right? you have accept a great charge of she; for well for bad, for - '
Mr. Bounderby may have be annoy by the repetition of his own word to Stephen Blackpool, but he cut the quotation short with an angry start.
'come!' say he, 'I donot want to be tell about that. I know what I take she for, as well as you do. never you mind what I take she for; thatbe my look out.'
'I be merely go on to remark, Bounderby, that we may all be more or less in the wrong, not even except you; and that some yield on your part, remember the trust you have accept, may not only be an act of true kindness, but perhaps a debt incur towards Louisa.'
'I think differently,' bluster Bounderby. 'I be go to finish this business accord to my own opinion. now, I donot want to make a quarrel of it with you, Tom Gradgrind. to tell you the truth, I donot think it would be worthy of my reputation to quarrel on such a subject. as to your gentleman-friend, he may take himself off, wherever he like well. if he fall in my way, I shall tell he my mind; if he donot fall in my way, I shallnot, for it willnot be worth my while to do it. as to your daughter, whom I make Loo Bounderby, and might have do well by leave Loo Gradgrind, if she donot come home to-morrow, by twelve o'clock at noon, I shall understand that she prefer to stay away, and I shall send she wear apparel and so forth over here, and youwill take charge of she for the future. what I shall say to people in general, of the incompatibility that lead to my so lay down the law, will be this. I be Josiah Bounderby, and I have my bringing- up; shebe the daughter of Tom Gradgrind, and she have she bringing- up; and the two horse wouldnot pull together. I be pretty well known to be rather an uncommon man, I believe; and most people will understand fast enough that it must be a woman rather out of the common, also, who, in the long run, would come up to my mark.'
'let I seriously entreat you to reconsider this, Bounderby,' urge Mr. Gradgrind, 'before you commit yourself to such a decision.'
'I always come to a decision,' say Bounderby, toss his hat on: 'and whatever I do, I do at once. I should be surprised at Tom Gradgrind's address such a remark to Josiah Bounderby of Coketown, know what he know of he, if I could be surprise by anything Tom Gradgrind do, after his make himself a party to sentimental humbug. I have give you my decision, and I have get no more to say. good night!'
so Mr. Bounderby go home to his town house to bed. at five minute past twelve o'clock next day, he direct Mrs. Bounderby's property to be carefully pack up and send to Tom Gradgrind's; advertise his country retreat for sale by private contract; and resume a bachelor life.
CHAPTER IV - LOST
the robbery at the Bank have not languish before, and do not cease to occupy a front place in the attention of the principal of that establishment now. in boastful proof of his promptitude and activity, as a remarkable man, and a self-make man, and a commercial wonder more admirable than Venus, who have rise out of the mud instead of the sea, he like to show how little his domestic affair abate his business ardour. consequently, in the first few week of his resume bachelorhood, he even advance upon his usual display of bustle, and every day make such a rout in renew his investigation into the robbery, that the officer who have it in hand almost wish it have never be commit.
they be at fault too, and off the scent. although they have be so quiet since the first outbreak of the matter, that most people really do suppose it to have be abandon as hopeless, nothing new occur. no implicated man or woman take untimely courage, or make a self-betray step. more remarkable yet, Stephen Blackpool could not be hear of, and the mysterious old woman remain a mystery.
thing have come to this pass, and show no latent sign of stir beyond it, the upshot of Mr. Bounderby's investigation be, that he resolve to hazard a bold burst. he draw up a placard, offer Twenty Pounds reward for the apprehension of Stephen Blackpool, suspect of complicity in the robbery of Coketown Bank on such a night; he describe the say Stephen Blackpool by dress, complexion, estimate height, and manner, as minutely as he could; he recite how he have leave the town, and in what direction he have be last see go; he have the whole print in great black letter on a star broadsheet; and he cause the wall to be post with it in the dead of night, so that it should strike upon the sight of the whole population at one blow.
the factory-bell have nee to ring their loudest that morning to disperse the group of worker who stand in the tardy daybreak, collect round the placard, devour they with eager eye. not the least eager of the eye assemble, be the eye of those who could not read. these people, as they listen to the friendly voice that read aloud - there be always some such ready to help they - star at the character which mean so much with a vague awe and respect that would have be half ludicrous, if any aspect of public ignorance could ever be otherwise than threaten and full of evil. many ear and eye be busy with a vision of the matter of these placard, among turn spindle, rattle loom, and whirl wheel, for hour afterwards; and when the Hands clear out again into the street, there be still as many reader as before.
Slackbridge, the delegate, have to address his audience too that night; and Slackbridge have obtain a clean bill from the printer, and have bring it in his pocket. oh, my friend and fellow- countryman, the down-trodden operative of Coketown, oh, my fellow- brother and fellow-workman and fellow-citizen and fellowman, what a to-do be there, when Slackbridge unfold what he call 'that damn document,' and hold it up to the gaze, and for the execration of the working-man community! 'oh, my fellow-man, behold of what a traitor in the camp of those great spirit who be enrol upon the holy scroll of Justice and of Union, be appropriately capable! oh, my prostrate friend, with the gall yoke of tyrant on your neck and the iron foot of despotism treading down your fall form into the dust of the earth, upon which right glad would your oppressor be to see you creep on your belly all the day of your life, like the serpent in the garden - oh, my brother, and shall I as a man not add, my sister too, what do you say, now, of Stephen Blackpool, with a slight stoop in his shoulder and about five foot seven in height, as set forth in this degrading and disgusting document, this blight bill, this pernicious placard, this abominable advertisement; and with what majesty of denouncement will you crush the viper, who would bring this stain and shame upon the God-like race that happily have cast he out for ever! yes, my compatriot, happily cast he out and send he forth! for you remember how he stand here before you on this platform; you remember how, face to face and foot to foot, I pursue he through all his intricate winding; you remember how he sneak and slunk, and sidle, and splitte of straw, until, with not an inch of ground to which to cling, I hurl he out from amongst we: an object for the undying finger of scorn to point at, and for the avenge fire of every free and think mind to scorch and scar! and now, my friend - my labour friend, for I rejoice and triumph in that stigma - my friend whose hard but honest bed be make in toil, and whose scanty but independent pot be boil in hardship; and now, I say, my friend, what appellation have that dastard craven take to himself, when, with the mask tear from his feature, he stand before we in all his native deformity, a what? a thief! a plunderer! a proscribe fugitive, with a price upon his head; a fester and a wound upon the noble character of the Coketown operative! therefore, my band of brother in a sacred bond, to which your child and your child's child yet unborn have set their infant hand and seal, I propose to you on the part of the United Aggregate Tribunal, ever watchful for your welfare, ever zealous for your benefit, that this meeting do resolve: that Stephen Blackpool, weaver, refer to in this placard, have be already solemnly disown by the community of Coketown Hands, the same be free from the shame of his misdeed, and cannot as a class be reproach with his dishonest action!'
thus Slackbridge; gnashing and perspiring after a prodigious sort. a few stern voice call out 'no!' and a score or two hail, with assent cry of 'hear, hear!' the caution from one man, 'Slackbridge, y'or over hetter in't; y'or a goen too fast!' but these be pigmy against an army; the general assemblage subscribe to the gospel accord to Slackbridge, and give three cheer for he, as he sit demonstratively pant at they.
these man and woman be yet in the street, pass quietly to their home, when Sissy, who have be call away from Louisa some minute before, return.
'who be it?' ask Louisa.
'it be Mr. Bounderby,' say Sissy, timid of the name, 'and your brother Mr. Tom, and a young woman who say her name be Rachael, and that you know she.'
'what do they want, Sissy dear?'
'they want to see you. Rachael have be cry, and seem angry.'
'Father,' say Louisa, for he be present, 'I cannot refuse to see they, for a reason that will explain itself. shall they come in here?'
as he answer in the affirmative, Sissy go away to bring they. she reappear with they directly. Tom be last; and remain stand in the obscurest part of the room, near the door.
'Mrs. Bounderby,' say her husband, enter with a cool nod, 'I donot disturb you, I hope. this be an unseasonable hour, but here be a young woman who have be make statement which render my visit necessary. Tom Gradgrind, as your son, young Tom, refuse for some obstinate reason or other to say anything at all about those statement, good or bad, I be oblige to confront she with your daughter.'
'you have see I once before, young lady,' say Rachael, stand in front of Louisa.
Tom cough.
'you have see I, young lady,' repeat Rachael, as she do not answer, 'once before.'
Tom cough again.
'I have.'
Rachael cast her eye proudly towards Mr. Bounderby, and say, 'will you make it know, young lady, where, and who be there?'
'I go to the house where Stephen Blackpool lodge, on the night of his discharge from his work, and I see you there. he be there too; and an old woman who do not speak, and whom I could scarcely see, stand in a dark corner. my brother be with I.'
'why couldnot you say so, young Tom?' demand Bounderby.
'I promise my sister I wouldnot.' which Louisa hastily confirm. 'and besides,' say the whelp bitterly, 'she tell her own story so precious well - and so full - that what business have I to take it out of her mouth!'
'say, young lady, if you please,' pursue Rachael, 'why, in an evil hour, you ever come to Stephen's that night.'
'I feel compassion for he,' say Louisa, her colour deepening, 'and I wish to know what he be go to do, and wish to offer he assistance.'
'thank you, ma'am,' say Bounderby. 'much flatter and oblige.'
'do you offer he,' ask Rachael, 'a bank-note?'
'yes; but he refuse it, and would only take two pound in gold.'
Rachael cast her eye towards Mr. Bounderby again.
'oh, certainly!' say Bounderby. 'if you put the question whether your ridiculous and improbable account be true or not, I be bind to say itbe confirm.'
'Young lady,' say Rachael, 'Stephen Blackpool be now name as a thief in public print all over this town, and where else! there have be a meeting to-night where he have be speak of in the same shameful way. Stephen! the honest lad, the true lad, the good!' her indignation fail she, and she break off sob.
'I be very, very sorry,' say Louisa.
'oh, young lady, young lady,' return Rachael, 'I hope you may be, but I donot know! I cannot say what you may ha' do! the like of you donot know we, donot care for we, donot belong to we. I be not sure why you may ha' come that night. I cannot tell but what you may ha' come wi' some aim of your own, not mindin to what trouble you bring such as the poor lad. I say then, bless you for come; and I say it of my heart, you seem to take so pitifully to he; but I donot know now, I donot know!'
Louisa could not reproach she for her unjust suspicion; she be so faithful to her idea of the man, and so afflict.
'and when I think,' say Rachael through her sob, 'that the poor lad be so grateful, thinkin you so good to he - when I mind that he put his hand over his hard-worken face to hide the tear that you bring up there - oh, I hope you may be sorry, and ha' no bad cause to be it; but I donot know, I donot know!'
'yoube a pretty article,' growl the whelp, move uneasily in his dark corner, 'to come here with these precious imputation! you ought to be bundle out for not know how to behave yourself, and you would be by right.'
she say nothing in reply; and her low weeping be the only sound that be hear, until Mr. Bounderby speak.
'come!' say he, 'you know what you have engage to do. you have well give your mind to that; not this.'
''deed, I be loath,' return Rachael, dry her eye, 'that any here should see I like this; but I willnot be see so again. young lady, when I have read whatbe put in print of Stephen - and what have just as much truth in it as if it have be put in print of you - I go straight to the Bank to say I know where Stephen be, and to give a sure and certain promise that he should be here in two day. I couldnot meet wi' Mr. Bounderby then, and your brother send I away, and I try to find you, but you be not to be find, and I go back to work. soon as I come out of the Mill to-night, I hasten to hear what be say of Stephen - for I know wi' pride he will come back to shame it! - and then I go again to seek Mr. Bounderby, and I find he, and I tell he every word I know; and he believe no word I say, and bring I here.'
'so far, thatbe true enough,' assent Mr. Bounderby, with his hand in his pocket and his hat on. 'but I have know you people before to-day, youwill observe, and I know you never die for want of talk. now, I recommend you not so much to mind talk just now, as do. you have undertake to do something; all I remark upon that at present be, do it!'
'I have write to Stephen by the post that go out this afternoon, as I have write to he once before sin' he go away,' say Rachael; 'and he will be here, at furth, in two day.'
'then, Iwill tell you something. you be not aware perhaps,' retort Mr. Bounderby, 'that you yourself have be look after now and then, not be consider quite free from suspicion in this business, on account of most people be judge accord to the company they keep. the post-office havenot be forget either. what Iwill tell you be, that no letter to Stephen Blackpool have ever get into it. therefore, what have become of your, I leave you to guess. perhaps yoube mistaken, and never write any.'
'he havenot be go from here, young lady,' say Rachael, turn appealingly to Louisa, 'as much as a week, when he send I the only letter I have have from he, say that he be force to seek work in another name.'
'oh, by George!' cry Bounderby, shake his head, with a whistle, 'he change his name, do he! thatbe rather unlucky, too, for such an immaculate chap. itbe consider a little suspicious in Courts of Justice, I believe, when an Innocent happen to have many name.'
'what,' say Rachael, with the tear in her eye again, 'what, young lady, in the name of Mercy, be leave the poor lad to do! the master against he on one hand, the man against he on the other, he only wantin to work hard in peace, and do what he feel right. can a man have no soul of his own, no mind of his own? must he go wrong all through wi' this side, or must he go wrong all through wi' that, or else be hunt like a hare?'
'indeed, indeed, I pity he from my heart,' return Louisa; 'and I hope that he will clear himself.'
'you need have no fear of that, young lady. he be sure!'
'all the surer, I suppose,' say Mr. Bounderby, 'for your refuse to tell where he be? eh?'
'he shall not, through any act of mine, come back wi' the unmerited reproach of be bring back. he shall come back of his own accord to clear himself, and put all those that have injure his good character, and he not here for its defence, to shame. I have tell he what have be do against he,' say Rachael, throw off all distrust as a rock throw of the sea, 'and he will be here, at furth, in two day.'
'Notwithstanding which,' add Mr. Bounderby, 'if he can be lay hold of any soon, he shall have an early opportunity of clear himself. as to you, I have nothing against you; what you come and tell I turn out to be true, and I have give you the mean of prove it to be true, and therebe an end of it. I wish you good night all! I must be off to look a little far into this.'
Tom come out of his corner when Mr. Bounderby move, move with he, keep close to he, and go away with he. the only part salutation of which he deliver himself be a sulky 'good night, father!' with a brief speech, and a scowl at his sister, he leave the house.
since his sheet-anchor have come home, Mr. Gradgrind have be spar of speech. he still sit silent, when Louisa mildly say:
'Rachael, you will not distrust I one day, when you know I well.'
'it go against I,' Rachael answer, in a gentler manner, 'to mistrust any one; but when I be so mistrusted - when we all be - I cannot keep such thing quite out of my mind. I ask your pardon for have do you an injury. I donot think what I say now. yet I might come to think it again, wi' the poor lad so wrong.'
'do you tell he in your letter,' inquire Sissy, 'that suspicion seem to have fall upon he, because he have be see about the Bank at night? he would then know what he would have to explain on come back, and would be ready.'
'yes, dear,' she return; 'but I cannot guess what can have ever take he there. he never use to go there. it be never in his way. his way be the same as mine, and not near it.'
Sissy have already be at her side ask she where she live, and whether she might come to-morrow night, to inquire if there be news of he.
'I doubt,' say Rachael, 'if he can be here till next day.'
'then I will come next night too,' say Sissy.
when Rachael, assent to this, be go, Mr. Gradgrind lift up his head, and say to his daughter:
'Louisa, my dear, I have never, that I know of, see this man. do you believe he to be implicate?'
'I think I have believe it, father, though with great difficulty. I do not believe it now.'
'that be to say, you once persuade yourself to believe it, from know he to be suspect. his appearance and manner; be they so honest?'
'very honest.'
'and her confidence not to be shake! I ask myself,' say Mr. Gradgrind, musing, 'do the real culprit know of these accusation? where be he? who be he?'
his hair have latterly begin to change its colour. as he lean upon his hand again, look gray and old, Louisa, with a face of fear and pity, hurriedly go over to he, and sit close at his side. her eye by accident meet Sissy's at the moment. Sissy flush and start, and Louisa put her finger on her lip.
next night, when Sissy return home and tell Louisa that Stephen be not come, she tell it in a whisper. next night again, when she come home with the same account, and add that he have not be hear of, she speak in the same low frightened tone. from the moment of that interchange of look, they never utter his name, or any reference to he, aloud; nor ever pursue the subject of the robbery, when Mr. Gradgrind speak of it.
the two appoint day run out, three day and night run out, and Stephen Blackpool be not come, and remain unheard of. on the fourth day, Rachael, with unabated confidence, but consider her despatch to have miscarry, go up to the Bank, and show her letter from he with his address, at a work colony, one of many, not upon the main road, sixty mile away. messenger be send to that place, and the whole town look for Stephen to be bring in next day.
during this whole time the whelp move about with Mr. Bounderby like his shadow, assist in all the proceeding. he be greatly excited, horribly fevere, bit his nail down to the quick, speak in a hard rattle voice, and with lip that be black and burn up. at the hour when the suspect man be look for, the whelp be at the station; offer to wager that he have make off before the arrival of those who be send in quest of he, and that he would not appear.
the whelp be right. the messenger return alone. Rachael's letter have go, Rachael's letter have be deliver. Stephen Blackpool have decamp in that same hour; and no soul know more of he. the only doubt in Coketown be, whether Rachael have write in good faith, believe that he really would come back, or warn he to fly. on this point opinion be divide.
six day, seven day, far on into another week. the wretched whelp pluck up a ghastly courage, and begin to grow defiant. 'be the suspect fellow the thief? a pretty question! if not, where be the man, and why do he not come back?'
where be the man, and why do he not come back? in the dead of night the echo of his own word, which have roll Heaven know how far away in the daytime, come back instead, and abide by he until morning. 
CHAPTER V - FOUND
day and night again, day and night again. no Stephen Blackpool. where be the man, and why do he not come back?
every night, Sissy go to Rachael's lodging, and sit with she in her small neat room. all day, Rachael toil as such people must toil, whatever their anxiety. the smoke-serpent be indifferent who be lose or find, who turn out bad or good; the melancholy mad elephant, like the Hard Fact man, abate nothing of their set routine, whatever happen. day and night again, day and night again. the monotony be unbroken. even Stephen Blackpool's disappearance be fall into the general way, and become as monotonous a wonder as any piece of machinery in Coketown.
'I misdoubt,' say Rachael, 'if there be as many as twenty left in all this place, who have any trust in the poor dear lad now.'
she say it to Sissy, as they sit in her lodging, light only by the lamp at the street corner. Sissy have come there when it be already dark, to await her return from work; and they have since sit at the window where Rachael have find she, want no bright light to shine on their sorrowful talk.
'if it havenot be mercifully bring about, that I be to have you to speak to,' pursue Rachael, 'time be, when I think my mind would not have keep right. but I get hope and strength through you; and you believe that though appearance may rise against he, he will be prove clear?'
'I do believe so,' return Sissy, 'with my whole heart. I feel so certain, Rachael, that the confidence you hold in yours against all discouragement, be not like to be wrong, that I have no more doubt of he than if I have know he through as many year of trial as you have.'
'and I, my dear,' say Rachel, with a tremble in her voice, 'have know he through they all, to be, accord to his quiet way, so faithful to everything honest and good, that if he be never to be hear of more, and I be to live to be a hundred year old, I could say with my last breath, God know my heart. I have never once leave trust Stephen Blackpool!'
'we all believe, up at the Lodge, Rachael, that he will be free from suspicion, soon or later.'
'the well I know it to be so believe there, my dear,' say Rachael, 'and the kind I feel it that you come away from there, purposely to comfort I, and keep I company, and be see wi' I when I be not yet free from all suspicion myself, the more grieve I be that I should ever have speak those mistrust word to the young lady. and yet I - '
'you donot mistrust she now, Rachael?'
'now that you have bring we more together, no. but I cannot at all time keep out of my mind - '
her voice so sink into a low and slow communing with herself, that Sissy, sit by her side, be oblige to listen with attention.
'I cannot at all time keep out of my mind, mistrusting of some one. I cannot think who 'tis, I cannot think how or why it may be do, but I mistrust that some one have put Stephen out of the way. I mistrust that by his come back of his own accord, and show himself innocent before they all, some one would be confound, who - to prevent that - have stop he, and put he out of the way.'
'that be a dreadful thought,' say Sissy, turn pale.
'it be a dreadful thought to think he may be murder.'
Sissy shudder, and turn paler yet.
'when it make its way into my mind, dear,' say Rachael, 'and it will come sometimes, though I do all I can to keep it out, wi' counting on to high number as I work, and say over and over again piece that I know when I be a child - I fall into such a wild, hot hurry, that, however tired I be, I want to walk fast, mile and mile. I must get the well of this before bed-time. Iwill walk home wi' you.'
'he might fall ill upon the journey back,' say Sissy, faintly offer a wear-out scrap of hope; 'and in such a case, there be many place on the road where he might stop.'
'but he be in none of they. he have be seek for in all, and hebe not there.'
'true,' be Sissy's reluctant admission.
'hewould walk the journey in two day. if he be footsore and couldnot walk, I send he, in the letter he get, the money to ride, lest he should have none of his own to spare.'
'let we hope that to-morrow will bring something well, Rachael. come into the air!'
her gentle hand adjust Rachael's shawl upon her shin black hair in the usual manner of she wear it, and they go out. the night be fine, little knot of Hands be here and there linger at street corner; but it be supper-time with the great part of they, and there be but few people in the street.
'yoube not so hurried now, Rachael, and your hand be cool.'
'I get well, dear, if I can only walk, and breathe a little fresh. 'time when I cannot, I turn weak and confused.'
'but you must not begin to fail, Rachael, for you may be want at any time to stand by Stephen. to-morrow be Saturday. if no news come to-morrow, let we walk in the country on Sunday morning, and strengthen you for another week. will you go?'
'yes, dear.'
they be by this time in the street where Mr. Bounderby's house stand. the way to Sissy's destination lead they past the door, and they be go straight towards it. some train have newly arrive in Coketown, which have put a number of vehicle in motion, and scatter a considerable bustle about the town. several coach be rattle before they and behind they as they approach Mr. Bounderby's, and one of the latter draw up with such briskness as they be in the act of pass the house, that they look round involuntarily. the bright gaslight over Mr. Bounderby's step show they Mrs. Sparsit in the coach, in an ecstasy of excitement, struggle to open the door; Mrs. Sparsit see they at the same moment, call to they to stop.
'itbe a coincidence,' exclaim Mrs. Sparsit, as she be release by the coachman. 'itbe a providence! come out, ma'am!' then say Mrs. Sparsit, to some one inside, 'come out, or wewill have you drag out!'
Hereupon, no other than the mysterious old woman descend. whom Mrs. Sparsit incontinently collar.
'leave she alone, everybody!' cry Mrs. Sparsit, with great energy. 'let nobody touch she. she belong to I. come in, ma'am!' then say Mrs. Sparsit, reverse her former word of command. 'come in, ma'am, or wewill have you drag in!'
the spectacle of a matron of classical deportment, seize an ancient woman by the throat, and haul she into a dwelling-house, would have be under any circumstance, sufficient temptation to all true english straggler so blest as to witness it, to force a way into that dwelling-house and see the matter out. but when the phenomenon be enhance by the notoriety and mystery by this time associate all over the town with the Bank robbery, it would have lure the straggler in, with an irresistible attraction, though the roof have be expect to fall upon their head. accordingly, the chance witness on the ground, consist of the busy of the neighbour to the number of some five-and-twenty, close in after Sissy and Rachael, as they close in after Mrs. Sparsit and her prize; and the whole body make a disorderly irruption into Mr. Bounderby's dining-room, where the people behind lose not a moment's time in mount on the chair, to get the well of the people in front.
'Fetch Mr. Bounderby down!' cry Mrs. Sparsit. 'Rachael, young woman; you know who this be?'
'itbe Mrs. Pegler,' say Rachael.
'I should think it be!' cry Mrs. Sparsit, exult. 'Fetch Mr. Bounderby. stand away, everybody!' here old Mrs. Pegler, muffle herself up, and shrink from observation, whisper a word of entreaty. 'donot tell I,' say Mrs. Sparsit, aloud. 'I have tell you twenty time, come along, that I will not leave you till I have hand you over to he myself.'
Mr. Bounderby now appear, accompany by Mr. Gradgrind and the whelp, with whom he have be hold conference up-stair. Mr. Bounderby look more astonished than hospitable, at sight of this uninvited party in his dining-room.
'why, whatbe the matter now!' say he. 'Mrs. Sparsit, ma'am?'
'Sir,' explain that worthy woman, 'I trust it be my good fortune to produce a person you have much desire to find. stimulate by my wish to relieve your mind, sir, and connect together such imperfect clue to the part of the country in which that person might be suppose to reside, as have be afford by the young woman, Rachael, fortunately now present to identify, I have have the happiness to succeed, and to bring that person with I - I need not say most unwillingly on her part. it have not be, sir, without some trouble that I have effect this; but trouble in your service be to I a pleasure, and hunger, thirst, and cold a real gratification.'
here Mrs. Sparsit cease; for Mr. Bounderby's visage exhibit an extraordinary combination of all possible colour and expression of discomfiture, as old Mrs. Pegler be disclose to his view.
'why, what do you mean by this?' be his highly unexpected demand, in great warmth. 'I ask you, what do you mean by this, Mrs. Sparsit, ma'am?'
'Sir!' exclaim Mrs. Sparsit, faintly.
'why donot you mind your own business, ma'am?' roar Bounderby. 'how dare you go and poke your officious nose into my family affair?'
this allusion to her favourite feature overpower Mrs. Sparsit. she sit down stiffly in a chair, as if she be frozen; and with a fix stare at Mr. Bounderby, slowly grate her mitten against one another, as if they be freeze too.
'my dear Josiah!' cry Mrs. Pegler, tremble. 'my darling boy! I be not to blame. itbe not my fault, Josiah. I tell this lady over and over again, that I know she be do what would not be agreeable to you, but she would do it.'
'what do you let she bring you for? couldnot you knock her cap off, or her tooth out, or scratch she, or do something or other to she?' ask Bounderby.
'my own boy! she threaten I that if I resist she, I should be bring by constable, and it be well to come quietly than make that stir in such a' - Mrs. Pegler glance timidly but proudly round the wall - 'such a fine house as this. indeed, indeed, it be not my fault! my dear, noble, stately boy! I have always live quiet, and secret, Josiah, my dear. I have never break the condition once. I have never say I be your mother. I have admire you at a distance; and if I have come to town sometimes, with long time between, to take a proud peep at you, I have do it unbeknown, my love, and go away again.'
Mr. Bounderby, with his hand in his pocket, walk in impatient mortification up and down at the side of the long dining-table, while the spectator greedily take in every syllable of Mrs. Pegler's appeal, and at each succeed syllable become more and more round-eye. Mr. Bounderby still walk up and down when Mrs. Pegler have do, Mr. Gradgrind address that malign old lady:
'I be surprised, madam,' he observe with severity, 'that in your old age you have the face to claim Mr. Bounderby for your son, after your unnatural and inhuman treatment of he.'
'I unnatural!' cry poor old Mrs. Pegler. 'I inhuman! to my dear boy?'
'dear!' repeat Mr. Gradgrind. 'yes; dear in his self-make prosperity, madam, I dare say. not very dear, however, when you desert he in his infancy, and leave he to the brutality of a drunken grandmother.'
'I desert my Josiah!' cry Mrs. Pegler, clasp her hand. 'now, Lord forgive you, sir, for your wicked imagination, and for your scandal against the memory of my poor mother, who die in my arm before Josiah be bear. may you repent of it, sir, and live to know well!'
she be so very earnest and injure, that Mr. Gradgrind, shock by the possibility which dawn upon he, say in a gentle tone:
'do you deny, then, madam, that you leave your son to - to be bring up in the gutter?'
'Josiah in the gutter!' exclaim Mrs. Pegler. 'no such a thing, sir. never! for shame on you! my dear boy know, and will give you to know, that though he come of humble parent, he come of parent that love he as dear as the good could, and never think it hardship on themselves to pinch a bit that he might write and cipher beautiful, and Ihave his book at home to show it! aye, have I!' say Mrs. Pegler, with indignant pride. 'and my dear boy know, and will give you to know, sir, that after his beloved father die, when he be eight year old, his mother, too, could pinch a bit, as it be her duty and her pleasure and her pride to do it, to help he out in life, and put he 'prentice. and a steady lad he be, and a kind master he have to lend he a hand, and well he work his own way forward to be rich and thriving. and Iwill give you to know, sir - for this my dear boy willnot - that though his mother keep but a little village shop, he never forget she, but pension I on thirty pound a year - more than I want, for I put by out of it - only make the condition that I be to keep down in my own part, and make no boast about he, and not trouble he. and I never have, except with look at he once a year, when he have never know it. and itbe right,' say poor old Mrs. Pegler, in affectionate championship, 'that I should keep down in my own part, and I have no doubt that if I be here I should do a many unbefitte thing, and I be well content, and I can keep my pride in my Josiah to myself, and I can love for love's own sake! and I be ashamed of you, sir,' say Mrs. Pegler, lastly, 'for your slander and suspicion. and I never stand here before, nor never want to stand here when my dear son say no. and I shouldnot be here now, if it havenot be for be bring here. and for shame upon you, oh, for shame, to accuse I of be a bad mother to my son, with my son stand here to tell you so different!'
the bystander, on and off the dining-room chair, raise a murmur of sympathy with Mrs. Pegler, and Mr. Gradgrind feel himself innocently place in a very distressing predicament, when Mr. Bounderby, who have never cease walk up and down, and have every moment swell large and large, and grow redder and redder, stop short.
'I donot exactly know,' say Mr. Bounderby, 'how I come to be favour with the attendance of the present company, but I donot inquire. when theybe quite satisfied, perhaps theywill be so good as to disperse; whether theybe satisfied or not, perhaps theywill be so good as to disperse. Ibe not bind to deliver a lecture on my family affair, I have not undertake to do it, and Ibe not a go to do it. therefore those who expect any explanation whatever upon that branch of the subject, will be disappoint - particularly Tom Gradgrind, and he cannot know it too soon. in reference to the Bank robbery, there have be a mistake make, concern my mother. if there havenot be over-officiousness it wouldnot have be make, and I hate over-officiousness at all time, whether or no. good evening!'
although Mr. Bounderby carry it off in these term, hold the door open for the company to depart, there be a bluster sheepishness upon he, at once extremely crestfallen and superlatively absurd. detect as the Bully of humility, who have build his windy reputation upon lie, and in his boastfulness have put the honest truth as far away from he as if he have advance the mean claim (there be no meaner) to tack himself on to a pedigree, he cut a most ridiculous figure. with the people file off at the door he hold, who he know would carry what have pass to the whole town, to be give to the four wind, he could not have look a Bully more shorn and forlorn, if he have have his ear crop. even that unlucky female, Mrs. Sparsit, fall from her pinnacle of exultation into the Slough of Despond, be not in so bad a plight as that remarkable man and self-make Humbug, Josiah Bounderby of Coketown.
Rachael and Sissy, leave Mrs. Pegler to occupy a bed at her son's for that night, walk together to the gate of Stone Lodge and there part. Mr. Gradgrind join they before they have go very far, and speak with much interest of Stephen Blackpool; for whom he think this signal failure of the suspicion against Mrs. Pegler be likely to work well.
as to the whelp; throughout this scene as on all other late occasion, he have stick close to Bounderby. he seem to feel that as long as Bounderby could make no discovery without his knowledge, he be so far safe. he never visit his sister, and have only see she once since she go home: that be to say on the night when he still stick close to Bounderby, as already relate.
there be one dim unformed fear linger about his sister's mind, to which she never give utterance, which surround the graceless and ungrateful boy with a dreadful mystery. the same dark possibility have present itself in the same shapeless guise, this very day, to Sissy, when Rachael speak of some one who would be confound by Stephen's return, have put he out of the way. Louisa have never speak of harbour any suspicion of her brother in connexion with the robbery, she and Sissy have hold no confidence on the subject, save in that one interchange of look when the unconscious father rest his gray head on his hand; but it be understand between they, and they both know it. this other fear be so awful, that it hover about each of they like a ghostly shadow; neither dare to think of its being near herself, far less of its being near the other.
and still the forced spirit which the whelp have pluck up, throve with he. if Stephen Blackpool be not the thief, let he show himself. why donot he?
another night. another day and night. no Stephen Blackpool. where be the man, and why do he not come back?
CHAPTER VI - THE STARLIGHT
the Sunday be a bright Sunday in autumn, clear and cool, when early in the morning Sissy and Rachael meet, to walk in the country.
as Coketown cast ash not only on its own head but on the neighbourhood's too - after the manner of those pious person who do penance for their own sin by put other people into sackcloth - it be customary for those who now and then thirst for a draught of pure air, which be not absolutely the most wicked among the vanity of life, to get a few mile away by the railroad, and then begin their walk, or their lounge in the field. Sissy and Rachael help themselves out of the smoke by the usual mean, and be put down at a station about midway between the town and Mr. Bounderby's retreat.
though the green landscape be blot here and there with heap of coal, it be green elsewhere, and there be tree to see, and there be lark singing (though it be Sunday), and there be pleasant scent in the air, and all be over-arch by a bright blue sky. in the distance one way, Coketown show as a black mist; in another distance hill begin to rise; in a third, there be a faint change in the light of the horizon where it shine upon the far-off sea. under their foot, the grass be fresh; beautiful shadow of branch flicker upon it, and speckle it; hedgerow be luxuriant; everything be at peace. engine at pit' mouth, and lean old horse that have wear the circle of their daily labour into the ground, be alike quiet; wheel have cease for a short space to turn; and the great wheel of earth seem to revolve without the shock and noise of another time.
they walk on across the field and down the shady lane, sometimes get over a fragment of a fence so rotten that it drop at a touch of the foot, sometimes pass near a wreck of brick and beam overgrow with grass, mark the site of deserted work. they follow path and track, however slight. mound where the grass be rank and high, and where bramble, dock-weed, and such-like vegetation, be confusedly heap together, they always avoid; for dismal story be tell in that country of the old pit hide beneath such indication.
the sun be high when they sit down to rest. they have see no one, near or distant, for a long time; and the solitude remain unbroken. 'it be so still here, Rachael, and the way be so untrodden, that I think we must be the first who have be here all the summer.'
as Sissy say it, her eye be attract by another of those rotten fragment of fence upon the ground. she get up to look at it. 'and yet I donot know. this have not be break very long. the wood be quite fresh where it give way. here be footstep too. - o Rachael!'
she run back, and catch she round the neck. Rachael have already start up.
'what be the matter?'
'I donot know. there be a hat lie in the grass.' they go forward together. Rachael take it up, shake from head to foot. she break into a passion of tear and lamentation: Stephen Blackpool be write in his own hand on the inside.
'o the poor lad, the poor lad! he have be make away with. he be lie murder here!'
'be there - have the hat any blood upon it?' Sissy falter.
they be afraid to look; but they do examine it, and find no mark of violence, inside or out. it have be lie there some day, for rain and dew have stain it, and the mark of its shape be on the grass where it have fall. they look fearfully about they, without move, but could see nothing more. 'Rachael,' Sissy whisper, 'I will go on a little by myself.'
she have unclasp her hand, and be in the act of step forward, when Rachael catch she in both arm with a scream that resound over the wide landscape. before they, at their very foot, be the brink of a black ragged chasm hide by the thick grass. they spring back, and fall upon their knee, each hide her face upon the other's neck.
'o, my good Lord! hebe down there! down there!' at first this, and her terrific scream, be all that could be get from Rachael, by any tear, by any prayer, by any representation, by any mean. it be impossible to hush she; and it be deadly necessary to hold she, or she would have fling herself down the shaft.
'Rachael, dear Rachael, good Rachael, for the love of Heaven, not these dreadful cry! think of Stephen, think of Stephen, think of Stephen!'
by an earnest repetition of this entreaty, pour out in all the agony of such a moment, Sissy at last bring she to be silent, and to look at she with a tearless face of stone.
'Rachael, Stephen may be live. you wouldnot leave he lie maim at the bottom of this dreadful place, a moment, if you could bring help to he?'
'no, no, no!'
'donot stir from here, for his sake! let I go and listen.'
she shudder to approach the pit; but she creep towards it on her hand and knee, and call to he as loud as she could call. she listen, but no sound reply. she call again and listen; still no answer sound. she do this, twenty, thirty time. she take a little clod of earth from the broken ground where he have stumble, and throw it in. she could not hear it fall.
the wide prospect, so beautiful in its stillness but a few minute ago, almost carry despair to her brave heart, as she rise and look all round she, see no help. 'Rachael, we must lose not a moment. we must go in different direction, seek aid. you shall go by the way we have come, and I will go forward by the path. tell any one you see, and every one what have happen. think of Stephen, think of Stephen!'
she know by Rachael's face that she might trust she now. and after stand for a moment to see she run, wring her hand as she run, she turn and go upon her own search; she stop at the hedge to tie her shawl there as a guide to the place, then throw her bonnet aside, and run as she have never run before.
Run, Sissy, run, in Heaven's name! donot stop for breath. run, run! quicken herself by carry such entreaty in her thought, she run from field to field, and lane to lane, and place to place, as she have never run before; until she come to a shed by an engine-house, where two man lie in the shade, asleep on straw.
first to wake they, and next to tell they, all so wild and breathless as she be, what have bring she there, be difficulty; but they no soon understand she than their spirit be on fire like her. one of the man be in a drunken slumber, but on his comrade's shout to he that a man have fall down the Old Hell Shaft, he start out to a pool of dirty water, put his head in it, and come back sober.
with these two man she run to another half-a-mile far, and with that one to another, while they run elsewhere. then a horse be find; and she get another man to ride for life or death to the railroad, and send a message to Louisa, which she write and give he. by this time a whole village be up: and windlass, rope, pole, candle, lantern, all thing necessary, be fast collect and be bring into one place, to be carry to the Old Hell Shaft.
it seem now hour and hour since she have leave the lost man lie in the grave where he have be bury alive. she could not bear to remain away from it any long - it be like desert he - and she hurry swiftly back, accompany by half-a-dozen labourer, include the drunken man whom the news have sober, and who be the good man of all. when they come to the Old Hell Shaft, they find it as lonely as she have leave it. the man call and listen as she have do, and examine the edge of the chasm, and settle how it have happen, and then sit down to wait until the implement they want should come up.
every sound of insect in the air, every stirring of the leaf, every whisper among these man, make sissy tremble, for she think it be a cry at the bottom of the pit. but the wind blow idly over it, and no sound arise to the surface, and they sit upon the grass, wait and wait. after they have wait some time, straggle people who have hear of the accident begin to come up; then the real help of implement begin to arrive. in the midst of this, Rachael return; and with her party there be a surgeon, who bring some wine and medicine. but, the expectation among the people that the man would be find alive be very slight indeed.
there be now people enough present to impede the work, the sobered man put himself at the head of the rest, or be put there by the general consent, and make a large ring round the Old Hell Shaft, and appoint man to keep it. besides such volunteer as be accept to work, only Sissy and Rachael be at first permit within this ring; but, later in the day, when the message bring an express from Coketown, Mr. Gradgrind and Louisa, and Mr. Bounderby, and the whelp, be also there.
the sun be four hour low than when Sissy and Rachael have first sit down upon the grass, before a means of enable two man to descend securely be rig with pole and rope. difficulty have arise in the construction of this machine, simple as it be; requisite have be find want, and message have have to go and return. it be five o'clock in the afternoon of the bright autumnal Sunday, before a candle be send down to try the air, while three or four rough face stand crowd close together, attentively watch it: the man at the windlass lower as they be tell. the candle be bring up again, feebly burn, and then some water be cast in. then the bucket be hook on; and the sobered man and another get in with light, give the word 'lower away!'
as the rope go out, tight and strained, and the windlass creak, there be not a breath among the one or two hundred man and woman look on, that come as it be willnot to come. the signal be give and the windlass stop, with abundant rope to spare. apparently so long an interval ensue with the man at the windlass stand idle, that some woman shriek that another accident have happen! but the surgeon who hold the watch, declare five minute not to have elapse yet, and sternly admonish they to keep silence. he have not well do speak, when the windlass be reverse and work again. practised eye know that it do not go as heavily as it would if both workman have be come up, and that only one be return.
the rope come in tight and strained; and ring after ring be coil upon the barrel of the windlass, and all eye be fasten on the pit. the sobered man be bring up and leap out briskly on the grass. there be an universal cry of 'alive or dead?' and then a deep, profound hush.
when he say 'alive!' a great shout arise and many eye have tear in they.
'but hebe hurt very bad,' he add, as soon as he could make himself hear again. 'where's doctor? hebe hurt so very bad, sir, that we donno how to get he up.'
they all consult together, and look anxiously at the surgeon, as he ask some question, and shake his head on receive the reply. the sun be set now; and the red light in the evening sky touch every face there, and cause it to be distinctly see in all its rapt suspense.
the consultation end in the man return to the windlass, and the pitman go down again, carry the wine and some other small matter with he. then the other man come up. in the meantime, under the surgeon's direction, some man bring a hurdle, on which other make a thick bed of spare clothe cover with loose straw, while he himself contrive some bandage and sling from shawl and handkerchief. as these be make, they be hang upon an arm of the pitman who have last come up, with instruction how to use they: and as he stand, show by the light he carry, lean his powerful loose hand upon one of the pole, and sometimes glance down the pit, and sometimes glance round upon the people, he be not the least conspicuous figure in the scene. it be dark now, and torch be kindle.
it appear from the little this man say to those about he, which be quickly repeat all over the circle, that the lost man have fall upon a mass of crumble rubbish with which the pit be half choke up, and that his fall have be far break by some jagged earth at the side. he lie upon his back with one arm double under he, and accord to his own belief have hardly stir since he fall, except that he have move his free hand to a side pocket, in which he remember to have some bread and meat (of which he have swallow crumb), and have likewise scoop up a little water in it now and then. he have come straight away from his work, on be write to, and have walk the whole journey; and be on his way to Mr. Bounderby's country house after dark, when he fall. he be cross that dangerous country at such a dangerous time, because he be innocent of what be lay to his charge, and couldnot rest from come the near way to deliver himself up. the Old Hell Shaft, the pitman say, with a curse upon it, be worthy of its bad name to the last; for though Stephen could speak now, he believe it would soon be find to have mangle the life out of he.
when all be ready, this man, still take his last hurried charge from his comrade and the surgeon after the windlass have begin to lower he, disappear into the pit. the rope go out as before, the signal be make as before, and the windlass stop. no man remove his hand from it now. every one wait with his grasp set, and his body bend down to the work, ready to reverse and wind in. at length the signal be give, and all the ring lean forward.
for, now, the rope come in, tighten and strain to its utmost as it appear, and the man turn heavily, and the windlass complain. it be scarcely endurable to look at the rope, and think of its give way. but, ring after ring be coil upon the barrel of the windlass safely, and the connect chain appear, and finally the bucket with the two man hold on at the side - a sight to make the head swim, and oppress the heart - and tenderly support between they, sling and tie within, the figure of a poor, crush, human creature.
a low murmur of pity go round the throng, and the woman weep aloud, as this form, almost without form, be move very slowly from its iron deliverance, and lay upon the bed of straw. at first, none but the surgeon go close to it. he do what he could in its adjustment on the couch, but the good that he could do be to cover it. that gently do, he call to he Rachael and Sissy. and at that time the pale, worn, patient face be see look up at the sky, with the broken right hand lie bare on the outside of the cover garment, as if wait to be take by another hand.
they give he drink, moisten his face with water, and administer some drop of cordial and wine. though he lie quite motionless look up at the sky, he smile and say, 'Rachael.' she stoop down on the grass at his side, and bend over he until her eye be between his and the sky, for he could not so much as turn they to look at she.
'Rachael, my dear.'
she take his hand. he smile again and say, 'donot let 't go.'
'Thou'rt in great pain, my own dear Stephen?'
'I ha' be, but not now. I ha' be - dreadful, and dree, and long, my dear - but 'tis ower now. ah, Rachael, aw a muddle! Fro' first to last, a muddle!'
the spectre of his old look seem to pass as he say the word.
'I ha' fall into th' pit, my dear, as have cost wi'in the knowledge o' old fok now livin, hundred and hundred o' man's life - father, son, brother, dear to thousand an' thousand, an' keep them fro' want and hunger. I ha' fall into a pit that ha' be wi' th' firedamp crueller than battle. I ha' read on 't in the public petition, as onny one may read, fro' the man that work in pit, in which they ha' pray'n and pray'n the lawmaker for Christ's sake not to let their work be murder to them, but to spare them for th' wife and child that they love as well as gentlefok love theirs. when it be in work, it kill wi'out need; when 'tis let alone, it kill wi'out need. see how we die an' no need, one way an' another - in a muddle - every day!'
he faintly say it, without any anger against any one. merely as the truth.
'thy little sister, Rachael, thou hast not forget she. Thou'rt not like to forget she now, and I so nigh she. Thou know'st - poor, patient, suff'rin, dear - how thou didst work for she, seet'n all day long in her little chair at thy winder, and how she die, young and misshapen, awlung o' sickly air as had'n no need to be, an' awlung o' work people's miserable home. a muddle! aw a muddle!'
Louisa approach he; but he could not see she, lie with his face turn up to the night sky.
'if aw th' thing that tooche we, my dear, be not so muddled, I should'n ha' had'n need to coom heer. if we be not in a muddle among ourseln, I should'n ha' be, by my own fellow weaver and workin' brother, so mistook. if Mr. Bounderby have ever know'd I right - if hewould ever know'd I at aw - he would'n ha' took'n offence wi' I. he would'n ha' suspect'n I. but look up yonder, Rachael! look aboove!'
follow his eye, she see that he be gaze at a star.
'it ha' shin upon I,' he say reverently, 'in my pain and trouble down below. it ha' shin into my mind. I ha' look'n at 't and thowt o' thee, Rachael, till the muddle in my mind have clear awa, above a bit, I hope. if soom ha' be wantin' in unnerstan'in I well, I, too, ha' be wantin' in unnerstan'in they well. when I get thy letter, I easily believen that what the yoong ledy sen and do to I, and what her brother sen and do to I, be one, and that there be a wicked plot betwixt them. when I fall, I be in anger wi' her, an' hurryin on t' be as onjust t' she as oother be t' I. but in our judgment, like as in our doin, we mun bear and forbear. in my pain an' trouble, lookin up yonder, - wi' it shinin on I - I ha' see more clear, and ha' make it my dyin prayer that aw th' world may on'y coom toogether more, an' get a well unnerstan'in o' one another, than when I be in 't my own weak seln.'
louisa hear what he say, bend over he on the opposite side to Rachael, so that he could see she.
'you ha' hear?' he say, after a few moment' silence. 'I ha' not forget you, ledy.'
'yes, Stephen, I have hear you. and your prayer be mine.'
'you ha' a father. will yo tak' a message to he?'
'he be here,' say Louisa, with dread. 'shall I bring he to you?'
'if yo please.'
Louisa return with her father. stand hand-in-hand, they both look down upon the solemn countenance.
'Sir, yo will clear I an' mak my name good wi' aw man. this I leave to yo.'
Mr. Gradgrind be troubled and ask how?
'Sir,' be the reply: 'yor son will tell yo how. ask he. I mak no charge: I leave none ahint I: not a single word. I ha' see an' spok'n wi' yor son, one night. I ask no more o' yo than that yo clear I - an' I trust to yo to do 't.'
the bearer be now ready to carry he away, and the surgeon be anxious for his removal, those who have torch or lantern, prepare to go in front of the litter. before it be raise, and while they be arrange how to go, he say to Rachael, look upward at the star:
'often as I coom to myseln, and find it shinin' on I down there in my trouble, I thowt it be the star as guide to our Saviour's home. I awmust think it be the very star!'
they lift he up, and he be overjoyed to find that they be about to take he in the direction whither the star seem to he to lead.
'Rachael, beloved lass! donot let go my hand. we may walk toogether t'night, my dear!'
'I will hold thy hand, and keep beside thee, Stephen, all the way.'
'bless thee! will soombody be pleased to coover my face!'
they carry he very gently along the field, and down the lane, and over the wide landscape; Rachael always hold the hand in her. very few whisper break the mournful silence. it be soon a funeral procession. the star have show he where to find the God of the poor; and through humility, and sorrow, and forgiveness, he have go to his Redeemer's rest.
CHAPTER VII - WHELP-hunting
before the ring form round the Old Hell Shaft be break, one figure have disappear from within it. Mr. Bounderby and his shadow have not stand near Louisa, who hold her father's arm, but in a retired place by themselves. when Mr. Gradgrind be summon to the couch, Sissy, attentive to all that happen, slip behind that wicked shadow - a sight in the horror of his face, if there have be eye there for any sight but one - and whisper in his ear. without turn his head, he confer with she a few moment, and vanish. thus the whelp have go out of the circle before the people move.
when the father reach home, he send a message to Mr. Bounderby's, desire his son to come to he directly. the reply be, that Mr. Bounderby have miss he in the crowd, and see nothing of he since, have suppose he to be at Stone Lodge.
'I believe, father,' say Louisa, 'he will not come back to town to-night.' Mr. Gradgrind turn away, and say no more.
in the morning, he go down to the Bank himself as soon as it be open, and see his son's place empty (he have not the courage to look in at first) go back along the street to meet Mr. Bounderby on his way there. to whom he say that, for reason he would soon explain, but entreat not then to be ask for, he have find it necessary to employ his son at a distance for a little while. also, that he be charge with the duty of vindicate Stephen Blackpool's memory, and declare the thief. Mr. Bounderby quite confound, stand stock-still in the street after his father-in-law have leave he, swell like an immense soap-bubble, without its beauty.
Mr. Gradgrind go home, lock himself in his room, and keep it all that day. when Sissy and Louisa tap at his door, he say, without open it, 'not now, my dear; in the evening.' on their return in the evening, he say, 'I be not able yet - to-morrow.' he eat nothing all day, and have no candle after dark; and they hear he walk to and fro late at night.
but, in the morning he appear at breakfast at the usual hour, and take his usual place at the table. aged and bent he look, and quite bow down; and yet he look a wise man, and a well man, than in the day when in this life he want nothing - but fact. before he leave the room, he appoint a time for they to come to he; and so, with his gray head droop, go away.
'dear father,' say Louisa, when they keep their appointment, 'you have three young child leave. they will be different, I will be different yet, with Heaven's help.'
she give her hand to Sissy, as if she mean with her help too.
'your wretched brother,' say Mr. Gradgrind. 'do you think he have plan this robbery, when he go with you to the lodging?'
'I fear so, father. I know he have want money very much, and have spend a great deal.'
'the poor man be about to leave the town, it come into his evil brain to cast suspicion on he?'
'I think it must have flash upon he while he sit there, father. for I ask he to go there with I. the visit do not originate with he.'
'he have some conversation with the poor man. do he take he aside?'
'he take he out of the room. I ask he afterwards, why he have do so, and he make a plausible excuse; but since last night, father, and when I remember the circumstance by its light, I be afraid I can imagine too truly what pass between they.'
'let I know,' say her father, 'if your thought present your guilty brother in the same dark view as mine.'
'I fear, father,' hesitate Louisa, 'that he must have make some representation to Stephen Blackpool - perhaps in my name, perhaps in his own - which induce he to do in good faith and honesty, what he have never do before, and to wait about the Bank those two or three night before he leave the town.'
'too plain!' return the father. 'too plain!'
he shade his face, and remain silent for some moment. recover himself, he say:
'and now, how be he to be find? how be he to be save from justice? in the few hour that I can possibly allow to elapse before I publish the truth, how be he to be find by we, and only by we? ten thousand pound could not effect it.'
'Sissy have effect it, father.'
he raise his eye to where she stand, like a good fairy in his house, and say in a tone of soften gratitude and grateful kindness, 'it be always you, my child!'
'we have our fear,' Sissy explain, glance at Louisa, 'before yesterday; and when I see you bring to the side of the litter last night, and hear what pass (be close to Rachael all the time), I go to he when no one see, and say to he, "donot look at I. see where your father be. escape at once, for his sake and your own!" he be in a tremble before I whisper to he, and he start and tremble more then, and say, "where can I go? I have very little money, and I donot know who will hide I!" I think of father's old circus. I have not forget where Mr. Sleary go at this time of year, and I read of he in a paper only the other day. I tell he to hurry there, and tell his name, and ask Mr. Sleary to hide he till I come. "Iwill get to he before the morning," he say. and I see he shrink away among the people.'
'thank Heaven!' exclaim his father. 'he may be get abroad yet.'
it be the more hopeful as the town to which Sissy have direct he be within three hour' journey of Liverpool, whence he could be swiftly dispatch to any part of the world. but, caution be necessary in communicate with he - for there be a great danger every moment of his be suspect now, and nobody could be sure at heart but that Mr. Bounderby himself, in a bullying vein of public zeal, might play a roman part - it be consent that Sissy and Louisa should repair to the place in question, by a circuitous course, alone; and that the unhappy father, set forth in an opposite direction, should get round to the same bourne by another and wide route. it be far agree that he should not present himself to Mr. Sleary, lest his intention should be mistrust, or the intelligence of his arrival should cause his son to take flight anew; but, that the communication should be leave to Sissy and Louisa to open; and that they should inform the cause of so much misery and disgrace, of his father's be at hand and of the purpose for which they have come. when these arrangement have be well consider and be fully understand by all three, it be time to begin to carry they into execution. early in the afternoon, Mr. Gradgrind walk direct from his own house into the country, to be take up on the line by which he be to travel; and at night the remain two set forth upon their different course, encourage by not see any face they know.
the two travel all night, except when they be leave, for odd number of minute, at branch-place, up illimitable flight of step, or down well - which be the only variety of those branch - and, early in the morning, be turn out on a swamp, a mile or two from the town they seek. from this dismal spot they be rescue by a savage old postilion, who happen to be up early, kick a horse in a fly: and so be smuggle into the town by all the back lane where the pig live: which, although not a magnificent or even savoury approach, be, as be usual in such case, the legitimate highway.
the first thing they see on enter the town be the skeleton of Sleary's Circus. the company have depart for another town more than twenty mile off, and have open there last night. the connection between the two place be by a hilly turnpike-road, and the travel on that road be very slow. though they take but a hasty breakfast, and no rest (which it would have be in vain to seek under such anxious circumstance), it be noon before they begin to find the bill of Sleary's horse-riding on barn and wall, and one o'clock when they stop in the market-place.
a Grand Morning Performance by the rider, commence at that very hour, be in course of announcement by the bellman as they set their foot upon the stone of the street. Sissy recommend that, to avoid make inquiry and attract attention in the town, they should present themselves to pay at the door. if Mr. Sleary be take the money, he would be sure to know she, and would proceed with discretion. if he be not, he would be sure to see they inside; and, know what he have do with the fugitive, would proceed with discretion still.
therefore, they repair, with flutter heart, to the well- remember booth. the flag with the inscription SLEARY'S horse- riding be there; and the Gothic niche be there; but Mr. Sleary be not there. Master Kidderminster, grow too maturely turfy to be receive by the wild credulity as Cupid any more, have yield to the invincible force of circumstance (and his beard), and, in the capacity of a man who make himself generally useful, preside on this occasion over the exchequer - have also a drum in reserve, on which to expend his leisure moment and superfluous force. in the extreme sharpness of his look out for base coin, Mr. Kidderminster, as at present situate, never see anything but money; so Sissy pass he unrecognised, and they go in.
the Emperor of Japan, on a steady old white horse stencil with black spot, be twirl five wash-hand basin at once, as it be the favourite recreation of that monarch to do. Sissy, though well acquaint with his royal line, have no personal knowledge of the present Emperor, and his reign be peaceful. Miss Josephine Sleary, in her celebrate graceful Equestrian Tyrolean Flower Act, be then announce by a new clown (who humorously say Cauliflower Act), and Mr. Sleary appear, lead she in.
Mr. Sleary have only make one cut at the Clown with his long whip- lash, and the Clown have only say, 'if you do it again, Iwill throw the horse at you!' when Sissy be recognise both by father and daughter. but they get through the Act with great self-possession; and Mr. Sleary, save for the first instant, convey no more expression into his locomotive eye than into his fix one. the performance seem a little long to Sissy and Louisa, particularly when it stop to afford the Clown an opportunity of tell Mr. Sleary (who say 'indeed, sir!' to all his observation in the calm way, and with his eye on the house) about two leg sit on three leg look at one leg, when in come four leg, and lay hold of one leg, and up get two leg, catch hold of three leg, and throw them at four leg, who run away with one leg. for, although an ingenious allegory relate to a butcher, a three- legged stool, a dog, and a leg of mutton, this narrative consume time; and they be in great suspense. at last, however, little fair-haired Josephine make her curtsey amid great applause; and the Clown, leave alone in the ring, have just warm himself, and say, 'now Iwill have a turn!' when Sissy be touch on the shoulder, and beckon out.
she take Louisa with she; and they be receive by Mr. Sleary in a very little private apartment, with canvas side, a grass floor, and a wooden ceiling all aslant, on which the box company stamp their approbation, as if they be come through. 'Thethilia,' say Mr. Sleary, who have brandy and water at hand, 'it doth I good to thee you. you wath alwayth a favourite with uth, and youhave do uth credith thinth the old timeth Ibe thure. you mutht thee our people, my dear, afore we thpeak of bithnith, or theywill break their hearth - ethpethially the woman. Here'th Jothphine hath be and get married to E. W. B. Childerth, and thee hath get a boy, and though he'th only three yearth old, he thtickth on to any pony you can bring againtht he. He'th name the little wonder of Thcolathtic Equitation; and if you donot hear of that boy at Athley'th, youwill hear of he at Parith. and you recollect Kidderminthter, that wath think to be rather thweet upon yourthelf? well. He'th marry too. marry a widder. old enough to be hith mother. Thee wath Tightrope, thee wath, and now thee'th nothing - on accounth of fat. theyhave get two child, tho webe thtrong in the Fairy bithnith and the Nurthery dodge. if you wath to thee our child in the Wood, with their father and mother both a dyin' on a horthe - their uncle a retheiving of them ath hith wardth, upon a horthe - themthelvth both a go a black- berryin' on a horthe - and the Robinth a come in to cover them with leavth, upon a horthe - youwould thay it wath the completetht thing ath ever you thet your eyeth on! and you remember Emma Gordon, my dear, ath wath a'motht a mother to you? of courthe you do; I neednot athk. well! Emma, thee lotht her huthband. he wath throw'd a heavy back-fall off a Elephant in a thort of a Pagoda thing ath the Thultan of the Indieth, and he never get the well of it; and thee marry a thecond time - marry a Cheethemonger ath fall in love with she from the front - and he'th a Overtheer and makin' a fortun.'
these various change, Mr. Sleary, very short of breath now, relate with great heartiness, and with a wonderful kind of innocence, consider what a bleary and brandy-and-watery old veteran he be. afterwards he bring in Josephine, and E. W. B. Childers (rather deeply line in the jaw by daylight), and the Little wonder of Scholastic Equitation, and in a word, all the company. amazing creature they be in Louisa's eye, so white and pink of complexion, so scant of dress, and so demonstrative of leg; but it be very agreeable to see they crowd about Sissy, and very natural in Sissy to be unable to refrain from tear.
'there! now Thethilia hath kithd all the child, and hug all the woman, and thaken handth all round with all the man, clear, every one of you, and ring in the band for the thecond part!'
as soon as they be go, he continue in a low tone. 'now, Thethilia, I donot athk to know any thecreth, but I thuppothe I may conthider thith to be Mith Thquire.'
'this be his sister. yes.'
'and t'other on'th daughter. That'h what I mean. Hope I thee you well, mith. and I hope the Thquire'th well?'
'my father will be here soon,' say Louisa, anxious to bring he to the point. 'be my brother safe?'
'thafe and thound!' he reply. 'I want you jutht to take a peep at the Ring, mith, through here. Thethilia, you know the dodgeth; find a thpy-hole for yourthelf.'
they each look through a chink in the board.
'That'h Jack the Giant Killer - piethe of comic infant bithnith,' say Sleary. 'there'th a property-houthe, you thee, for Jack to hide in; there'th my Clown with a thauthepan-lid and a thpit, for Jack'th thervant; there'th little Jack himthelf in a thplendid thoot of armour; there'th two comic black thervanth twithe ath big ath the houthe, to thtand by it and to bring it in and clear it; and the Giant (a very ecthpenthive bathket one), he an't on yet. now, do you thee them all?'
'yes,' they both say.
'look at them again,' say Sleary, 'look at them well. you thee em all? very good. now, mith;' he put a form for they to sit on; 'I have my opinionth, and the Thquire your father hath hith. I donot want to know what your brother'th be up to; ith well for I not to know. all I thay ith, the Thquire hath thtood by Thethilia, and Iwill thtand by the Thquire. your brother ith one they black thervanth.'
Louisa utter an exclamation, partly of distress, partly of satisfaction.
'ith a fact,' say Sleary, 'and even knowin' it, you couldnot put your finger on he. let the Thquire come. I thall keep your brother here after the performanth. I thant undreth he, nor yet wath hith paint off. let the Thquire come here after the performanth, or come here yourthelf after the performanth, and you thall find your brother, and have the whole plathe to talk to he in. never mind the lookth of he, ath long ath he'th well hide.'
Louisa, with many thank and with a lightened load, detain Mr. Sleary no long then. she leave her love for her brother, with her eye full of tear; and she and Sissy go away until later in the afternoon.
Mr. Gradgrind arrive within an hour afterwards. he too have encounter no one whom he know; and be now sanguine with Sleary's assistance, of get his disgraced son to Liverpool in the night. as neither of the three could be his companion without almost identify he under any disguise, he prepare a letter to a correspondent whom he could trust, beseech he to ship the bearer off at any cost, to North or South America, or any distant part of the world to which he could be the most speedily and privately dispatch.
this do, they walk about, wait for the Circus to be quite vacate; not only by the audience, but by the company and by the horse. after watch it a long time, they see Mr. Sleary bring out a chair and sit down by the side-door, smoking; as if that be his signal that they might approach.
'your thervant, Thquire,' be his cautious salutation as they pass in. 'if you want I youwill find I here. you muthn't mind your thon have a comic livery on.'
they all three go in; and Mr. Gradgrind sit down forlorn, on the Clown's perform chair in the middle of the ring. on one of the back bench, remote in the subdue light and the strangeness of the place, sit the villainous whelp, sulky to the last, whom he have the misery to call his son.
in a preposterous coat, like a beadle's, with cuff and flap exaggerate to an unspeakable extent; in an immense waistcoat, knee-breech, buckled shoe, and a mad cocked hat; with nothing fit he, and everything of coarse material, moth-eat and full of hole; with seam in his black face, where fear and heat have start through the greasy composition daub all over it; anything so grimly, detestably, ridiculously shameful as the whelp in his comic livery, Mr. Gradgrind never could by any other mean have believe in, weighable and measurable fact though it be. and one of his model child have come to this!
at first the whelp would not draw any nearer, but persist in remain up there by himself. yield at length, if any concession so sullenly make can be call yield, to the entreaty of Sissy - for Louisa he disown altogether - he come down, bench by bench, until he stand in the sawdust, on the verge of the circle, as far as possible, within its limit from where his father sit.
'how be this do?' ask the father.
'how be what do?' moodily answer the son.
'this robbery,' say the father, raise his voice upon the word.
'I force the safe myself over night, and shut it up ajar before I go away. I have have the key that be find, make long before. I drop it that morning, that it might be suppose to have be use. I donot take the money all at once. I pretend to put my balance away every night, but I donot. now you know all about it.'
'if a thunderbolt have fall on I,' say the father, 'it would have shock I less than this!'
'I donot see why,' grumble the son. 'so many people be employ in situation of trust; so many people, out of so many, will be dishonest. I have hear you talk, a hundred time, of its be a law. how can I help law? you have comfort other with such thing, father. Comfort yourself!'
the father bury his face in his hand, and the son stand in his disgraceful grotesqueness, bite straw: his hand, with the black partly wear away inside, look like the hand of a monkey. the evening be fast closing in; and from time to time, he turn the white of his eye restlessly and impatiently towards his father. they be the only part of his face that show any life or expression, the pigment upon it be so thick.
'you must be get to Liverpool, and send abroad.'
'I suppose I must. I cannot be more miserable anywhere,' whimper the whelp, 'than I have be here, ever since I can remember. thatbe one thing.'
Mr. Gradgrind go to the door, and return with Sleary, to whom he submit the question, how to get this deplorable object away?
'why, Ihave be think of it, Thquire. There'th not muth time to lothe, tho you muth thay yeth or no. ith over twenty mileth to the rail. There'th a coath in half an hour, that goeth to the rail, 'purpothe to cath the mail train. that train will take he right to Liverpool.'
'but look at he,' groan Mr. Gradgrind. 'will any coach - '
'I donot mean that he thould go in the comic livery,' say Sleary. 'Thay the word, and Iwill make a Jothkin of he, out of the wardrobe, in five minute.'
'I donot understand,' say Mr. Gradgrind.
'a Jothkin - a carter. make up your mind quick, Thquire. therewill be beer to feth. Ihave never meet with nothing but beer ath'll ever clean a comic blackamoor.'
Mr. Gradgrind rapidly assent; Mr. Sleary rapidly turn out from a box, a smock frock, a feel hat, and other essential; the whelp rapidly change clothe behind a screen of baize; Mr. Sleary rapidly bring beer, and wash he white again.
'now,' say Sleary, 'come along to the coath, and jump up behind; Iwill go with you there, and theywill thuppothe you one of my people. Thay farewell to your family, and tharp'th the word.' with which he delicately retire.
'here be your letter,' say Mr. Gradgrind. 'all necessary mean will be provide for you. atone, by repentance and well conduct, for the shocking action you have commit, and the dreadful consequence to which it have lead. give I your hand, my poor boy, and may God forgive you as I do!'
the culprit be move to a few abject tear by these word and their pathetic tone. but, when Louisa open her arm, he repulse her afresh.
'not you. I donot want to have anything to say to you!'
'o Tom, Tom, do we end so, after all my love!'
'after all your love!' he return, obdurately. 'pretty love! leave old Bounderby to himself, and pack my good friend Mr. Harthouse off, and go home just when I be in the great danger. pretty love that! come out with every word about our have go to that place, when you see the net be gather round I. pretty love that! you have regularly give I up. you never care for I.'
'tharp'th the word!' say Sleary, at the door.
they all confusedly go out: Louisa cry to he that she forgive he, and love he still, and that he would one day be sorry to have leave she so, and glad to think of these her last word, far away: when some one run against they. Mr. Gradgrind and Sissy, who be both before he while his sister yet clung to his shoulder, stop and recoil.
for, there be Bitzer, out of breath, his thin lip part, his thin nostril distend, his white eyelash quiver, his colourless face more colourless than ever, as if he run himself into a white heat, when other people run themselves into a glow. there he stand, pant and heaving, as if he have never stop since the night, now long ago, when he have run they down before.
'Ibe sorry to interfere with your plan,' say Bitzer, shake his head, 'but I cannot allow myself to be do by horse-rider. I must have young Mr. Tom; he mustnot be get away by horse-rider; here he be in a smock frock, and I must have he!'
by the collar, too, it seem. for, so he take possession of he.
CHAPTER VIII - PHILOSOPHICAL
they go back into the booth, Sleary shut the door to keep intruder out. Bitzer, still hold the paralysed culprit by the collar, stand in the Ring, blink at his old patron through the darkness of the twilight.
'Bitzer,' say Mr. Gradgrind, break down, and miserably submissive to he, 'have you a heart?'
'the circulation, sir,' return Bitzer, smile at the oddity of the question, 'couldnot be carry on without one. no man, sir, acquaint with the fact establish by Harvey relate to the circulation of the blood, can doubt that I have a heart.'
'be it accessible,' cry Mr. Gradgrind, 'to any compassionate influence?'
'it be accessible to Reason, sir,' return the excellent young man. 'and to nothing else.'
they stand look at each other; Mr. Gradgrind's face as white as the pursuer's.
'what motive - even what motive in reason - can you have for prevent the escape of this wretched youth,' say Mr. Gradgrind, 'and crush his miserable father? see his sister here. pity we!'
'Sir,' return Bitzer, in a very business-like and logical manner, 'since you ask I what motive I have in reason, for take young Mr. Tom back to Coketown, it be only reasonable to let you know. I have suspect young Mr. Tom of this bank-robbery from the first. I have have my eye upon he before that time, for I know his way. I have keep my observation to myself, but I have make they; and I have get ample proof against he now, besides his run away, and besides his own confession, which I be just in time to overhear. I have the pleasure of watch your house yesterday morning, and follow you here. I be go to take young Mr. Tom back to Coketown, in order to deliver he over to Mr. Bounderby. Sir, I have no doubt whatever that Mr. Bounderby will then promote I to young Mr. Tom's situation. and I wish to have his situation, sir, for it will be a rise to I, and will do I good.'
'if this be solely a question of self-interest with you - ' Mr. Gradgrind begin.
'I beg your pardon for interrupt you, sir,' return Bitzer; 'but I be sure you know that the whole social system be a question of self-interest. what you must always appeal to, be a person's self-interest. itbe your only hold. we be so constituted. I be bring up in that catechism when I be very young, sir, as you be aware.'
'what sum of money,' say Mr. Gradgrind, 'will you set against your expect promotion?'
'thank you, sir,' return Bitzer, 'for hint at the proposal; but I will not set any sum against it. know that your clear head would propose that alternative, I have go over the calculation in my mind; and I find that to compound a felony, even on very high term indeed, would not be as safe and good for I as my improved prospect in the Bank.'
'Bitzer,' say Mr. Gradgrind, stretch out his hand as though he would have say, see how miserable I be! 'Bitzer, I have but one chance leave to soften you. you be many year at my school. if, in remembrance of the pain bestow upon you there, you can persuade yourself in any degree to disregard your present interest and release my son, I entreat and pray you to give he the benefit of that remembrance.'
'I really wonder, sir,' rejoin the old pupil in an argumentative manner, 'to find you take a position so untenable. my schooling be pay for; it be a bargain; and when I come away, the bargain end.'
it be a fundamental principle of the Gradgrind philosophy that everything be to be pay for. nobody be ever on any account to give anybody anything, or render anybody help without purchase. Gratitude be to be abolish, and the virtue spring from it be not to be. every inch of the existence of mankind, from birth to death, be to be a bargain across a counter. and if we donot get to Heaven that way, it be not a politico-economical place, and we have no business there.
'I donot deny,' add Bitzer, 'that my schooling be cheap. but that come right, sir. I be make in the cheap market, and have to dispose of myself in the dearest.'
he be a little troubled here, by Louisa and Sissy cry.
'pray donot do that,' say he, 'itbe of no use do that: it only worry. you seem to think that I have some animosity against young Mr. Tom; whereas I have none at all. I be only go, on the reasonable ground I have mention, to take he back to Coketown. if he be to resist, I should set up the cry of stop thief! but, he willnot resist, you may depend upon it.'
Mr. Sleary, who with his mouth open and his rolling eye as immovably jammed in his head as his fix one, have listen to these doctrine with profound attention, here step forward.
'Thquire, you know perfectly well, and your daughter knowth perfectly well (well than you, becauthe I the it to she), that I donot know what your thon have do, and that I donot want to know - I the it wath well not, though I only think, then, it wath thome thkylarke. however, thith young man have make it know to be a robbery of a bank, why, that'h a theriouth thing; muth too theriouth a thing for I to compound, ath thith young man hath very properly call it. conthequently, Thquire, you muthn't quarrel with I if I take thith young man'th thide, and thay he'th right and there'th no help for it. but I tell you what Iwill do, Thquire; Iwill drive your thon and thith young man over to the rail, and prevent expothure here. I cannot conthent to do more, but Iwill do that.'
fresh lamentation from Louisa, and deep affliction on Mr. Gradgrind's part, follow this desertion of they by their last friend. but, Sissy glance at he with great attention; nor do she in her own breast misunderstand he. as they be all go out again, he favour she with one slight roll of his movable eye, desire she to linger behind. as he lock the door, he say excitedly:
'the Thquire thtood by you, Thethilia, and Iwill thtand by the Thquire. More than that: thith ith a prethiouth rathcal, and belongth to that bluthtere Cove that my people nearly pitht out o' winder. itwill be a dark night; Ihave get a horthe thatwill do anything but thpeak; Ihave get a pony thatwill go fifteen mile an hour with Childerth drive of he; Ihave get a dog thatwill keep a man to one plathe four-and-twenty hourth. get a word with the young Thquire. tell he, when he theeth our horthe begin to danthe, not to be afraid of be thpilt, but to look out for a pony-gig come up. tell he, when he theeth that gig clothe by, to jump down, and itwill take he off at a rattle pathe. if my dog leth thith young man thtir a peg on foot, I give he leave to go. and if my horthe ever thtirth from that thpot where he beginth a danthing, till the morning - I donot know he? - tharp'th the word!'
the word be so sharp, that in ten minute Mr. Childers, saunter about the market-place in a pair of slipper, have his cue, and Mr. Sleary's equipage be ready. it be a fine sight, to behold the learn dog bark round it, and Mr. Sleary instruct he, with his one practicable eye, that Bitzer be the object of his particular attention. soon after dark they all three get in and start; the learn dog (a formidable creature) already pin Bitzer with his eye, and stick close to the wheel on his side, that he might be ready for he in the event of his show the slight disposition to alight.
the other three sit up at the inn all night in great suspense. at eight o'clock in the morning Mr. Sleary and the dog reappear: both in high spirit.
'all right, Thquire!' say Mr. Sleary, 'your thon may be aboard-a- thip by thith time. Childerth take he off, an hour and a half after we leave there latht night. the horthe danthe the polka till he wath dead beat (he would have walthe if he havenot be in harneth), and then I give he the word and he go to thleep comfortable. when that prethiouth young Rathcal the hewould go for'ard afoot, the dog hang on to hith neck-hankercher with all four legth in the air and pull he down and roll he over. Tho he come back into the drag, and there he that, 'till I turn the horthe'th head, at half-patht thixth thith morning.'
Mr. Gradgrind overwhelm he with thank, of course; and hint as delicately as he could, at a handsome remuneration in money.
'I donot want money mythelf, Thquire; but Childerth ith a family man, and if you wath to like to offer he a five-pound note, it mightnot be unactheptable. likewithe if you wath to thtand a collar for the dog, or a thet of bellth for the horthe, I thould be very glad to take them. Brandy and water I alwayth take.' he have already call for a glass, and now call for another. 'if you wouldnot think it go too far, Thquire, to make a little thpread for the company at about three and thixth ahead, not reckon Luth, it would make them happy.'
all these little token of his gratitude, Mr. Gradgrind very willingly undertake to render. though he think they far too slight, he say, for such a service.
'very well, Thquire; then, if youwill only give a Horthe-riding, a bethpeak, whenever you can, youwill more than balanthe the account. now, Thquire, if your daughter will ethcuthe I, I thould like one parting word with you.'
Louisa and Sissy withdraw into an adjoining room; Mr. Sleary, stir and drink his brandy and water as he stand, go on:
'Thquire, - you donot need to be tell that dogth ith wonderful animalth.'
'their instinct,' say Mr. Gradgrind, 'be surprising.'
'whatever you call it - and Ibe bletht if I know what to call it' - say Sleary, 'it ith athtonithing. the way in whith a dog'll find you - the dithtanthe hewill come!'
'his scent,' say Mr. Gradgrind, 'be so fine.'
'Ibe bletht if I know what to call it,' repeat Sleary, shake his head, 'but I have have dogth find I, Thquire, in a way that make I think whether that dog havenot go to another dog, and the, "you donot happen to know a perthon of the name of Thleary, do you? Perthon of the name of Thleary, in the Horthe-Riding way - thtout man - game eye?" and whether that dog mightnot have the, "well, I cannot thay I know he mythelf, but I know a dog that I think would be likely to be acquaint with he." and whether that dog mightnot have think it over, and the, "Thleary, Thleary! o yeth, to be thure! a friend of mine menthione he to I at one time. I can get you hith addreth directly." in conthequenth of my be afore the public, and go about tho muth, you thee, there mutht be a number of dogth acquaint with I, Thquire, that I donot know!'
Mr. Gradgrind seem to be quite confound by this speculation.
'any way,' say Sleary, after put his lip to his brandy and water, 'ith fourteen month ago, Thquire, thinthe we wath at Chethter. we wath get up our child in the Wood one morning, when there cometh into our Ring, by the thtage door, a dog. he have travel a long way, he wath in a very bad condithon, he wath lame, and pretty well blind. he go round to our child, one after another, as if he wath a theeking for a child he know'd; and then he come to I, and throwd hithelf up behind, and thtood on hith two forelegth, weak ath he wath, and then he wag hith tail and die. Thquire, that dog wath Merrylegth.'
'Sissy's father's dog!'
'thethilia'th father'th old dog. now, Thquire, I can take my oath, from my knowledge of that dog, that that man wath dead - and bury - afore that dog come back to I. Joth'phine and Childerth and I talk it over a long time, whether I thould write or not. but we agree, "no. There'th nothing comfortable to tell; why unthettle her mind, and make she unhappy?" Tho, whether her father bathely detherte she; or whether he break hith own heart alone, rather than pull she down along with he; never will be know, now, Thquire, till - no, not till we know how the dogth findth uth out!'
'she keep the bottle that he send she for, to this hour; and she will believe in his affection to the last moment of her life,' say Mr. Gradgrind.
'it theemth to prethent two thingth to a perthon, donot it, Thquire?' say Mr. Sleary, muse as he look down into the depth of his brandy and water: 'one, that there ith a love in the world, not all Thelf-interetht after all, but thomethe very different; t'other, that it bath a way of ith own of calculate or not calculate, whith thomehow or another ith at leatht ath hard to give a name to, ath the wayth of the dogth ith!'
Mr. Gradgrind look out of window, and make no reply. Mr. Sleary empty his glass and recall the lady.
'Thethilia my dear, kith I and good-bye! Mith Thquire, to thee you treat of she like a thithter, and a thithter that you trutht and honour with all your heart and more, ith a very pretty thight to I. I hope your brother may live to be well detherving of you, and a great comfort to you. Thquire, thake handth, firtht and latht! donot be croth with uth poor vagabondth. People mutht be amuthe. they cannot be alwayth a learning, nor yet they cannot be alwayth a working, they an't make for it. you mutht have uth, Thquire. do the withe thing and the kind thing too, and make the betht of uth; not the wurtht!'
'and I never think before,' say Mr. Sleary, put his head in at the door again to say it, 'that I wath tho muth of a Cackler!'
CHAPTER IX - FINAL
it be a dangerous thing to see anything in the sphere of a vain blusterer, before the vain blusterer see it himself. Mr. Bounderby feel that Mrs. Sparsit have audaciously anticipate he, and presume to be wise than he. inappeasably indignant with she for her triumphant discovery of Mrs. Pegler, he turn this presumption, on the part of a woman in her dependent position, over and over in his mind, until it accumulate with turn like a great snowball. at last he make the discovery that to discharge this highly connect female - to have it in his power to say, 'she be a woman of family, and want to stick to I, but I wouldnot have it, and get rid of she' - would be to get the utmost possible amount of crown glory out of the connection, and at the same time to punish Mrs. Sparsit accord to her desert.
fill full than ever, with this great idea, Mr. Bounderby come in to lunch, and sit himself down in the dining-room of former day, where his portrait be. Mrs. Sparsit sit by the fire, with her foot in her cotton stirrup, little thinking whither she be post.
since the Pegler affair, this gentlewoman have cover her pity for Mr. Bounderby with a veil of quiet melancholy and contrition. in virtue thereof, it have become her habit to assume a woful look, which woful look she now bestow upon her patron.
'whatbe the matter now, ma'am?' say Mr. Bounderby, in a very short, rough way.
'pray, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit, 'do not bite my nose off.'
'bite your nose off, ma'am?' repeat Mr. Bounderby. 'your nose!' meaning, as Mrs. Sparsit conceive, that it be too develop a nose for the purpose. after which offensive implication, he cut himself a crust of bread, and throw the knife down with a noise.
Mrs. Sparsit take her foot out of her stirrup, and say, 'Mr. Bounderby, sir!'
'well, ma'am?' retort Mr. Bounderby. 'what be you star at?'
'may I ask, sir,' say Mrs. Sparsit, 'have you be ruffle this morning?'
'yes, ma'am.'
'may I inquire, sir,' pursue the injure woman, 'whether I be the unfortunate cause of your have lose your temper?'
'now, Iwill tell you what, ma'am,' say Bounderby, 'I be not come here to be bully. a female may be highly connected, but she cannot be permit to bother and badger a man in my position, and I be not go to put up with it.' (Mr. Bounderby feel it necessary to get on: foresee that if he allow of detail, he would be beat.)
Mrs. Sparsit first elevate, then knit, her coriolanian eyebrow; gather up her work into its proper basket; and rise.
'Sir,' say she, majestically. 'it be apparent to I that I be in your way at present. I will retire to my own apartment.'
'allow I to open the door, ma'am.'
'thank you, sir; I can do it for myself.'
'you have well allow I, ma'am,' say Bounderby, pass she, and get his hand upon the lock; 'because I can take the opportunity of say a word to you, before you go. Mrs. Sparsit, ma'am, I rather think you be cramp here, do you know? it appear to I, that, under my humble roof, therebe hardly open enough for a lady of your genius in other people's affair.'
Mrs. Sparsit give he a look of the darkest scorn, and say with great politeness, 'really, sir?'
'I have be think it over, you see, since the late affair have happen, ma'am,' say Bounderby; 'and it appear to my poor judgment - '
'oh! pray, sir,' Mrs. Sparsit interpose, with sprightly cheerfulness, 'donot disparage your judgment. everybody know how unerring Mr. Bounderby's judgment be. everybody have have proof of it. it must be the theme of general conversation. disparage anything in yourself but your judgment, sir,' say Mrs. Sparsit, laugh.
Mr. Bounderby, very red and uncomfortable, resume:
'it appear to I, ma'am, I say, that a different sort of establishment altogether would bring out a lady of your power. such an establishment as your relation, Lady Scadgers's, now. donot you think you might find some affair there, ma'am, to interfere with?'
'it never occur to I before, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit; 'but now you mention it, should think it highly probable.'
'then suppose you try, ma'am,' say Bounderby, lay an envelope with a cheque in it in her little basket. 'you can take your own time for going, ma'am; but perhaps in the meanwhile, it will be more agreeable to a lady of your power of mind, to eat her meal by herself, and not to be intrude upon. I really ought to apologise to you - be only Josiah Bounderby of Coketown - for have stand in your light so long.'
'pray donot name it, sir,' return Mrs. Sparsit. 'if that portrait could speak, sir - but it have the advantage over the original of not possess the power of commit itself and disgusting other, - it would testify, that a long period have elapse since I first habitually address it as the picture of a Noodle. nothing that a Noodle do, can awaken surprise or indignation; the proceeding of a Noodle can only inspire contempt.'
thus say, Mrs. Sparsit, with her roman feature like a medal strike to commemorate her scorn of Mr. Bounderby, survey he fixedly from head to foot, sweep disdainfully past he, and ascend the staircase. Mr. Bounderby close the door, and stand before the fire; project himself after his old explosive manner into his portrait - and into futurity.
into how much of futurity? he see Mrs. Sparsit fight out a daily fight at the point of all the weapon in the female armoury, with the grudging, smarting, peevish, torment Lady Scadgers, still lay up in bed with her mysterious leg, and gobble her insufficient income down by about the middle of every quarter, in a mean little airless lodge, a mere closet for one, a mere crib for two; but do he see more? do he catch any glimpse of himself make a show of Bitzer to stranger, as the rise young man, so devoted to his master's great merit, who have win young Tom's place, and have almost capture young Tom himself, in the time when by various rascal he be spirit away? do he see any faint reflection of his own image make a vain-glorious will, whereby five-and-twenty humbug, past five-and-fifty year of age, each take upon himself the name, Josiah Bounderby of Coketown, should for ever dine in Bounderby Hall, for ever lodge in Bounderby building, for ever attend a Bounderby chapel, for ever go to sleep under a Bounderby chaplain, for ever be support out of a Bounderby estate, and for ever nauseate all healthy stomach, with a vast amount of Bounderby balderdash and bluster? have he any prescience of the day, five year to come, when Josiah Bounderby of Coketown be to die of a fit in the Coketown street, and this same precious will be to begin its long career of quibble, plunder, false pretence, vile example, little service and much law? probably not. yet the portrait be to see it all out.
here be Mr. Gradgrind on the same day, and in the same hour, sit thoughtful in his own room. how much of futurity do he see? do he see himself, a white-haired decrepit man, bend his hitherto inflexible theory to appoint circumstance; make his fact and figure subservient to Faith, Hope, and Charity; and no long try to grind that heavenly trio in his dusty little mill? do he catch sight of himself, therefore much despise by his late political associate? do he see they, in the era of its being quite settle that the national dustman have only to do with one another, and owe no duty to an abstraction call a People, 'taunt the honourable gentleman' with this and with that and with what not, five night a-week, until the small hour of the morning? probably he have that much foreknowledge, know his man.
here be Louisa on the night of the same day, watch the fire as in day of yore, though with a gentler and a humbler face. how much of the future might arise before her vision? broadside in the street, sign with her father's name, exonerate the late Stephen Blackpool, weaver, from misplaced suspicion, and publish the guilt of his own son, with such extenuation as his year and temptation (he could not bring himself to add, his education) might beseech; be of the Present. so, Stephen Blackpool's tombstone, with her father's record of his death, be almost of the Present, for she know it be to be. these thing she could plainly see. but, how much of the Future?
a work woman, christen Rachael, after a long illness once again appear at the ringing of the Factory bell, and pass to and fro at the set hour, among the Coketown Hands; a woman of pensive beauty, always dress in black, but sweet-temper and serene, and even cheerful; who, of all the people in the place, alone appear to have compassion on a degrade, drunken wretch of her own sex, who be sometimes see in the town secretly beg of she, and cry to she; a woman work, ever work, but content to do it, and prefer to do it as her natural lot, until she should be too old to labour any more? do Louisa see this? such a thing be to be.
a lonely brother, many thousand of mile away, writing, on paper blot with tear, that her word have too soon come true, and that all the treasure in the world would be cheaply barter for a sight of her dear face? at length this brother come nearer home, with hope of see she, and be delay by illness; and then a letter, in a strange hand, say 'he die in hospital, of fever, such a day, and die in penitence and love of you: his last word be your name'? do Louisa see these thing? such thing be to be.
herself again a wife - a mother - lovingly watchful of her child, ever careful that they should have a childhood of the mind no less than a childhood of the body, as know it to be even a more beautiful thing, and a possession, any hoard scrap of which, be a blessing and happiness to the wise? do Louisa see this? such a thing be never to be.
but, happy Sissy's happy child love she; all child love she; she, grow learn in childish lore; think no innocent and pretty fancy ever to be despise; try hard to know her humbler fellow-creature, and to beautify their life of machinery and reality with those imaginative grace and delight, without which the heart of infancy will wither up, the sturdy physical manhood will be morally stark death, and the plainest national prosperity figure can show, will be the writing on the Wall, - she hold this course as part of no fantastic vow, or bond, or brotherhood, or sisterhood, or pledge, or covenant, or fancy dress, or fancy fair; but simply as a duty to be do, - do Louisa see these thing of herself? these thing be to be.
dear reader! it rest with you and I, whether, in our two field of action, similar thing shall be or not. let they be! we shall sit with light bosom on the hearth, to see the ash of our fire turn gray and cold.
185
