DAVID COPPERFIELD
by CHARLES DICKENS
AFFECTIONATELY inscribe to
the HON. Mr. and Mrs. RICHARD WATSON,
of ROCKINGHAM, NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.
content
I. I be bear
II. I observe
III. I have a Change
IV. I fall into Disgrace
V. I be send away
VI. I Enlarge my Circle of Acquaintance
VII. my 'First half' at Salem House
VIII. my Holidays. especially one Happy Afternoon
IX. I have a memorable birthday
x. I become neglect, and be provide for
XI. I begin Life on my own Account, and donot like it
XII. like life on my Own Account no Better, I form a Great Resolution
xiii. the sequel of my Resolution
XIV. my Aunt make up her mind about I
XV. I make another Beginning
XVI. I be a New boy in More sens than one
XVII. somebody turn up
xviii. a Retrospect
XIX. I look about I and make a Discovery
XX. Steerforth's Home
XXI. Little Em'ly
XXII. some Old Scenes, and some New People
XXIII. I corroborate Mr. Dick, and choose a profession
XXIV. my First Dissipation
XXV. good and Bad Angels
XXVI. I fall into captivity
XXVII. Tommy Traddles
xxviii. Mr. Micawber's Gauntlet
XXIX. I visit Steerforth at his home, again
XXX. a loss
xxxi. a Greater Loss
XXXII. the beginning of a Long Journey
XXXIII. blissful
XXXIV. my Aunt Astonishes Me
XXXV. depression
xxxvi. Enthusiasm
XXXVII. a Little Cold Water
xxxviii. a Dissolution of Partnership
XXXIX. Wickfield and Heep
XL. the Wanderer
XLI. Dora's Aunts
XLII. Mischief
XLIII. another Retrospect
XLIV. our Housekeeping
XLV. Mr. Dick Fulfils my Aunt's prediction
XLVI. intelligence
XLVII. Martha
XLVIII. domestic
XLIX. I be involve in Mystery
L. Mr. Peggotty's Dream come true
LI. the beginning of a long Journey
LII. I assist at an Explosion
liii. another Retrospect
LIV. Mr. Micawber's Transactions
LV. Tempest
LVI. the New Wound, and the Old
LVII. the emigrant
LVIII. absence
LIX. return
LX. Agnes
LXI. I be show two Interesting Penitents
LXII. a Light Shines on my way
LXIII. a Visitor
LXIV. a last Retrospect
PREFACE to 1850 EDITION
I do not find it easy to get sufficiently far away from this Book,
in the first sensation of have finish it, to refer to it with
the composure which this formal heading would seem to require. my
interest in it, be so recent and strong; and my mind be so divide
between pleasure and regret - pleasure in the achievement of a long
design, regret in the separation from many companion - that I be
in danger of weary the reader whom I love, with personal
confidence, and private emotion.
besides which, all that I could say of the Story, to any purpose,
I have endeavour to say in it.
it would concern the reader little, perhaps, to know, how
sorrowfully the pen be lay down at the close of a two-year'
imaginative task; or how an author feel as if he be dismiss
some portion of himself into the shadowy world, when a crowd of the
creature of his brain be go from he for ever. yet, I have
nothing else to tell; unless, indeed, I be to confess (which
might be of less moment still) that no one can ever believe this
Narrative, in the reading, more than I have believe it in the
writing.
instead of look back, therefore, I will look forward. I cannot
close this volume more agreeably to myself, than with a hopeful
glance towards the time when I shall again put forth my two green
leaf once a month, and with a faithful remembrance of the genial
sun and shower that have fall on these leaf of David
Copperfield, and make I happy.
London, October, 1850.
PREFACE to
the CHARLES DICKENS EDITION
I remarked in the original Preface to this Book, that I do not
find it easy to get sufficiently far away from it, in the first
sensation of have finish it, to refer to it with the composure
which this formal heading would seem to require. my interest in it
be so recent and strong, and my mind be so divide between
pleasure and regret - pleasure in the achievement of a long design,
regret in the separation from many companion - that I be in
danger of weary the reader with personal confidence and private
emotion.
besides which, all that I could have say of the Story to any
purpose, I have endeavour to say in it.
it would concern the reader little, perhaps, to know how
sorrowfully the pen be lay down at the close of a two-year'
imaginative task; or how an author feel as if he be dismiss
some portion of himself into the shadowy world, when a crowd of the
creature of his brain be go from he for ever. yet, I have
nothing else to tell; unless, indeed, I be to confess (which
might be of less moment still), that no one can ever believe this
Narrative, in the reading, more than I believe it in the writing.
so true be these avowal at the present day, that I can now only
take the reader into one confidence more. of all my book, I like
this the good. it will be easily believe that I be a fond parent
to every child of my fancy, and that no one can ever love that
family as dearly as I love they. but, like many fond parent, I
have in my heart of heart a favourite child. and his name be
DAVID COPPERFIELD.
1869
the personal history and
experience of
DAVID COPPERFIELD the YOUNGER
CHAPTER 1
I be bear
whether I shall turn out to be the hero of my own life, or whether
that station will be hold by anybody else, these page must show.
to begin my life with the beginning of my life, I record that I be
bear (as I have be inform and believe) on a Friday, at twelve
o'clock at night. it be remark that the clock begin to strike,
and I begin to cry, simultaneously.
in consideration of the day and hour of my birth, it be declare
by the nurse, and by some sage woman in the neighbourhood who have
take a lively interest in I several month before there be any
possibility of our become personally acquaint, first, that I
be destine to be unlucky in life; and secondly, that I be
privileged to see ghost and spirit; both these gift inevitably
attach, as they believe, to all unlucky infant of either
gender, bear towards the small hour on a Friday night.
I need say nothing here, on the first head, because nothing can
show well than my history whether that prediction be verify or
falsify by the result. on the second branch of the question, I
will only remark, that unless I run through that part of my
inheritance while I be still a baby, I have not come into it yet.
but I do not at all complain of have be keep out of this
property; and if anybody else should be in the present enjoyment of
it, he be heartily welcome to keep it.
I be bear with a caul, which be advertise for sale, in the
newspaper, at the low price of fifteen guineas. whether sea-go
people be short of money about that time, or be short of faith
and preferred cork jacket, I donot know; all I know be, that there
be but one solitary bidding, and that be from an attorney
connect with the bill-broke business, who offer two pound in
cash, and the balance in sherry, but decline to be guarantee from
drown on any high bargain. consequently the advertisement be
withdraw at a dead loss - for as to sherry, my poor dear mother's
own sherry be in the market then - and ten year afterwards, the
caul be put up in a raffle down in our part of the country, to
fifty member at half-a-crown a head, the winner to spend five
shilling. I be present myself, and I remember to have feel quite
uncomfortable and confused, at a part of myself be dispose of
in that way. the caul be win, I recollect, by an old lady with a
hand-basket, who, very reluctantly, produce from it the stipulate
five shilling, all in halfpence, and twopence halfpenny short - as
it take an immense time and a great waste of arithmetic, to
endeavour without any effect to prove to she. it be a fact which
will be long remember as remarkable down there, that she be
never drown, but die triumphantly in bed, at ninety-two. I have
understand that it be, to the last, her proud boast, that she
never have be on the water in her life, except upon a bridge; and
that over her tea (to which she be extremely partial) she, to the
last, express her indignation at the impiety of mariner and
other, who have the presumption to go 'meandering' about the world.
it be in vain to represent to she that some convenience, tea
perhaps include, result from this objectionable practice. she
always return, with great emphasis and with an instinctive
knowledge of the strength of her objection, 'let we have no
meandering.'
not to meander myself, at present, I will go back to my birth.
I be bear at Blunderstone, in Suffolk, or 'there by', as they say
in Scotland. I be a posthumous child. my father's eye have
close upon the light of this world six month, when mine open on
it. there be something strange to I, even now, in the reflection
that he never see I; and something strange yet in the shadowy
remembrance that I have of my first childish association with his
white grave-stone in the churchyard, and of the indefinable
compassion I use to feel for it lie out alone there in the dark
night, when our little parlour be warm and bright with fire and
candle, and the door of our house be - almost cruelly, it seem
to I sometimes - bolt and lock against it.
an aunt of my father's, and consequently a great-aunt of mine, of
whom I shall have more to relate by and by, be the principal
magnate of our family. Miss Trotwood, or Miss Betsey, as my poor
mother always call she, when she sufficiently overcome her dread
of this formidable personage to mention she at all (which be
seldom), have be marry to a husband young than herself, who
be very handsome, except in the sense of the homely adage,
'handsome be, that handsome do' - for he be strongly suspect
of have beat Miss Betsey, and even of have once, on a
dispute question of supply, make some hasty but determined
arrangement to throw she out of a two pair of stair' window.
these evidence of an incompatibility of temper induce Miss Betsey
to pay he off, and effect a separation by mutual consent. he go
to India with his capital, and there, accord to a wild legend in
our family, he be once see rid on an elephant, in company with
a Baboon; but I think it must have be a Baboo - or a Begum.
anyhow, from India tiding of his death reach home, within ten
year. how they affect my aunt, nobody know; for immediately
upon the separation, she take her maiden name again, buy a
cottage in a hamlet on the sea-coast a long way off, establish
herself there as a single woman with one servant, and be
understand to live seclude, ever afterwards, in an inflexible
retirement.
my father have once be a favourite of her, I believe; but she be
mortally affront by his marriage, on the ground that my mother
be 'a wax doll'. she have never see my mother, but she know she
to be not yet twenty. my father and Miss Betsey never meet again.
he be double my mother's age when he marry, and of but a
delicate constitution. he die a year afterwards, and, as I have
say, six month before I come into the world.
this be the state of matter, on the afternoon of, what I may be
excuse for call, that eventful and important Friday. I can
make no claim therefore to have know, at that time, how matter
stand; or to have any remembrance, found on the evidence of my
own sens, of what follow.
my mother be sit by the fire, but poorly in health, and very
low in spirit, look at it through her tear, and despond
heavily about herself and the fatherless little stranger, who be
already welcome by some gross of prophetic pin, in a drawer
upstairs, to a world not at all excited on the subject of his
arrival; my mother, I say, be sit by the fire, that bright,
windy March afternoon, very timid and sad, and very doubtful of
ever come alive out of the trial that be before she, when,
lift her eye as she dry they, to the window opposite, she see
a strange lady come up the garden.
MY mother have a sure foreboding at the second glance, that it be
Miss Betsey. the set sun be glow on the strange lady, over
the garden-fence, and she come walk up to the door with a fell
rigidity of figure and composure of countenance that could have
belong to nobody else.
when she reach the house, she give another proof of her identity.
my father have often hint that she seldom conduct herself like
any ordinary Christian; and now, instead of ring the bell, she
come and look in at that identical window, press the end of
her nose against the glass to that extent, that my poor dear mother
use to say it become perfectly flat and white in a moment.
she give my mother such a turn, that I have always be convince
I be indebted to Miss Betsey for have be bear on a Friday.
my mother have leave her chair in her agitation, and go behind it
in the corner. Miss Betsey, look round the room, slowly and
inquiringly, begin on the other side, and carry her eye on, like
a saracen's Head in a dutch clock, until they reach my mother.
then she make a frown and a gesture to my mother, like one who be
accustomed to be obey, to come and open the door. my mother
go.
'Mrs. David Copperfield, I think,' say Miss Betsey; the emphasis
referring, perhaps, to my mother's mourning weed, and her
condition.
'yes,' say my mother, faintly.
'Miss Trotwood,' say the visitor. 'you have hear of she, I dare
say?'
my mother answer she have have that pleasure. and she have a
disagreeable consciousness of not appear to imply that it have
be an overpowering pleasure.
'now you see she,' say Miss Betsey. my mother bend her head, and
beg she to walk in.
they go into the parlour my mother have come from, the fire in the
good room on the other side of the passage not be light - not
have be light, indeed, since my father's funeral; and when
they be both seat, and Miss Betsey say nothing, my mother,
after vainly try to restrain herself, begin to cry.
'oh tut, tut, tut!' say Miss Betsey, in a hurry. 'donot do that!
come, come!'
my mother couldnot help it notwithstanding, so she cry until she
have have her cry out.
'take off your cap, child,' say Miss Betsey, 'and let I see you.'
my mother be too much afraid of she to refuse compliance with this
odd request, if she have any disposition to do so. therefore she
do as she be tell, and do it with such nervous hand that her
hair (which be luxuriant and beautiful) fall all about her face.
'why, bless my heart!' exclaim Miss Betsey. 'you be a very
Baby!'
my mother be, no doubt, unusually youthful in appearance even for
her year; she hang her head, as if it be her fault, poor thing,
and say, sob, that indeed she be afraid she be but a
childish widow, and would be but a childish mother if she live.
in a short pause which ensue, she have a fancy that she feel Miss
Betsey touch her hair, and that with no ungentle hand; but, look
at she, in her timid hope, she find that lady sit with the
skirt of her dress tuck up, her hand fold on one knee, and her
foot upon the fender, frown at the fire.
'in the name of Heaven,' say Miss Betsey, suddenly, 'why Rookery?'
'do you mean the house, ma'am?' ask my mother.
'why rookery?' say Miss Betsey. 'cookery would have be more to
the purpose, if you have have any practical idea of life, either of
you.'
'the name be Mr. Copperfield's choice,' return my mother. 'when
he buy the house, he like to think that there be rook about
it.'
the evening wind make such a disturbance just now, among some tall
old elm-tree at the bottom of the garden, that neither my mother
nor Miss Betsey could forbear glance that way. as the elm bend
to one another, like giant who be whispering secret, and after
a few second of such repose, fall into a violent flurry, toss
their wild arm about, as if their late confidence be really too
wicked for their peace of mind, some weatherbeaten ragged old
rooks'-nest, burden their high branch, swing like wreck
upon a stormy sea.
'where be the bird?' ask Miss Betsey.
'the -?' my mother have be think of something else.
'the rook - what have become of they?' ask Miss Betsey.
'there have not be any since we have live here,' say my mother.
'we think - Mr. Copperfield think - it be quite a large
rookery; but the nest be very old one, and the bird have
desert they a long while.'
'David Copperfield all over!' cry Miss Betsey. 'David
Copperfield from head to foot! call a house a rookery when
therebe not a rook near it, and take the bird on trust, because
he see the nest!'
'Mr. Copperfield,' return my mother, 'be dead, and if you dare to
speak unkindly of he to I -'
my poor dear mother, I suppose, have some momentary intention of
commit an assault and battery upon my aunt, who could easily
have settle she with one hand, even if my mother have be in far
well training for such an encounter than she be that evening.
but it pass with the action of rise from her chair; and she sit
down again very meekly, and faint.
when she come to herself, or when Miss Betsey have restore she,
whichever it be, she find the latter standing at the window. the
twilight be by this time shade down into darkness; and dimly as
they see each other, they could not have do that without the aid
of the fire.
'well?' say Miss Betsey, come back to her chair, as if she have
only be take a casual look at the prospect; 'and when do you
expect -'
'I be all in a tremble,' falter my mother. 'I donot know whatbe
the matter. I shall die, I be sure!'
'no, no, no,' say Miss Betsey. 'have some tea.'
'oh dear I, dear I, do you think it will do I any good?' cry
my mother in a helpless manner.
'of course it will,' say Miss Betsey. 'itbe nothing but fancy.
what do you call your girl?'
'I donot know that it will be a girl, yet, ma'am,' say my mother
innocently.
'bless the Baby!' exclaim Miss Betsey, unconsciously quote the
second sentiment of the pincushion in the drawer upstairs, but
apply it to my mother instead of I, 'I donot mean that. I mean
your servant-girl.'
'Peggotty,' say my mother.
'Peggotty!' repeat Miss Betsey, with some indignation. 'do you
mean to say, child, that any human being have go into a Christian
church, and get herself name Peggotty?'
'itbe her surname,' say my mother, faintly. 'Mr. Copperfield
call she by it, because her christian name be the same as mine.'
'here! Peggotty!' cry Miss Betsey, open the parlour door.
'Tea. your mistress be a little unwell. donot dawdle.'
have issue this mandate with as much potentiality as if she have
be a recognize authority in the house ever since it have be a
house, and have look out to confront the amazed Peggotty come
along the passage with a candle at the sound of a strange voice,
Miss Betsey shut the door again, and sit down as before: with her
foot on the fender, the skirt of her dress tuck up, and her hand
fold on one knee.
'you be speak about its be a girl,' say Miss Betsey. 'I
have no doubt it will be a girl. I have a presentiment that it
must be a girl. now child, from the moment of the birth of this
girl -'
'perhaps boy,' my mother take the liberty of put in.
'I tell you I have a presentiment that it must be a girl,' return
Miss Betsey. 'donot contradict. from the moment of this girl's
birth, child, I intend to be her friend. I intend to be her
godmother, and I beg youwill call her Betsey Trotwood Copperfield.
there must be no mistake in life with this Betsey Trotwood. there
must be no trifling with her affection, poor dear. she must be
well bring up, and well guard from repose any foolish
confidence where they be not deserve. I must make that MY
care.'
there be a twitch of Miss Betsey's head, after each of these
sentence, as if her own old wrong be work within she, and
she repress any plainer reference to they by strong constraint.
so my mother suspect, at least, as she observe she by the low
glimmer of the fire: too much scared by Miss Betsey, too uneasy in
herself, and too subdue and bewildered altogether, to observe
anything very clearly, or to know what to say.
'and be David good to you, child?' ask Miss Betsey, when she have
be silent for a little while, and these motion of her head have
gradually cease. 'be you comfortable together?'
'we be very happy,' say my mother. 'Mr. Copperfield be only
too good to I.'
'what, he spoil you, I suppose?' return Miss Betsey.
'for be quite alone and dependent on myself in this rough world
again, yes, I fear he do indeed,' sob my mother.
'well! donot cry!' say Miss Betsey. 'you be not equally
match, child - if any two people can be equally match - and so
I ask the question. you be an orphan, benot you?'
'yes.'
'and a governess?'
'I be nursery-governess in a family where Mr. Copperfield come to
visit. Mr. Copperfield be very kind to I, and take a great deal
of notice of I, and pay I a good deal of attention, and at last
propose to I. and I accept he. and so we be marry,' say
my mother simply.
'ha! Poor Baby!' muse Miss Betsey, with her frown still bent upon
the fire. 'do you know anything?'
'I beg your pardon, ma'am,' falter my mother.
'about keep house, for instance,' say Miss Betsey.
'not much, I fear,' return my mother. 'not so much as I could
wish. but Mr. Copperfield be teach I -'
('much he know about it himself!') say Miss Betsey in a
parenthesis.
- 'and I hope I should have improve, be very anxious to learn,
and he very patient to teach I, if the great misfortune of his
death' - my mother break down again here, and could get no far.
'well, well!' say Miss Betsey.
-'I keep my housekeeping-book regularly, and balance it with Mr.
Copperfield every night,' cry my mother in another burst of
distress, and break down again.
'well, well!' say Miss Betsey. 'donot cry any more.'
- 'and I be sure we never have a word of difference respect it,
except when Mr. Copperfield object to my three and five be
too much like each other, or to my put curly tail to my seven
and nine,' resume my mother in another burst, and break down
again.
'youwill make yourself ill,' say Miss Betsey, 'and you know that
will not be good either for you or for my god-daughter. come! you
mustnot do it!'
this argument have some share in quiet my mother, though she
increase indisposition have a large one. there be an interval
of silence, only break by Miss Betsey's occasionally ejaculate
'ha!' as she sit with her foot upon the fender.
'David have buy an annuity for himself with his money, I know,'
say she, by and by. 'what do he do for you?'
'Mr. Copperfield,' say my mother, answer with some difficulty,
'be so considerate and good as to secure the reversion of a part
of it to I.'
'how much?' ask Miss Betsey.
'a hundred and five pound a year,' say my mother.
'he might have do bad,' say my aunt.
the word be appropriate to the moment. my mother be so much
bad that Peggotty, come in with the teaboard and candle, and
see at a glance how ill she be, - as Miss Betsey might have
do soon if there have be light enough, - convey her upstairs
to her own room with all speed; and immediately dispatch Ham
Peggotty, her nephew, who have be for some day past secrete in
the house, unknown to my mother, as a special messenger in case of
emergency, to fetch the nurse and doctor.
those allied power be considerably astonish, when they arrive
within a few minute of each other, to find an unknown lady of
portentous appearance, sit before the fire, with her bonnet
tie over her left arm, stop her ear with jeweller' cotton.
Peggotty know nothing about she, and my mother say nothing
about she, she be quite a mystery in the parlour; and the fact of
she have a magazine of jeweller' cotton in her pocket, and
stick the article in her ear in that way, do not detract from
the solemnity of her presence.
the doctor have be upstairs and come down again, and have
satisfied himself, I suppose, that there be a probability of this
unknown lady and himself have to sit there, face to face, for
some hour, lay himself out to be polite and social. he be the
meek of his sex, the mild of little man. he sidle in and
out of a room, to take up the less space. he walk as softly as
the Ghost in Hamlet, and more slowly. he carry his head on one
side, partly in modest depreciation of himself, partly in modest
propitiation of everybody else. it be nothing to say that he
havenot a word to throw at a dog. he couldnot have throw a word at
a mad dog. he might have offer he one gently, or half a one, or
a fragment of one; for he speak as slowly as he walk; but he
wouldnot have be rude to he, and he couldnot have be quick
with he, for any earthly consideration.
Mr. Chillip, look mildly at my aunt with his head on one side,
and make she a little bow, say, in allusion to the jeweller'
cotton, as he softly touch his left ear:
'some local irritation, ma'am?'
'what!' reply my aunt, pull the cotton out of one ear like a
cork.
Mr. Chillip be so alarmed by her abruptness - as he tell my mother
afterwards - that it be a mercy he donot lose his presence of
mind. but he repeat sweetly:
'some local irritation, ma'am?'
'nonsense!' reply my aunt, and cork herself again, at one blow.
Mr. Chillip could do nothing after this, but sit and look at she
feebly, as she sit and look at the fire, until he be call
upstairs again. after some quarter of an hour's absence, he
return.
'well?' say my aunt, take the cotton out of the ear near to
he.
'well, ma'am,' return Mr. Chillip, 'we are- we be progress
slowly, ma'am.'
'Ba--a--ah!' say my aunt, with a perfect shake on the contemptuous
interjection. and cork herself as before.
really - really - as Mr. Chillip tell my mother, he be almost
shock; speak in a professional point of view alone, he be
almost shocked. but he sit and look at she, notwithstanding, for
nearly two hour, as she sit look at the fire, until he be
again call out. after another absence, he again return.
'well?' say my aunt, take out the cotton on that side again.
'well, ma'am,' return Mr. Chillip, 'we be - we be progress
slowly, ma'am.'
'ya--a--ah!' say my aunt. with such a snarl at he, that Mr.
Chillip absolutely could not bear it. it be really calculate to
break his spirit, he say afterwards. he prefer to go and sit
upon the stair, in the dark and a strong draught, until he be
again send for.
Ham Peggotty, who go to the national school, and be a very
dragon at his catechism, and who may therefore be regard as a
credible witness, report next day, that happen to peep in at
the parlour-door an hour after this, he be instantly descry by
Miss Betsey, then walk to and fro in a state of agitation, and
pounce upon before he could make his escape. that there be now
occasional sound of foot and voice overhead which he infer the
cotton do not exclude, from the circumstance of his evidently
be clutch by the lady as a victim on whom to expend her
superabundant agitation when the sound be loud. that,
march he constantly up and down by the collar (as if he have
be take too much laudanum), she, at those time, shake he,
rumple his hair, make light of his linen, stop his ear as if
she confound they with her own, and otherwise tousled and
maltreat he. this be in part confirm by his aunt, who see
he at half past twelve o'clock, soon after his release, and
affirm that he be then as red as I be.
the mild Mr. Chillip could not possibly bear malice at such a time,
if at any time. he sidle into the parlour as soon as he be at
liberty, and say to my aunt in his meek manner:
'well, ma'am, I be happy to congratulate you.'
'what upon?' say my aunt, sharply.
Mr. Chillip be flutter again, by the extreme severity of my
aunt's manner; so he make she a little bow and give she a little
smile, to mollify she.
'mercy on the man, whatbe he do!' cry my aunt, impatiently.
'cannot he speak?'
'be calm, my dear ma'am,' say Mr. Chillip, in his soft accent.
'there be no long any occasion for uneasiness, ma'am. be calm.'
it have since be consider almost a miracle that my aunt donot
shake he, and shake what he have to say, out of he. she only
shake her own head at he, but in a way that make he quail.
'well, ma'am,' resume Mr. Chillip, as soon as he have courage, 'I
be happy to congratulate you. all be now over, ma'am, and well
over.'
during the five minute or so that Mr. Chillip devote to the
delivery of this oration, my aunt eye he narrowly.
'how be she?' say my aunt, fold her arm with her bonnet still
tie on one of they.
'well, ma'am, she will soon be quite comfortable, I hope,' return
Mr. Chillip. 'quite as comfortable as we can expect a young mother
to be, under these melancholy domestic circumstance. there cannot
be any objection to your see she presently, ma'am. it may do
her good.'
'and SHE. how be she?' say my aunt, sharply.
Mr. Chillip lay his head a little more on one side, and look at
my aunt like an amiable bird.
'the baby,' say my aunt. 'how be she?'
'Ma'am,' return Mr. Chillip, 'I apprehend you have know. itbe
a boy.'
my aunt say never a word, but take her bonnet by the string, in
the manner of a sling, aim a blow at Mr. Chillip's head with it,
put it on bent, walk out, and never come back. she vanish like
a discontent fairy; or like one of those supernatural being,
whom it be popularly suppose I be entitle to see; and never
come back any more.
no. I lie in my basket, and my mother lie in her bed; but Betsey
Trotwood Copperfield be for ever in the land of dream and
shadow, the tremendous region whence I have so lately travel;
and the light upon the window of our room shine out upon the
earthly bourne of all such traveller, and the mound above the
ash and the dust that once be he, without whom I have never be.
CHAPTER 2
I OBSERVE
the first object that assume a distinct presence before I, as I
look far back, into the blank of my infancy, be my mother with her
pretty hair and youthful shape, and Peggotty with no shape at all,
and eye so dark that they seem to darken their whole
neighbourhood in her face, and cheek and arm so hard and red that
I wonder the bird donot peck she in preference to apple.
I believe I can remember these two at a little distance apart,
dwarf to my sight by stoop down or kneel on the floor, and
I go unsteadily from the one to the other. I have an impression
on my mind which I cannot distinguish from actual remembrance, of
the touch of Peggotty's forefinger as she use to hold it out to
I, and of its be roughen by needlework, like a pocket
nutmeg-grater.
this may be fancy, though I think the memory of most of we can go
far back into such time than many of we suppose; just as I
believe the power of observation in number of very young child
to be quite wonderful for its closeness and accuracy. indeed, I
think that most grown man who be remarkable in this respect, may
with great propriety be say not to have lose the faculty, than
to have acquire it; the rather, as I generally observe such man to
retain a certain freshness, and gentleness, and capacity of be
please, which be also an inheritance they have preserve from
their childhood.
I might have a misgiving that I be 'meander' in stop to say
this, but that it bring I to remark that I build these
conclusion, in part upon my own experience of myself; and if it
should appear from anything I may set down in this narrative that
I be a child of close observation, or that as a man I have a
strong memory of my childhood, I undoubtedly lie claim to both of
these characteristic.
look back, as I be say, into the blank of my infancy, the
first object I can remember as stand out by themselves from a
confusion of thing, be my mother and Peggotty. what else do I
remember? let I see.
there come out of the cloud, our house - not new to I, but quite
familiar, in its early remembrance. on the ground-floor be
Peggotty's kitchen, open into a back yard; with a pigeon-house
on a pole, in the centre, without any pigeon in it; a great dog-
kennel in a corner, without any dog; and a quantity of fowl that
look terribly tall to I, walk about, in a menacing and
ferocious manner. there be one cock who get upon a post to crow,
and seem to take particular notice of I as I look at he through
the kitchen window, who make I shiver, he be so fierce. of the
geese outside the side-gate who come waddle after I with their
long neck stretch out when I go that way, I dream at night: as
a man environ by wild beast might dream of lion.
here be a long passage - what an enormous perspective I make of it!
- lead from Peggotty's kitchen to the front door. a dark
store-room open out of it, and that be a place to be run past at
night; for I donot know what may be among those tub and jar and
old tea-chest, when there be nobody in there with a dimly-burn
light, let a mouldy air come out of the door, in which there be
the smell of soap, pickle, pepper, candle, and coffee, all at one
whiff. then there be the two parlour: the parlour in which we
sit of an evening, my mother and I and Peggotty - for Peggotty be
quite our companion, when her work be do and we be alone - and
the good parlour where we sit on a Sunday; grandly, but not so
comfortably. there be something of a doleful air about that room
to I, for Peggotty have tell I - I donot know when, but apparently
age ago - about my father's funeral, and the company have their
black cloak put on. one Sunday night my mother read to Peggotty
and I in there, how Lazarus be raise up from the dead. and I be
so frightened that they be afterwards oblige to take I out of
bed, and show I the quiet churchyard out of the bedroom window,
with the dead all lie in their graf at rest, below the solemn
moon.
there be nothing half so green that I know anywhere, as the grass
of that churchyard; nothing half so shady as its tree; nothing
half so quiet as its tombstone. the sheep be feed there, when
I kneel up, early in the morning, in my little bed in a closet
within my mother's room, to look out at it; and I see the red light
shin on the sun-dial, and think within myself, 'be the sun-dial
glad, I wonder, that it can tell the time again?'
here be our pew in the church. what a high-back pew! with a
window near it, out of which our house can be see, and be see
many time during the morning's service, by Peggotty, who like to
make herself as sure as she can that itbe not be rob, or be
not in flame. but though Peggotty's eye wander, she be much
offend if mine do, and frown to I, as I stand upon the seat,
that I be to look at the clergyman. but I cannot always look at he
- I know he without that white thing on, and I be afraid of his
wonder why I stare so, and perhaps stop the service to
inquire - and what be I to do? itbe a dreadful thing to gape, but
I must do something. I look at my mother, but she pretend not to
see I. I look at a boy in the aisle, and he make face at I.
I look at the sunlight come in at the open door through the
porch, and there I see a stray sheep - I donot mean a sinner, but
mutton - half make up his mind to come into the church. I feel
that if I look at he any long, I might be tempt to say
something out loud; and what would become of I then! I look up at
the monumental tablet on the wall, and try to think of Mr. Bodgers
late of this parish, and what the feeling of Mrs. Bodgers must
have be, when affliction sore, long time Mr. Bodgers bore, and
physician be in vain. I wonder whether they call in Mr.
Chillip, and he be in vain; and if so, how he like to be remind
of it once a week. I look from Mr. Chillip, in his Sunday
neckcloth, to the pulpit; and think what a good place it would be
to play in, and what a castle it would make, with another boy
come up the stair to attack it, and have the velvet cushion
with the tassel throw down on his head. in time my eye
gradually shut up; and, from seem to hear the clergyman singing
a drowsy song in the heat, I hear nothing, until I fall off the
seat with a crash, and be take out, more dead than alive, by
Peggotty.
and now I see the outside of our house, with the latticed
bedroom-window standing open to let in the sweet-smell air, and
the ragged old rooks'-nests still dangle in the elm-tree at the
bottom of the front garden. now I be in the garden at the back,
beyond the yard where the empty pigeon-house and dog-kennel be -
a very preserve of butterfly, as I remember it, with a high
fence, and a gate and padlock; where the fruit cluster on the
tree, riper and rich than fruit have ever be since, in any
other garden, and where my mother gather some in a basket, while
I stand by, bolt furtive gooseberry, and try to look
unmoved. a great wind rise, and the summer be go in a moment.
we be play in the winter twilight, dance about the parlour.
when my mother be out of breath and rest herself in an
elbow-chair, I watch she wind her bright curl round her
finger, and straiten her waist, and nobody know well than I
do that she like to look so well, and be proud of be so pretty.
that be among my very early impression. that, and a sense that
we be both a little afraid of Peggotty, and submit ourselves
in most thing to her direction, be among the first opinion - if
they may be so call - that I ever derive from what I see.
Peggotty and I be sit one night by the parlour fire, alone.
I have be read to Peggotty about crocodile. I must have read
very perspicuously, or the poor soul must have be deeply
interested, for I remember she have a cloudy impression, after I have
do, that they be a sort of vegetable. I be tired of reading,
and dead sleepy; but have leave, as a high treat, to sit up until
my mother come home from spend the evening at a neighbour's, I
would rather have die upon my post (of course) than have go to
bed. I have reach that stage of sleepiness when Peggotty seem
to swell and grow immensely large. I prop my eyelid open with
my two forefinger, and look perseveringly at she as she sit at
work; at the little bit of wax-candle she keep for her thread - how
old it look, be so wrinkle in all direction! - at the little
house with a thatched roof, where the yard-measure live; at her
work-box with a slide lid, with a view of St. Paul's Cathedral
(with a pink dome) paint on the top; at the brass thimble on her
finger; at herself, whom I think lovely. I feel so sleepy, that
I know if I lose sight of anything for a moment, I be go.
'Peggotty,' say I, suddenly, 'be you ever married?'
'Lord, Master Davy,' reply Peggotty. 'whatbe put marriage in
your head?'
she answer with such a start, that it quite awake I. and then
she stop in her work, and look at I, with her needle draw
out to its thread's length.
'but be you ever married, Peggotty?' say I. 'you be a very
handsome woman, an't you?'
I think she in a different style from my mother, certainly; but
of another school of beauty, I consider she a perfect example.
there be a red velvet footstool in the good parlour, on which my
mother have paint a nosegay. the ground-work of that stool, and
Peggotty's complexion appear to I to be one and the same thing.
the stool be smooth, and Peggotty be rough, but that make no
difference.
'I handsome, Davy!' say Peggotty. 'Lawk, no, my dear! but what
put marriage in your head?'
'I donot know! - you mustnot marry more than one person at a time,
may you, Peggotty?'
'certainly not,' say Peggotty, with the prompt decision.
'but if you marry a person, and the person die, why then you may
marry another person, maynot you, Peggotty?'
'you MAY,' say Peggotty, 'if you choose, my dear. thatbe a matter
of opinion.'
'but what be your opinion, Peggotty?' say I.
I ask she, and look curiously at she, because she look so
curiously at I.
'my opinion be,' say Peggotty, take her eye from I, after a
little indecision and go on with her work, 'that I never be
marry myself, Master Davy, and that I donot expect to be. thatbe
all I know about the subject.'
'you an't cross, I suppose, Peggotty, be you?' say I, after
sit quiet for a minute.
I really think she be, she have be so short with I; but I be
quite mistaken: for she lay aside her work (which be a stocking
of her own), and open her arm wide, take my curly head within
they, and give it a good squeeze. I know it be a good squeeze,
because, be very plump, whenever she make any little exertion
after she be dress, some of the button on the back of her gown
fly off. and I recollect two burst to the opposite side of the
parlour, while she be hug I.
'now let I hear some more about the crorkindill,' say Peggotty,
who be not quite right in the name yet, 'for I an't hear half
enough.'
I couldnot quite understand why Peggotty look so queer, or why
she be so ready to go back to the crocodile. however, we
return to those monster, with fresh wakefulness on my part, and
we leave their egg in the sand for the sun to hatch; and we run
away from they, and baffle they by constantly turn, which they
be unable to do quickly, on account of their unwieldy make; and
we go into the water after they, as native, and put sharp piece
of timber down their throat; and in short we run the whole
crocodile gauntlet. I do, at least; but I have my doubt of
Peggotty, who be thoughtfully stick her needle into various
part of her face and arm, all the time.
we have exhaust the crocodile, and begin with the alligator,
when the garden-bell rang. we go out to the door; and there be
my mother, look unusually pretty, I think, and with her a
gentleman with beautiful black hair and whisker, who have walk
home with we from church last Sunday.
as my mother stoop down on the threshold to take I in her arm
and kiss I, the gentleman say I be a more highly privileged
little fellow than a monarch - or something like that; for my later
understanding come, I be sensible, to my aid here.
'what do that mean?' I ask he, over her shoulder.
he pat I on the head; but somehow, I donot like he or his
deep voice, and I be jealous that his hand should touch my
mother's in touch I - which it do. I put it away, as well as
I could.
'oh, Davy!' remonstrate my mother.
'dear boy!' say the gentleman. 'I cannot wonder at his devotion!'
I never see such a beautiful colour on my mother's face before.
she gently chid I for be rude; and, keep I close to she
shawl, turn to thank the gentleman for take so much trouble as
to bring her home. she put out her hand to he as she speak, and,
as he meet it with his own, she glance, I think, at I.
'let we say "good night", my fine boy,' say the gentleman, when he
have bend his head - I see he! - over my mother's little glove.
'good night!' say I.
'come! let we be the good friend in the world!' say the
gentleman, laugh. 'shake hand!'
my right hand be in my mother's left, so I give he the other.
'why, thatbe the wrong hand, Davy!' laugh the gentleman.
MY mother draw my right hand forward, but I be resolve, for my
former reason, not to give it he, and I do not. I give he the
other, and he shake it heartily, and say I be a brave fellow, and
go away.
at this minute I see he turn round in the garden, and give we a
last look with his ill-omen black eye, before the door be shut.
Peggotty, who have not say a word or move a finger, secure the
fastening instantly, and we all go into the parlour. my mother,
contrary to her usual habit, instead of come to the elbow-chair
by the fire, remain at the other end of the room, and sit singing
to herself.
- 'hope you have have a pleasant evening, ma'am,' say Peggotty,
stand as stiff as a barrel in the centre of the room, with a
candlestick in her hand.
'much oblige to you, Peggotty,' return my mother, in a cheerful
voice, 'I have have a very pleasant evening.'
'a stranger or so make an agreeable change,' suggest Peggotty.
'a very agreeable change, indeed,' return my mother.
Peggotty continue to stand motionless in the middle of the room,
and my mother resume her singing, I fall asleep, though I be not
so sound asleep but that I could hear voice, without hear what
they say. when I half awake from this uncomfortable doze, I find
Peggotty and my mother both in tear, and both talk.
'not such a one as this, Mr. Copperfield wouldnot have like,' say
Peggotty. 'that I say, and that I swear!'
'Good Heavens!' cry my mother, 'youwill drive I mad! be ever
any poor girl so ill-use by her servant as I be! why do I do
myself the injustice of call myself a girl? have I never be
married, Peggotty?'
'God know you have, ma'am,' return Peggotty.
'then, how can you dare,' say my mother - 'you know I donot mean
how can you dare, Peggotty, but how can you have the heart - to
make I so uncomfortable and say such bitter thing to I, when you
be well aware that I havenot, out of this place, a single friend
to turn to?'
'the morebe the reason,' return Peggotty, 'for say that it
willnot do. no! that it willnot do. no! no price could make it do.
no!' - I think Peggotty would have throw the candlestick away,
she be so emphatic with it.
'how can you be so aggravating,' say my mother, shed more
tear than before, 'as to talk in such an unjust manner! how can
you go on as if it be all settle and arrange, Peggotty, when I
tell you over and over again, you cruel thing, that beyond the
commonest civility nothing have pass! you talk of admiration.
what be I to do? if people be so silly as to indulge the
sentiment, be it my fault? what be I to do, I ask you? would you
wish I to shave my head and black my face, or disfigure myself
with a burn, or a scald, or something of that sort? I dare say you
would, Peggotty. I dare say youwould quite enjoy it.'
Peggotty seem to take this aspersion very much to heart, I
think.
'and my dear boy,' cry my mother, come to the elbow-chair in
which I be, and caress I, 'my own little Davy! be it to be
hint to I that I be want in affection for my precious
treasure, the dear little fellow that ever be!'
'nobody never go and hint no such a thing,' say Peggotty.
'you do, Peggotty!' return my mother. 'you know you do. what
else be it possible to infer from what you say, you unkind
creature, when you know as well as I do, that on his account only
last quarter I wouldnot buy myself a new parasol, though that old
green one be fray the whole way up, and the fringe be perfectly
mangy? you know it be, Peggotty. you cannot deny it.' then,
turn affectionately to I, with her cheek against mine, 'be I a
naughty mama to you, Davy? be I a nasty, cruel, selfish, bad mama?
say I be, my child; say "yes", dear boy, and Peggotty will love
you; and Peggotty's love be a great deal well than mine, Davy.
I donot love you at all, do I?'
at this, we all fall a-cry together. I think I be the loud
of the party, but I be sure we be all sincere about it. I be
quite heart-break myself, and be afraid that in the first
transport of wound tenderness I call Peggotty a 'beast'. that
honest creature be in deep affliction, I remember, and must have
become quite buttonless on the occasion; for a little volley of
those explosive go off, when, after have make it up with my
mother, she kneel down by the elbow-chair, and make it up with
I.
we go to bed greatly deject. my sob keep wake I, for a
long time; and when one very strong sob quite hoist I up in bed,
I find my mother sit on the coverlet, and lean over I. I
fall asleep in her arm, after that, and sleep soundly.
whether it be the following Sunday when I see the gentleman again,
or whether there be any great lapse of time before he
reappear, I cannot recall. I donot profess to be clear about
date. but there he be, in church, and he walk home with we
afterwards. he come in, too, to look at a famous geranium we have,
in the parlour-window. it do not appear to I that he take much
notice of it, but before he go he ask my mother to give he a
bit of the blossom. she beg he to choose it for himself, but
he refuse to do that - I could not understand why - so she pluck
it for he, and give it into his hand. he say he would never,
never part with it any more; and I think he must be quite a fool
not to know that it would fall to piece in a day or two.
Peggotty begin to be less with we, of an evening, than she have
always be. my mother defer to her very much - more than
usual, it occur to I - and we be all three excellent friend;
still we be different from what we use to be, and be not so
comfortable among ourselves. sometimes I fancy that Peggotty
perhaps object to my mother's wear all the pretty dress she
have in her drawer, or to she go so often to visit at that
neighbour's; but I couldnot, to my satisfaction, make out how it
be.
gradually, I become used to see the gentleman with the black
whisker. I like he no well than at first, and have the same
uneasy jealousy of he; but if I have any reason for it beyond a
child's instinctive dislike, and a general idea that Peggotty and
I could make much of my mother without any help, it certainly be
not the reason that I might have find if I have be old. no
such thing come into my mind, or near it. I could observe, in
little piece, as it be; but as to make a net of a number of
these piece, and catch anybody in it, that be, as yet, beyond
I.
one autumn morning I be with my mother in the front garden, when
Mr. Murdstone - I know he by that name now - come by, on
horseback. he rein up his horse to salute my mother, and say he
be go to Lowestoft to see some friend who be there with a
yacht, and merrily propose to take I on the saddle before he if
I would like the ride.
the air be so clear and pleasant, and the horse seem to like the
idea of the ride so much himself, as he stand snort and paw
at the garden-gate, that I have a great desire to go. so I be send
upstairs to Peggotty to be make spruce; and in the meantime Mr.
Murdstone dismount, and, with his horse's bridle draw over his
arm, walk slowly up and down on the outer side of the sweetbriar
fence, while my mother walk slowly up and down on the inner to
keep he company. I recollect Peggotty and I peep out at they
from my little window; I recollect how closely they seem to be
examine the sweetbriar between they, as they stroll along; and
how, from be in a perfectly angelic temper, Peggotty turn
cross in a moment, and brush my hair the wrong way, excessively
hard.
Mr. Murdstone and I be soon off, and trot along on the green
turf by the side of the road. he hold I quite easily with one
arm, and I donot think I be restless usually; but I could not make
up my mind to sit in front of he without turn my head
sometimes, and look up in his face. he have that kind of shallow
black eye - I want a well word to express an eye that have no
depth in it to be look into - which, when it be abstract, seem
from some peculiarity of light to be disfigure, for a moment at a
time, by a cast. several time when I glance at he, I observe
that appearance with a sort of awe, and wonder what he be
think about so closely. his hair and whisker be blacker and
thick, look at so near, than even I have give they credit for
be. a squareness about the low part of his face, and the
dotted indication of the strong black beard he shave close every
day, remind I of the wax-work that have travel into our
neighbourhood some half-a-year before. this, his regular eyebrow,
and the rich white, and black, and brown, of his complexion -
confound his complexion, and his memory! - make I think he, in
spite of my misgiving, a very handsome man. I have no doubt that
my poor dear mother think he so too.
we go to an hotel by the sea, where two gentleman be smoke
cigar in a room by themselves. each of they be lie on at least
four chair, and have a large rough jacket on. in a corner be a
heap of coat and boat-cloak, and a flag, all bundle up together.
they both roll on to their foot in an untidy sort of manner, when
we come in, and say, 'Halloa, Murdstone! we think you be
dead!'
'not yet,' say Mr. Murdstone.
'and whobe this shaver?' say one of the gentleman, take hold of
I.
'thatbe Davy,' return Mr. Murdstone.
'Davy who?' say the gentleman. 'Jones?'
'copperfield,' say Mr. Murdstone.
'what! bewitch Mrs. Copperfield's encumbrance?' cry the
gentleman. 'the pretty little widow?'
'Quinion,' say Mr. Murdstone, 'take care, if you please.
somebody's sharp.'
'who be?' ask the gentleman, laugh.
I look up, quickly; be curious to know.
'only Brooks of Sheffield,' say Mr. Murdstone.
I be quite relieved to find that it be only Brooks of Sheffield;
for, at first, I really think it be I.
there seem to be something very comical in the reputation of Mr.
Brooks of Sheffield, for both the gentleman laugh heartily when
he be mention, and Mr. Murdstone be a good deal amuse also.
after some laughing, the gentleman whom he have call Quinion,
say:
'and what be the opinion of Brooks of Sheffield, in reference to
the project business?'
'why, I donot know that Brooks understand much about it at
present,' reply Mr. Murdstone; 'but he be not generally
favourable, I believe.'
there be more laughter at this, and Mr. Quinion say he would ring
the bell for some sherry in which to drink to Brooks. this he do;
and when the wine come, he make I have a little, with a biscuit,
and, before I drink it, stand up and say, 'confusion to Brooks of
Sheffield!' the toast be receive with great applause, and such
hearty laughter that it make I laugh too; at which they laugh
the more. in short, we quite enjoy ourselves.
we walk about on the cliff after that, and sit on the grass, and
look at thing through a telescope - I could make out nothing
myself when it be put to my eye, but I pretend I could - and
then we come back to the hotel to an early dinner. all the time we
be out, the two gentleman smoke incessantly - which, I think,
if I might judge from the smell of their rough coat, they must
have be do, ever since the coat have first come home from the
tailor's. I must not forget that we go on board the yacht, where
they all three descend into the cabin, and be busy with some
paper. I see they quite hard at work, when I look down through
the open skylight. they leave I, during this time, with a very
nice man with a very large head of red hair and a very small shiny
hat upon it, who have get a cross-barred shirt or waistcoat on, with
'Skylark' in capital letter across the chest. I think it be
his name; and that as he live on board ship and havenot a street
door to put his name on, he put it there instead; but when I call
he Mr. Skylark, he say it mean the vessel.
I observe all day that Mr. Murdstone be graver and steady than
the two gentleman. they be very gay and careless. they joke
freely with one another, but seldom with he. it appear to I
that he be more clever and cold than they be, and that they
regard he with something of my own feeling. I remark that,
once or twice when Mr. Quinion be talk, he look at Mr.
Murdstone sideway, as if to make sure of his not be displease;
and that once when Mr. Passnidge (the other gentleman) be in high
spirit, he trod upon his foot, and give he a secret caution with
his eye, to observe Mr. Murdstone, who be sit stern and
silent. nor do I recollect that Mr. Murdstone laugh at all that
day, except at the Sheffield joke - and that, by the by, be his
own.
we go home early in the evening. it be a very fine evening, and
my mother and he have another stroll by the sweetbriar, while I be
send in to get my tea. when he be go, my mother ask I all
about the day I have have, and what they have say and do. I
mention what they have say about she, and she laugh, and tell
I they be impudent fellow who talk nonsense - but I know it
please she. I know it quite as well as I know it now. I take the
opportunity of ask if she be at all acquaint with Mr. Brooks
of Sheffield, but she answer no, only she suppose he must be a
manufacturer in the knife and fork way.
can I say of her face - alter as I have reason to remember it,
perish as I know it be - that it be go, when here it come
before I at this instant, as distinct as any face that I may
choose to look on in a crowded street? can I say of her innocent
and girlish beauty, that it fade, and be no more, when its breath
fall on my cheek now, as it fall that night? can I say she ever
change, when my remembrance bring she back to life, thus only;
and, truer to its love youth than I have be, or man ever be,
still hold fast what it cherish then?
I write of she just as she be when I have go to bed after this
talk, and she come to bid I good night. she kneel down
playfully by the side of the bed, and lay her chin upon her
hand, and laughing, say:
'what be it they say, Davy? tell I again. I cannot believe it.'
'"bewitch -"' I begin.
my mother put her hand upon my lip to stop I.
'it be never bewitch,' she say, laugh. 'it never could
have be bewitch, Davy. now I know it benot!'
'yes, it be. "bewitch Mrs. Copperfield",' I repeat stoutly.
'and, "pretty."'
'no, no, it be never pretty. not pretty,' interpose my mother,
lay her finger on my lip again.
'yes it be. "pretty little widow."'
'what foolish, impudent creature!' cry my mother, laugh and
cover her face. 'what ridiculous man! An't they? davy dear -'
'well, Ma.'
'donot tell Peggotty; she might be angry with they. I be
dreadfully angry with they myself; but I would rather Peggotty
donot know.'
I promise, of course; and we kiss one another over and over
again, and I soon fall fast asleep.
it seem to I, at this distance of time, as if it be the next
day when Peggotty broach the striking and adventurous proposition
I be about to mention; but it be probably about two month
afterwards.
we be sit as before, one evening (when my mother be out as
before), in company with the stocking and the yard-measure, and the
bit of wax, and the box with St. Paul's on the lid, and the
crocodile book, when Peggotty, after look at I several time,
and open her mouth as if she be go to speak, without do
it - which I think be merely gap, or I should have be
rather alarmed - say coaxingly:
'Master Davy, how should you like to go along with I and spend a
fortnight at my brother's at Yarmouth? wouldnot that be a treat?'
'be your brother an agreeable man, Peggotty?' I inquire,
provisionally.
'oh, what an agreeable man he be!' cry Peggotty, hold up her
hand. 'then therebe the sea; and the boat and ship; and the
fisherman; and the beach; and be to play with -'
Peggotty mean her nephew Ham, mention in my first chapter; but
she speak of he as a morsel of English Grammar.
I be flush by her summary of delight, and reply that it would
indeed be a treat, but what would my mother say?
'why then Iwill as good as bet a guinea,' say Peggotty, intent upon
my face, 'that shewill let we go. Iwill ask she, if you like, as
soon as ever she come home. there now!'
'but whatbe she to do while webe away?' say I, put my small
elbow on the table to argue the point. 'she cannot live by
herself.'
if Peggotty be look for a hole, all of a sudden, in the heel
of that stocking, it must have be a very little one indeed, and
not worth darn.
'I say! Peggotty! she cannot live by herself, you know.'
'oh, bless you!' say Peggotty, look at I again at last.
'donot you know? shebe go to stay for a fortnight with Mrs.
Grayper. Mrs. Grayper's go to have a lot of company.'
oh! if that be it, I be quite ready to go. I wait, in the
utmost impatience, until my mother come home from Mrs. Grayper's
(for it be that identical neighbour), to ascertain if we could get
leave to carry out this great idea. without be nearly so much
surprised as I have expect, my mother enter into it readily; and
it be all arrange that night, and my board and lodge during the
visit be to be pay for.
the day soon come for our going. it be such an early day that it
come soon, even to I, who be in a fever of expectation, and half
afraid that an earthquake or a fiery mountain, or some other great
convulsion of nature, might interpose to stop the expedition. we
be to go in a carrier's cart, which depart in the morning after
breakfast. I would have give any money to have be allow to
wrap myself up over-night, and sleep in my hat and boot.
it touch I nearly now, although I tell it lightly, to recollect
how eager I be to leave my happy home; to think how little I
suspect what I do leave for ever.
I be glad to recollect that when the carrier's cart be at the
gate, and my mother stand there kiss I, a grateful fondness for
she and for the old place I have never turn my back upon before,
make I cry. I be glad to know that my mother cry too, and that
I feel her heart beat against mine.
I be glad to recollect that when the carrier begin to move, my
mother run out at the gate, and call to he to stop, that she
might kiss I once more. I be glad to dwell upon the earnestness
and love with which she lift up her face to mine, and do so.
as we leave she stand in the road, Mr. Murdstone come up to where
she be, and seem to expostulate with she for be so moved. I
be look back round the awning of the cart, and wonder what
business it be of his. Peggotty, who be also look back on the
other side, seem anything but satisfied; as the face she bring
back in the cart denote.
I sit look at Peggotty for some time, in a reverie on this
supposititious case: whether, if she be employ to lose I like
the boy in the fairy tale, I should be able to track my way home
again by the button she would shed.
CHAPTER 3
I have a change
the carrier's horse be the lazy horse in the world, I should
hope, and shuffle along, with his head down, as if he like to
keep people wait to whom the package be direct. I fancy,
indeed, that he sometimes chuckle audibly over this reflection,
but the carrier say he be only trouble with a cough.
the carrier have a way of keep his head down, like his horse, and
of droop sleepily forward as he drive, with one of his arm on
each of his knee. I say 'drove', but it strike I that the cart
would have go to Yarmouth quite as well without he, for the
horse do all that; and as to conversation, he have no idea of it
but whistle.
Peggotty have a basket of refreshment on her knee, which would have
last we out handsomely, if we have be go to London by the
same conveyance. we eat a good deal, and sleep a good deal.
Peggotty always go to sleep with her chin upon the handle of the
basket, her hold of which never relax; and I could not have
believe unless I have hear she do it, that one defenceless woman
could have snore so much.
we make so many deviation up and down lane, and be such a long
time deliver a bedstead at a public-house, and call at other
place, that I be quite tired, and very glad, when we see
Yarmouth. it look rather spongy and soppy, I think, as I
carry my eye over the great dull waste that lie across the river;
and I could not help wonder, if the world be really as round
as my geography book say, how any part of it come to be so flat.
but I reflect that Yarmouth might be situate at one of the
pole; which would account for it.
as we draw a little nearer, and see the whole adjacent prospect
lie a straight low line under the sky, I hint to Peggotty that
a mound or so might have improve it; and also that if the land have
be a little more separated from the sea, and the town and the
tide have not be quite so much mixed up, like toast and water, it
would have be nice. but Peggotty say, with great emphasis
than usual, that we must take thing as we find they, and that,
for her part, she be proud to call herself a Yarmouth Bloater.
when we get into the street (which be strange enough to I) and
smell the fish, and pitch, and oakum, and tar, and see the sailor
walk about, and the cart jingle up and down over the stone,
I feel that I have do so busy a place an injustice; and say as
much to Peggotty, who hear my expression of delight with great
complacency, and tell I it be well know (I suppose to those who
have the good fortune to be bear Bloaters) that Yarmouth be, upon
the whole, the fine place in the universe.
'herebe my Am!' scream Peggotty, 'grow out of knowledge!'
he be wait for we, in fact, at the public-house; and ask I
how I find myself, like an old acquaintance. I do not feel, at
first, that I know he as well as he know I, because he have never
come to our house since the night I be bear, and naturally he have
the advantage of I. but our intimacy be much advanced by his
take I on his back to carry I home. he be, now, a huge,
strong fellow of six foot high, broad in proportion, and
round-shoulder; but with a simpering boy's face and curly light
hair that give he quite a sheepish look. he be dress in a
canvas jacket, and a pair of such very stiff trouser that they
would have stand quite as well alone, without any leg in they.
and you couldnot so properly have say he wear a hat, as that he
be cover in a-top, like an old building, with something pitchy.
ham carry I on his back and a small box of our under his arm,
and Peggotty carry another small box of ours, we turn down
lane bestrewn with bit of chip and little hillock of sand, and
go past gas-work, rope-walk, boat-builder' yard, shipwrights'
yard, ship-breaker' yard, caulker' yard, rigger' loft,
smith' forge, and a great litter of such place, until we come
out upon the dull waste I have already see at a distance; when Ham
say,
'Yon's our house, Mas'r Davy!'
I look in all direction, as far as I could stare over the
wilderness, and away at the sea, and away at the river, but no
house could I make out. there be a black barge, or some other
kind of superannuated boat, not far off, high and dry on the
ground, with an iron funnel stick out of it for a chimney and
smoke very cosily; but nothing else in the way of a habitation
that be visible to I.
'thatbe not it?' say I. 'that ship-look thing?'
'thatbe it, Mas'r Davy,' return Ham.
if it have be Aladdin's palace, roc's egg and all, I suppose I
could not have be more charmed with the romantic idea of live
in it. there be a delightful door cut in the side, and it be
roof in, and there be little window in it; but the wonderful
charm of it be, that it be a real boat which have no doubt be
upon the water hundred of time, and which have never be intend
to be live in, on dry land. that be the captivation of it to I.
if it have ever be mean to be live in, I might have think it
small, or inconvenient, or lonely; but never have be design
for any such use, it become a perfect abode.
it be beautifully clean inside, and as tidy as possible. there
be a table, and a dutch clock, and a chest of drawer, and on the
chest of drawer there be a tea-tray with a painting on it of a
lady with a parasol, take a walk with a military-look child
who be trundle a hoop. the tray be keep from tumble down, by
a bible; and the tray, if it have tumble down, would have smash
a quantity of cup and saucer and a teapot that be group
around the book. on the wall there be some common colour
picture, frame and glaze, of scripture subject; such as I have
never see since in the hand of pedlar, without see the whole
interior of Peggotty's brother's house again, at one view. Abraham
in red go to sacrifice Isaac in blue, and Daniel in yellow cast
into a den of green lion, be the most prominent of these. over
the little mantelshelf, be a picture of the 'Sarah Jane' lugger,
build at Sunderland, with a real little wooden stern stick on to
it; a work of art, combine composition with carpentry, which I
consider to be one of the most enviable possession that the
world could afford. there be some hook in the beam of the
ceiling, the use of which I do not divine then; and some locker
and box and convenience of that sort, which serve for seat and
eke out the chair.
all this I see in the first glance after I cross the threshold -
child-like, accord to my theory - and then Peggotty open a
little door and show I my bedroom. it be the complete and
most desirable bedroom ever see - in the stern of the vessel; with
a little window, where the rudder use to go through; a little
look-glass, just the right height for I, nail against the
wall, and frame with oyster-shell; a little bed, which there be
just room enough to get into; and a nosegay of seaweed in a blue
mug on the table. the wall be whitewash as white as milk, and
the patchwork counterpane make my eye quite ache with its
brightness. one thing I particularly notice in this delightful
house, be the smell of fish; which be so searching, that when I
take out my pocket-handkerchief to wipe my nose, I find it smell
exactly as if it have wrap up a lobster. on my imparting this
discovery in confidence to Peggotty, she inform I that her
brother deal in lobster, crab, and crawfish; and I afterwards
find that a heap of these creature, in a state of wonderful
conglomeration with one another, and never leave off pinch
whatever they lay hold of, be usually to be find in a little
wooden outhouse where the pot and kettle be keep.
we be welcome by a very civil woman in a white apron, whom I have
see curtsey at the door when I be on Ham's back, about a
quarter of a mile off. likewise by a most beautiful little girl
(or I think she so) with a necklace of blue bead on, who
wouldnot let I kiss she when I offer to, but run away and hide
herself. by and by, when we have din in a sumptuous manner off
boil dab, melt butter, and potato, with a chop for I, a
hairy man with a very good-natured face come home. as he call
Peggotty 'lass', and give she a hearty smack on the cheek, I have no
doubt, from the general propriety of her conduct, that he be her
brother; and so he turn out - be presently introduce to I as
Mr. Peggotty, the master of the house.
'glad to see you, sir,' say Mr. Peggotty. 'youwill find we rough,
sir, but youwill find we ready.'
I thank he, and reply that I be sure I should be happy in
such a delightful place.
'howbe your Ma, sir?' say Mr. Peggotty. 'do you leave her pretty
jolly?'
I give Mr. Peggotty to understand that she be as jolly as I could
wish, and that she desire her compliment - which be a polite
fiction on my part.
'Ibe much obleege to she, Ibe sure,' say Mr. Peggotty. 'well,
sir, if you can make out here, fur a fortnut, 'long wi' she,'
nod at his sister, 'and Ham, and little Em'ly, we shall be
proud of your company.'
have do the honour of his house in this hospitable manner, Mr.
Peggotty go out to wash himself in a kettleful of hot water,
remark that 'cold would never get his muck off'. he soon
return, greatly improve in appearance; but so rubicund, that I
couldnot help think his face have this in common with the
lobster, crab, and crawfish, - that it go into the hot water
very black, and come out very red.
after tea, when the door be shut and all be make snug (the night
be cold and misty now), it seem to I the most delicious
retreat that the imagination of man could conceive. to hear the
wind get up out at sea, to know that the fog be creep over
the desolate flat outside, and to look at the fire, and think that
there be no house near but this one, and this one a boat, be like
enchantment. Little Em'ly have overcome her shyness, and be
sit by my side upon the low and least of the locker, which
be just large enough for we two, and just fit into the chimney
corner. Mrs. Peggotty with the white apron, be knit on the
opposite side of the fire. Peggotty at her needlework be as much
at home with St. Paul's and the bit of wax-candle, as if they have
never know any other roof. Ham, who have be give I my first
lesson in all-four, be try to recollect a scheme of tell
fortune with the dirty card, and be print off fishy
impression of his thumb on all the card he turn. Mr. Peggotty
be smoke his pipe. I feel it be a time for conversation and
confidence.
'Mr. Peggotty!' say I.
'Sir,' say he.
'do you give your son the name of Ham, because you live in a sort
of ark?'
Mr. Peggotty seem to think it a deep idea, but answer:
'no, sir. I never giv he no name.'
'who give he that name, then?' say I, put question number two
of the catechism to Mr. Peggotty.
'why, sir, his father giv it he,' say Mr. Peggotty.
'I think you be his father!'
'my brother Joe be his father,' say Mr. Peggotty.
'Dead, Mr. Peggotty?' I hint, after a respectful pause.
'Drowndead,' say Mr. Peggotty.
I be very much surprised that Mr. Peggotty be not Ham's father,
and begin to wonder whether I be mistaken about his relationship
to anybody else there. I be so curious to know, that I make up my
mind to have it out with Mr. Peggotty.
'Little Em'ly,' I say, glance at she. 'she be your daughter,
benot she, Mr. Peggotty?'
'no, sir. my brother-in-law, Tom, be her father.'
I couldnot help it. '- dead, Mr. Peggotty?' I hint, after
another respectful silence.
'Drowndead,' say Mr. Peggotty.
I feel the difficulty of resume the subject, but have not get to
the bottom of it yet, and must get to the bottom somehow. so I
say:
'havenot you any child, Mr. Peggotty?'
'no, master,' he answer with a short laugh. 'Ibe a bacheldore.'
'a bachelor!' I say, astonish. 'why, whobe that, Mr. Peggotty?'
point to the person in the apron who be knit.
'thatbe Missis Gummidge,' say Mr. Peggotty.
'Gummidge, Mr. Peggotty?'
but at this point Peggotty - I mean my own peculiar Peggotty - make
such impressive motion to I not to ask any more question, that
I could only sit and look at all the silent company, until it be
time to go to bed. then, in the privacy of my own little cabin,
she inform I that Ham and Em'ly be an orphan nephew and niece,
whom my host have at different time adopt in their childhood,
when they be leave destitute: and that Mrs. Gummidge be the widow
of his partner in a boat, who have die very poor. he be but a
poor man himself, say Peggotty, but as good as gold and as true as
steel - those be her simile. the only subject, she inform I,
on which he ever show a violent temper or swear an oath, be this
generosity of his; and if it be ever refer to, by any one of
they, he strike the table a heavy blow with his right hand (have
split it on one such occasion), and swear a dreadful oath that he
would be 'Gormed' if he donot cut and run for good, if it be ever
mention again. it appear, in answer to my inquiry, that
nobody have the least idea of the etymology of this terrible verb
passive to be gorme; but that they all regard it as constitute
a most solemn imprecation.
I be very sensible of my entertainer's goodness, and listen to
the womanbe go to bed in another little crib like mine at the
opposite end of the boat, and to he and Ham hang up two
hammock for themselves on the hook I have notice in the roof, in
a very luxurious state of mind, enhance by my be sleepy. as
slumber gradually steal upon I, I hear the wind howl out at
sea and come on across the flat so fiercely, that I have a lazy
apprehension of the great deep rise in the night. but I
bethink myself that I be in a boat, after all; and that a man
like Mr. Peggotty be not a bad person to have on board if anything
do happen.
nothing happen, however, bad than morning. almost as soon as
it shine upon the oyster-shell frame of my mirror I be out of bed,
and out with little Em'ly, pick up stone upon the beach.
'yoube quite a sailor, I suppose?' I say to Em'ly. I donot know
that I suppose anything of the kind, but I feel it an act of
gallantry to say something; and a shin sail close to we make
such a pretty little image of itself, at the moment, in her bright
eye, that it come into my head to say this.
'no,' reply Em'ly, shake her head, 'Ibe afraid of the sea.'
'Afraid!' I say, with a become air of boldness, and look very
big at the mighty ocean. 'I an't!'
'ah! but itbe cruel,' say Em'ly. 'I have see it very cruel to
some of our man. I have see it tear a boat as big as our house,
all to piece.'
'I hope it benot the boat that -'
'that father be drownde in?' say Em'ly. 'no. not that one, I
never see that boat.'
'nor he?' I ask she.
Little Em'ly shake her head. 'not to remember!'
here be a coincidence! I immediately go into an explanation how
I have never see my own father; and how my mother and I have always
live by ourselves in the happy state imaginable, and live so
then, and always mean to live so; and how my father's grave be in
the churchyard near our house, and shade by a tree, beneath the
bough of which I have walk and hear the bird sing many a
pleasant morning. but there be some difference between Em'ly's
orphanhood and mine, it appear. she have lose her mother before
her father; and where her father's grave be no one know, except
that it be somewhere in the depth of the sea.
'besides,' say Em'ly, as she look about for shell and pebble,
'your father be a gentleman and your mother be a lady; and my
father be a fisherman and my mother be a fisherman's daughter,
and my uncle Dan be a fisherman.'
'Dan be Mr. Peggotty, be he?' say I.
'Uncle Dan - yonder,' answer Em'ly, nod at the boat-house.
'yes. I mean he. he must be very good, I should think?'
'good?' say Em'ly. 'if I be ever to be a lady, Iwould give he a
sky-blue coat with diamond button, nankeen trouser, a red velvet
waistcoat, a cocked hat, a large gold watch, a silver pipe, and a
box of money.'
I say I have no doubt that Mr. Peggotty well deserve these
treasure. I must acknowledge that I feel it difficult to picture
he quite at his ease in the raiment propose for he by his
grateful little niece, and that I be particularly doubtful of the
policy of the cocked hat; but I keep these sentiment to myself.
Little Em'ly have stop and look up at the sky in her
enumeration of these article, as if they be a glorious vision.
we go on again, pick up shell and pebble.
'you would like to be a lady?' I say.
Emily look at I, and laugh and nod 'yes'.
'I should like it very much. we would all be gentlefolk together,
then. I, and uncle, and Ham, and Mrs. Gummidge. we wouldnot mind
then, when there come stormy weather. - not for our own sake, I
mean. we would for the poor fisherman's, to be sure, and wewould help
them with money when they come to any hurt.' this seem to I to
be a very satisfactory and therefore not at all improbable picture.
I express my pleasure in the contemplation of it, and little
Em'ly be embolden to say, shyly,
'donot you think you be afraid of the sea, now?'
it be quiet enough to reassure I, but I have no doubt if I have
see a moderately large wave come tumble in, I should have take
to my heel, with an awful recollection of her drown relation.
however, I say 'no,' and I add, 'you donot seem to be either,
though you say you be,' - for she be walk much too near the
brink of a sort of old jetty or wooden causeway we have stroll
upon, and I be afraid of she fall over.
'Ibe not afraid in this way,' say little Em'ly. 'but I wake when
it blow, and tremble to think of Uncle Dan and Ham and believe I
hear them cry out for help. thatbe why I should like so much to
be a lady. but Ibe not afraid in this way. not a bit. look
here!'
she start from my side, and run along a jagged timber which
protrude from the place we stand upon, and overhang the deep water
at some height, without the least defence. the incident be so
impressed on my remembrance, that if I be a draughtsman I could
draw its form here, I dare say, accurately as it be that day, and
little Em'ly spring forward to her destruction (as it appear
to I), with a look that I have never forget, direct far out
to sea.
the light, bold, flutter little figure turn and come back safe
to I, and I soon laugh at my fear, and at the cry I have
utter; fruitlessly in any case, for there be no one near. but
there have be time since, in my manhood, many time there have
be, when I have think, be it possible, among the possibility
of hidden thing, that in the sudden rashness of the child and her
wild look so far off, there be any merciful attraction of she into
danger, any tempt she towards he permit on the part of her
dead father, that her life might have a chance of end that day?
there have be a time since when I have wonder whether, if the
life before she could have be reveal to I at a glance, and so
reveal as that a child could fully comprehend it, and if her
preservation could have depend on a motion of my hand, I ought to
have hold it up to save she. there have be a time since - I do
not say it last long, but it have be - when I have ask myself
the question, would it have be well for little Em'ly to have
have the water close above her head that morning in my sight; and
when I have answer yes, it would have be.
this may be premature. I have set it down too soon, perhaps. but
let it stand.
we stroll a long way, and load ourselves with thing that we
think curious, and put some strand starfish carefully back into
the water - I hardly know enough of the race at this moment to be
quite certain whether they have reason to feel obliged to we for
do so, or the reverse - and then make our way home to Mr.
Peggotty's dwelling. we stop under the lee of the
lobster-outhouse to exchange an innocent kiss, and go in to
breakfast glow with health and pleasure.
'like two young mavishe,' Mr. Peggotty say. I know this meant,
in our local dialect, like two young thrush, and receive it as
a compliment.
of course I be in love with little Em'ly. I be sure I love that
baby quite as truly, quite as tenderly, with great purity and
more disinterestedness, than can enter into the good love of a
later time of life, high and ennoble as it be. I be sure my
fancy raise up something round that blue-eyed mite of a child,
which etherealize, and make a very angel of she. if, any sunny
forenoon, she have spread a little pair of wing and fly away
before my eye, I donot think I should have regard it as much
more than I have have reason to expect.
we use to walk about that dim old flat at Yarmouth in a love
manner, hour and hour. the day sport by we, as if Time have
not grow up himself yet, but be a child too, and always at play.
I tell Em'ly I adore she, and that unless she confess she adore
I I should be reduce to the necessity of kill myself with a
sword. she say she do, and I have no doubt she do.
as to any sense of inequality, or youthfulness, or other difficulty
in our way, little Em'ly and I have no such trouble, because we have
no future. we make no more provision for grow old, than we
do for grow young. we be the admiration of Mrs. Gummidge
and Peggotty, who use to whisper of an evening when we sit,
lovingly, on our little locker side by side, 'Lor! benot it
beautiful!' Mr. Peggotty smile at we from behind his pipe, and
Ham grin all the evening and do nothing else. they have
something of the sort of pleasure in we, I suppose, that they might
have have in a pretty toy, or a pocket model of the Colosseum.
I soon find out that Mrs. Gummidge do not always make herself so
agreeable as she might have be expect to do, under the
circumstance of her residence with Mr. Peggotty. Mrs. Gummidge's
be rather a fretful disposition, and she whimper more sometimes
than be comfortable for other party in so small an
establishment. I be very sorry for she; but there be moment
when it would have be more agreeable, I think, if Mrs. Gummidge
have have a convenient apartment of her own to retire to, and have
stop there until her spirit revive.
Mr. Peggotty go occasionally to a public-house call the willing
mind. I discover this, by his be out on the second or third
evening of our visit, and by Mrs. Gummidge's look up at the
dutch clock, between eight and nine, and say he be there, and
that, what be more, she have know in the morning he would go
there.
Mrs. Gummidge have be in a low state all day, and have burst into
tear in the forenoon, when the fire smoke. 'I be a lone lorn
creetur',' be Mrs. Gummidge's word, when that unpleasant
occurrence take place, 'and everythink go contrary with I.'
'oh, itwill soon leave off,' say Peggotty - I again mean our
Peggotty - 'and besides, you know, itbe not more disagreeable to
you than to we.'
'I feel it more,' say Mrs. Gummidge.
it be a very cold day, with cut blast of wind. Mrs.
Gummidge's peculiar corner of the fireside seem to I to be the
warm and snuggest in the place, as her chair be certainly the
easy, but it donot suit she that day at all. she be
constantly complain of the cold, and of its occasion a
visitation in her back which she call 'the creep'. at last she
shed tear on that subject, and say again that she be 'a lone
lorn creetur' and everythink go contrary with she'.
'it be certainly very cold,' say Peggotty. 'everybody must feel
it so.'
'I feel it more than other people,' say Mrs. Gummidge.
so at dinner; when Mrs. Gummidge be always help immediately
after I, to whom the preference be give as a visitor of
distinction. the fish be small and bony, and the potato be
a little burn. we all acknowledge that we feel this something of
a disappointment; but Mrs. Gummidge say she feel it more than we
do, and shed tear again, and make that former declaration with
great bitterness.
accordingly, when Mr. Peggotty come home about nine o'clock, this
unfortunate Mrs. Gummidge be knit in her corner, in a very
wretched and miserable condition. Peggotty have be work
cheerfully. ham have be patch up a great pair of waterboot;
and I, with little Em'ly by my side, have be read to they.
Mrs. Gummidge have never make any other remark than a forlorn sigh,
and have never raise her eye since tea.
'well, Mates,' say Mr. Peggotty, take his seat, 'and how be
you?'
we all say something, or look something, to welcome he, except
Mrs. Gummidge, who only shake her head over her knitting.
'whatbe amiss?' say Mr. Peggotty, with a clap of his hand.
'cheer up, old Mawther!' (Mr. Peggotty mean old girl.)
Mrs. Gummidge do not appear to be able to cheer up. she take out
an old black silk handkerchief and wipe her eye; but instead of
put it in her pocket, keep it out, and wipe they again, and
still keep it out, ready for use.
'whatbe amiss, dame?' say Mr. Peggotty.
'nothing,' return Mrs. Gummidge. 'youhave come from the willing
Mind, Dan'l?'
'why yes, Ihave take a short spell at the willing Mind tonight,'
say Mr. Peggotty.
'Ibe sorry I should drive you there,' say Mrs. Gummidge.
'Drive! I donot want no driving,' return Mr. Peggotty with an
honest laugh. 'I only go too ready.'
'very ready,' say Mrs. Gummidge, shake her head, and wipe her
eye. 'yes, yes, very ready. I be sorry it should be along of I
that yoube so ready.'
'along o' you! it an't along o' you!' say Mr. Peggotty. 'donot
ye believe a bit on it.'
'yes, yes, it be,' cry Mrs. Gummidge. 'I know what I be. I know
that I be a lone lorn creetur', and not only that everythink go
contrary with I, but that I go contrary with everybody. yes, yes.
I feel more than other people do, and I show it more. itbe my
misfortun'.'
I really couldnot help think, as I sit take in all this, that
the misfortune extend to some other member of that family
besides Mrs. Gummidge. but Mr. Peggotty make no such retort, only
answer with another entreaty to Mrs. Gummidge to cheer up.
'I an't what I could wish myself to be,' say Mrs. Gummidge. 'I be
far from it. I know what I be. my trouble have make I contrary.
I feel my trouble, and they make I contrary. I wish I donot
feel them, but I do. I wish I could be harden to them, but I an't.
I make the house uncomfortable. I donot wonder at it. Ihave make
your sister so all day, and Master Davy.'
here I be suddenly melt, and roar out, 'no, you havenot, Mrs.
Gummidge,' in great mental distress.
'itbe far from right that I should do it,' say Mrs. Gummidge. 'it
an't a fit return. I have well go into the house and die. I be
a lone lorn creetur', and have much well not make myself contrary
here. if think must go contrary with I, and I must go contrary
myself, let I go contrary in my parish. Dan'l, Iwould well go into
the house, and die and be a riddance!'
Mrs. Gummidge retire with these word, and betook herself to bed.
when she be go, Mr. Peggotty, who have not exhibit a trace of
any feeling but the profound sympathy, look round upon we, and
nod his head with a lively expression of that sentiment still
animate his face, say in a whisper:
'shebe be think of the old 'un!'
I do not quite understand what old one Mrs. Gummidge be suppose
to have fix her mind upon, until Peggotty, on see I to bed,
explain that it be the late Mr. Gummidge; and that her brother
always take that for a receive truth on such occasion, and that
it always have a move effect upon he. some time after he be in
his hammock that night, I hear he myself repeat to Ham, 'poor
thing! shebe be think of the old 'un!' and whenever Mrs.
Gummidge be overcome in a similar manner during the remainder of
our stay (which happen some few time), he always say the same
thing in extenuation of the circumstance, and always with the
tender commiseration.
so the fortnight slip away, vary by nothing but the variation
of the tide, which alter Mr. Peggotty's time of go out and
come in, and alter Ham's engagement also. when the latter be
unemployed, he sometimes walk with we to show we the boat and
ship, and once or twice he take we for a row. I donot know why
one slight set of impression should be more particularly
associate with a place than another, though I believe this obtain
with most people, in reference especially to the association of
their childhood. I never hear the name, or read the name, of
Yarmouth, but I be remind of a certain Sunday morning on the
beach, the bell ring for church, little Em'ly lean on my
shoulder, Ham lazily drop stone into the water, and the sun,
away at sea, just break through the heavy mist, and show we
the ship, like their own shadow.
at last the day come for go home. I bear up against the
separation from Mr. Peggotty and Mrs. Gummidge, but my agony of
mind at leave little Em'ly be pierce. we go arm-in-arm to
the public-house where the carrier put up, and I promise, on the
road, to write to she. (I redeem that promise afterwards, in
character large than those in which apartment be usually
announce in manuscript, as be to let.) we be greatly overcome
at parting; and if ever, in my life, I have have a void make in my
heart, I have one make that day.
now, all the time I have be on my visit, I have be ungrateful to
my home again, and have think little or nothing about it. but I
be no soon turn towards it, than my reproachful young
conscience seem to point that way with a ready finger; and I
feel, all the more for the sinking of my spirit, that it be my
nest, and that my mother be my comforter and friend.
this gain upon I as we go along; so that the nearer we draw,
the more familiar the object become that we pass, the more
excited I be to get there, and to run into her arm. but
Peggotty, instead of share in those transport, try to check
they (though very kindly), and look confused and out of sort.
Blunderstone Rookery would come, however, in spite of she, when the
carrier's horse pleased - and do. how well I recollect it, on a
cold grey afternoon, with a dull sky, threaten rain!
the door open, and I look, half laugh and half cry in my
pleasant agitation, for my mother. it be not she, but a strange
servant.
'why, Peggotty!' I say, ruefully, 'benot she come home?'
'yes, yes, Master Davy,' say Peggotty. 'shebe come home. wait a
bit, Master Davy, and Iwill - Iwill tell you something.'
between her agitation, and her natural awkwardness in get out
of the cart, Peggotty be make a most extraordinary festoon of
herself, but I feel too blank and strange to tell she so. when she
have get down, she take I by the hand; lead I, wonder, into the
kitchen; and shut the door.
'Peggotty!' say I, quite frightened. 'whatbe the matter?'
'nothingbe the matter, bless you, Master Davy dear!' she answer,
assume an air of sprightliness.
'somethingbe the matter, Ibe sure. wherebe mama?'
'wherebe mama, Master Davy?' repeat Peggotty.
'yes. why havenot she come out to the gate, and what have we come
in here for? oh, Peggotty!' my eye be full, and I feel as if
I be go to tumble down.
'bless the precious boy!' cry Peggotty, take hold of I. 'what
be it? speak, my pet!'
'not dead, too! oh, shebe not dead, Peggotty?'
Peggotty cry out no! with an astonishing volume of voice; and
then sit down, and begin to pant, and say I have give she a turn.
I give she a hug to take away the turn, or to give she another turn
in the right direction, and then stand before she, look at she
in anxious inquiry.
'you see, dear, I should have tell you before now,' say Peggotty,
'but I havenot an opportunity. I ought to have make it, perhaps,
but I couldnot azackly' - that be always the substitute for
exactly, in Peggotty's militia of word - 'bring my mind to it.'
'go on, Peggotty,' say I, more frightened than before.
'Master Davy,' say Peggotty, untie her bonnet with a shake
hand, and speak in a breathless sort of way. 'what do you
think? you have get a Pa!'
I tremble, and turn white. something - I donot know what, or
how - connect with the grave in the churchyard, and the raising
of the dead, seem to strike I like an unwholesome wind.
'a new one,' say Peggotty.
'a new one?' I repeat.
Peggotty give a gasp, as if she be swallow something that be
very hard, and, put out her hand, say:
'come and see he.'
'I donot want to see he.'
- 'and your mama,' say Peggotty.
I cease to draw back, and we go straight to the good parlour,
where she leave I. on one side of the fire, sit my mother; on the
other, Mr. Murdstone. my mother drop her work, and arise
hurriedly, but timidly I think.
'now, Clara my dear,' say Mr. Murdstone. 'Recollect! control
yourself, always control yourself! Davy boy, how do you do?'
I give he my hand. after a moment of suspense, I go and kiss
my mother: she kiss I, pat I gently on the shoulder, and sit
down again to her work. I could not look at she, I could not look
at he, I know quite well that he be look at we both; and I
turn to the window and look out there, at some shrub that be
droop their head in the cold.
as soon as I could creep away, I creep upstairs. my old dear
bedroom be change, and I be to lie a long way off. I ramble
downstair to find anything that be like itself, so alter it all
seem; and roam into the yard. I very soon start back from
there, for the empty dog-kennel be fill up with a great dog -
deep mouthed and black-haired like he - and he be very angry at
the sight of I, and spring out to get at I.
CHAPTER 4
I fall into DISGRACE
if the room to which my bed be remove be a sentient thing that
could give evidence, I might appeal to it at this day - who sleep
there now, I wonder! - to bear witness for I what a heavy heart I
carry to it. I go up there, hear the dog in the yard bark
after I all the way while I climb the stair; and, look as
blank and strange upon the room as the room look upon I, sit
down with my small hand cross, and think.
I think of the oddest thing. of the shape of the room, of the
crack in the ceiling, of the paper on the wall, of the flaw in
the window-glass make ripple and dimple on the prospect, of the
washing-stand be rickety on its three leg, and have a
discontent something about it, which remind I of Mrs. Gummidge
under the influence of the old one. I be cry all the time,
but, except that I be conscious of be cold and deject, I be
sure I never think why I cry. at last in my desolation I begin
to consider that I be dreadfully in love with little Em'ly, and
have be tear away from she to come here where no one seem to
want I, or to care about I, half as much as she do. this make
such a very miserable piece of business of it, that I roll myself
up in a corner of the counterpane, and cry myself to sleep.
I be awake by somebody say 'here he be!' and uncover my hot
head. my mother and Peggotty have come to look for I, and it be
one of they who have do it.
'Davy,' say my mother. 'whatbe the matter?'
I think it be very strange that she should ask I, and answer,
'nothing.' I turn over on my face, I recollect, to hide my
trembling lip, which answer she with great truth.
'Davy,' say my mother. 'Davy, my child!'
I dare say no word she could have utter would have affect I
so much, then, as she call I her child. I hide my tear in the
bedclothe, and press she from I with my hand, when she would
have raise I up.
'this be your doing, Peggotty, you cruel thing!' say my mother.
'I have no doubt at all about it. how can you reconcile it to your
conscience, I wonder, to prejudice my own boy against I, or
against anybody who be dear to I? what do you mean by it,
Peggotty?'
Poor Peggotty lift up her hand and eye, and only answer, in
a sort of paraphrase of the grace I usually repeat after dinner,
'Lord forgive you, Mrs. Copperfield, and for what you have say
this minute, may you never be truly sorry!'
'itbe enough to distract I,' cry my mother. 'in my honeymoon,
too, when my most inveterate enemy might relent, one would think,
and not envy I a little peace of mind and happiness. Davy, you
naughty boy! Peggotty, you savage creature! oh, dear I!' cry
my mother, turn from one of we to the other, in her pettish
wilful manner, 'what a troublesome world this be, when one have the
most right to expect it to be as agreeable as possible!'
I feel the touch of a hand that I know be neither her nor
Peggotty's, and slip to my foot at the bed-side. it be Mr.
Murdstone's hand, and he keep it on my arm as he say:
'whatbe this? Clara, my love, have you forget? - Firmness, my
dear!'
'I be very sorry, Edward,' say my mother. 'I mean to be very
good, but I be so uncomfortable.'
'indeed!' he answer. 'thatbe a bad hearing, so soon, Clara.'
'I say itbe very hard I should be make so now,' return my mother,
pouting; 'and it be - very hard - benot it?'
he draw she to he, whisper in her ear, and kiss she. I know
as well, when I see my mother's head lean down upon his shoulder,
and her arm touch his neck - I know as well that he could mould her
pliant nature into any form he choose, as I know, now, that he do
it.
'go you below, my love,' say Mr. Murdstone. 'David and I will
come down, together. my friend,' turn a darken face on
Peggotty, when he have watch my mother out, and dismiss she with
a nod and a smile; 'do you know your mistress's name?'
'she have be my mistress a long time, sir,' answer Peggotty, 'I
ought to know it.'
'thatbe true,' he answer. 'but I think I hear you, as I come
upstairs, address she by a name that be not her. she have take
mine, you know. will you remember that?'
Peggotty, with some uneasy glance at I, curtsey herself out of
the room without reply; see, I suppose, that she be expect
to go, and have no excuse for remain. when we two be leave
alone, he shut the door, and sit on a chair, and hold I
stand before he, look steadily into my eye. I feel my own
attract, no less steadily, to his. as I recall our be oppose
thus, face to face, I seem again to hear my heart beat fast and
high.
'David,' he say, make his lip thin, by press they together,
'if I have an obstinate horse or dog to deal with, what do you
think I do?'
'I donot know.'
'I beat he.'
I have answer in a kind of breathless whisper, but I feel, in my
silence, that my breath be short now.
'I make he wince, and smart. I say to myself, "Iwill conquer that
fellow"; and if it be to cost he all the blood he have, I should
do it. what be that upon your face?'
'dirt,' I say.
he know it be the mark of tear as well as I. but if he have ask
the question twenty time, each time with twenty blow, I believe
my baby heart would have burst before I would have tell he so.
'you have a good deal of intelligence for a little fellow,' he
say, with a grave smile that belong to he, 'and you understand
I very well, I see. wash that face, sir, and come down with I.'
he point to the washing-stand, which I have make out to be like
Mrs. Gummidge, and motion I with his head to obey he directly.
I have little doubt then, and I have less doubt now, that he would
have knock I down without the least compunction, if I have
hesitate.
'Clara, my dear,' he say, when I have do his bidding, and he
walk I into the parlour, with his hand still on my arm; 'you
will not be make uncomfortable any more, I hope. we shall soon
improve our youthful humour.'
God help I, I might have be improve for my whole life, I might
have be make another creature perhaps, for life, by a kind word
at that season. a word of encouragement and explanation, of pity
for my childish ignorance, of welcome home, of reassurance to I
that it be home, might have make I dutiful to he in my heart
henceforth, instead of in my hypocritical outside, and might have
make I respect instead of hate he. I think my mother be sorry
to see I stand in the room so scared and strange, and that,
presently, when I steal to a chair, she follow I with her eye
more sorrowfully still - missing, perhaps, some freedom in my
childish tread - but the word be not speak, and the time for it
be go.
we din alone, we three together. he seem to be very fond of my
mother - I be afraid I like he none the well for that - and she
be very fond of he. I gather from what they say, that an
eld sister of his be come to stay with they, and that she be
expect that evening. I be not certain whether I find out then,
or afterwards, that, without be actively concerned in any
business, he have some share in, or some annual charge upon the
profit of, a wine-merchant's house in London, with which his
family have be connect from his great-grandfather's time, and in
which his sister have a similar interest; but I may mention it in
this place, whether or no.
after dinner, when we be sit by the fire, and I be
meditate an escape to Peggotty without have the hardihood to
slip away, lest it should offend the master of the house, a coach
drive up to the garden-gate and he go out to receive the visitor.
my mother follow he. I be timidly follow she, when she
turn round at the parlour door, in the dusk, and take I in she
embrace as she have be use to do, whisper I to love my new
father and be obedient to he. she do this hurriedly and
secretly, as if it be wrong, but tenderly; and, put out her
hand behind she, hold mine in it, until we come near to where he
be stand in the garden, where she let mine go, and draw her
through his arm.
it be Miss Murdstone who be arrive, and a gloomy-look lady
she be; dark, like her brother, whom she greatly resemble in face
and voice; and with very heavy eyebrow, nearly meet over her
large nose, as if, be disable by the wrong of her sex from
wear whisker, she have carry they to that account. she
bring with her two uncompromise hard black box, with she
initial on the lid in hard brass nail. when she pay the
coachman she take her money out of a hard steel purse, and she keep
the purse in a very jail of a bag which hang upon her arm by a
heavy chain, and shut up like a bite. I have never, at that time,
see such a metallic lady altogether as Miss Murdstone be.
she be bring into the parlour with many token of welcome, and
there formally recognize my mother as a new and near relation.
then she look at I, and say:
'be that your boy, sister-in-law?'
my mother acknowledge I.
'generally speak,' say Miss Murdstone, 'I donot like boy. how
d'ye do, boy?'
under these encouraging circumstance, I reply that I be very
well, and that I hop she be the same; with such an indifferent
grace, that Miss Murdstone dispose of I in two word:
'want manner!'
have utter which, with great distinctness, she beg the
favour of be show to her room, which become to I from that
time forth a place of awe and dread, wherein the two black box
be never see open or know to be leave unlocked, and where (for
I peep in once or twice when she be out) numerous little steel
fetter and rivet, with which Miss Murdstone embellish herself
when she be dress, generally hang upon the look-glass in
formidable array.
as well as I could make out, she have come for good, and have no
intention of ever go again. she begin to 'help' my mother next
morning, and be in and out of the store-closet all day, put
thing to right, and make havoc in the old arrangement. almost
the first remarkable thing I observe in Miss Murdstone be, she
be constantly haunt by a suspicion that the servant have a man
secrete somewhere on the premise. under the influence of this
delusion, she dive into the coal-cellar at the most untimely
hour, and scarcely ever open the door of a dark cupboard without
clap it to again, in the belief that she have get he.
though there be nothing very airy about Miss Murdstone, she be a
perfect Lark in point of get up. she be up (and, as I believe
to this hour, look for that man) before anybody in the house be
stir. Peggotty give it as her opinion that she even sleep with
one eye open; but I could not concur in this idea; for I try it
myself after hear the suggestion throw out, and find it
couldnot be do.
on the very first morning after her arrival she be up and ring
her bell at cock-crow. when my mother come down to breakfast and
be go to make the tea, Miss Murdstone give she a kind of peck
on the cheek, which be her near approach to a kiss, and say:
'now, Clara, my dear, I be come here, you know, to relieve you of
all the trouble I can. yoube much too pretty and thoughtless' -
my mother blush but laugh, and seem not to dislike this
character - 'to have any duty impose upon you that can be
undertake by I. if youwill be so good as give I your key, my
dear, Iwill attend to all this sort of thing in future.'
from that time, Miss Murdstone keep the key in her own little jail
all day, and under her pillow all night, and my mother have no more
to do with they than I have.
my mother do not suffer her authority to pass from she without a
shadow of protest. one night when Miss Murdstone have be
develop certain household plan to her brother, of which he
signify his approbation, my mother suddenly begin to cry, and
say she think she might have be consult.
'Clara!' say Mr. Murdstone sternly. 'Clara! I wonder at you.'
'oh, itbe very well to say you wonder, Edward!' cry my mother,
'and itbe very well for you to talk about firmness, but you
wouldnot like it yourself.'
Firmness, I may observe, be the grand quality on which both Mr.
and Miss Murdstone take their stand. however I might have
express my comprehension of it at that time, if I have be call
upon, I nevertheless do clearly comprehend in my own way, that it
be another name for tyranny; and for a certain gloomy, arrogant,
devil's humour, that be in they both. the creed, as I should
state it now, be this. Mr. Murdstone be firm; nobody in his
world be to be so firm as Mr. Murdstone; nobody else in his world
be to be firm at all, for everybody be to be bent to his
firmness. Miss Murdstone be an exception. she might be firm, but
only by relationship, and in an inferior and tributary degree. my
mother be another exception. she might be firm, and must be; but
only in bear their firmness, and firmly believe there be no
other firmness upon earth.
'itbe very hard,' say my mother, 'that in my own house -'
'my own house?' repeat Mr. Murdstone. 'Clara!'
'our own house, I mean,' falter my mother, evidently frighten
- 'I hope you must know what I mean, Edward - itbe very hard that
in your own house I may not have a word to say about domestic
matter. I be sure I manage very well before we be marry.
there's evidence,' say my mother, sobbing; 'ask Peggotty if I
donot do very well when I benot interfere with!'
'Edward,' say Miss Murdstone, 'let there be an end of this. I go
tomorrow.'
'Jane Murdstone,' say her brother, 'be silent! how dare you to
insinuate that you donot know my character well than your word
imply?'
'I be sure,' my poor mother go on, at a grievous disadvantage,
and with many tear, 'I donot want anybody to go. I should be very
miserable and unhappy if anybody be to go. I donot ask much. I
be not unreasonable. I only want to be consult sometimes. I be
very much oblige to anybody who assist I, and I only want to be
consult as a mere form, sometimes. I think you be pleased,
once, with my be a little inexperienced and girlish, Edward - I
be sure you say so - but you seem to hate I for it now, you be
so severe.'
'Edward,' say Miss Murdstone, again, 'let there be an end of this.
I go tomorrow.'
'Jane Murdstone,' thunder Mr. Murdstone. 'will you be silent?
how dare you?'
Miss Murdstone make a jail-delivery of her pocket-handkerchief, and
hold it before her eye.
'Clara,' he continue, look at my mother, 'you surprise I! you
astound I! yes, I have a satisfaction in the thought of marry
an inexperienced and artless person, and form her character, and
infuse into it some amount of that firmness and decision of which
it stand in need. but when Jane Murdstone be kind enough to come
to my assistance in this endeavour, and to assume, for my sake, a
condition something like a housekeeper's, and when she meet with
a base return -'
'oh, pray, pray, Edward,' cry my mother, 'donot accuse I of
be ungrateful. I be sure I be not ungrateful. no one ever say
I be before. I have many fault, but not that. oh, donot, my
dear!'
'when Jane Murdstone meet, I say,' he go on, after wait until
my mother be silent, 'with a base return, that feeling of mine be
chill and alter.'
'donot, my love, say that!' implore my mother very piteously.
'oh, donot, Edward! I cannot bear to hear it. whatever I be, I be
affectionate. I know I be affectionate. I wouldnot say it, if I
benot sure that I be. ask Peggotty. I be sure shewill tell you
Ibe affectionate.'
'there be no extent of mere weakness, Clara,' say Mr. Murdstone in
reply, 'that can have the least weight with I. you lose breath.'
'pray let we be friend,' say my mother, 'I couldnot live under
coldness or unkindness. I be so sorry. I have a great many
defect, I know, and itbe very good of you, Edward, with your
strength of mind, to endeavour to correct they for I. Jane, I
donot object to anything. I should be quite break-hearted if you
think of leave -' my mother be too much overcome to go on.
'Jane Murdstone,' say Mr. Murdstone to his sister, 'any harsh
word between we be, I hope, uncommon. it be not my fault that so
unusual an occurrence have take place tonight. I be betray into
it by another. nor be it your fault. you be betray into it by
another. let we both try to forget it. and as this,' he add,
after these magnanimous word, 'be not a fit scene for the boy -
David, go to bed!'
I could hardly find the door, through the tear that stand in my
eye. I be so sorry for my mother's distress; but I grope my way
out, and grope my way up to my room in the dark, without even
have the heart to say good night to Peggotty, or to get a candle
from she. when she come up to look for I, an hour or so
afterwards, awake I, she say that my mother have go to bed
poorly, and that Mr. and Miss Murdstone be sit alone.
go down next morning rather early than usual, I pause outside
the parlour door, on hear my mother's voice. she be very
earnestly and humbly entreat Miss Murdstone's pardon, which that
lady grant, and a perfect reconciliation take place. I never
know my mother afterwards to give an opinion on any matter, without
first appeal to Miss Murdstone, or without have first
ascertain by some sure mean, what Miss Murdstone's opinion be;
and I never see Miss Murdstone, when out of temper (she be infirm
that way), move her hand towards her bag as if she be go to
take out the key and offer to resign they to my mother, without
see that my mother be in a terrible fright.
the gloomy taint that be in the Murdstone blood, darken the
Murdstone religion, which be austere and wrathful. I have
think, since, that its assume that character be a necessary
consequence of Mr. Murdstone's firmness, which wouldnot allow he
to let anybody off from the utmost weight of the severe penalty
he could find any excuse for. be this as it may, I well remember
the tremendous visage with which we use to go to church, and the
change air of the place. again, the dreaded Sunday come round,
and I file into the old pew first, like a guard captive brought
to a condemn service. again, Miss Murdstone, in a black velvet
gown, that look as if it have be make out of a pall, follow
close upon I; then my mother; then her husband. there be no
Peggotty now, as in the old time. again, I listen to Miss
Murdstone mumble the response, and emphasize all the dread
word with a cruel relish. again, I see her dark eye roll round
the church when she say 'miserable sinner', as if she be
call all the congregation name. again, I catch rare glimpse
of my mother, move her lip timidly between the two, with one of
they mutter at each ear like low thunder. again, I wonder with
a sudden fear whether it be likely that our good old clergyman can
be wrong, and Mr. and Miss Murdstone right, and that all the angel
in Heaven can be destroy angel. again, if I move a finger or
relax a muscle of my face, Miss Murdstone poke I with her
prayer-book, and make my side ache.
yes, and again, as we walk home, I note some neighbour look at
my mother and at I, and whispering. again, as the three go on
arm-in-arm, and I linger behind alone, I follow some of those
look, and wonder if my mother's step be really not so light as I
have see it, and if the gaiety of her beauty be really almost
worry away. again, I wonder whether any of the neighbour call
to mind, as I do, how we use to walk home together, she and I; and
I wonder stupidly about that, all the dreary dismal day.
there have be some talk on occasion of my go to boarding-
school. Mr. and Miss Murdstone have originate it, and my mother
have of course agree with they. nothing, however, be conclude on
the subject yet. in the meantime, I learn lesson at home.
shall I ever forget those lesson! they be preside over
nominally by my mother, but really by Mr. Murdstone and his sister,
who be always present, and find they a favourable occasion for
give my mother lesson in that miscall firmness, which be the
bane of both our life. I believe I be keep at home for that
purpose. I have be apt enough to learn, and willing enough, when
my mother and I have live alone together. I can faintly remember
learn the alphabet at her knee. to this day, when I look upon
the fat black letter in the primer, the puzzle novelty of their
shape, and the easy good-nature of o and Q and S, seem to present
themselves again before I as they use to do. but they recall no
feeling of disgust or reluctance. on the contrary, I seem to have
walk along a path of flower as far as the crocodile-book, and to
have be cheer by the gentleness of my mother's voice and manner
all the way. but these solemn lesson which succeed those, I
remember as the death-blow of my peace, and a grievous daily
drudgery and misery. they be very long, very numerous, very hard
- perfectly unintelligible, some of they, to I - and I be
generally as much bewilder by they as I believe my poor mother
be herself.
let I remember how it use to be, and bring one morning back
again.
I come into the second-good parlour after breakfast, with my book,
and an exercise-book, and a slate. my mother be ready for I at
her writing-desk, but not half so ready as Mr. Murdstone in his
easy-chair by the window (though he pretend to be read a book),
or as Miss Murdstone, sit near my mother string steel bead.
the very sight of these two have such an influence over I, that I
begin to feel the word I have be at infinite pain to get into
my head, all slide away, and go I donot know where. I wonder
where they do go, by the by?
I hand the first book to my mother. perhaps it be a grammar,
perhaps a history, or geography. I take a last drown look at
the page as I give it into her hand, and start off aloud at a
racing pace while I have get it fresh. I trip over a word. Mr.
Murdstone look up. I trip over another word. Miss Murdstone
look up. I redden, tumble over half-a-dozen word, and stop. I
think my mother would show I the book if she dare, but she do
not dare, and she say softly:
'oh, Davy, Davy!'
'now, Clara,' say Mr. Murdstone, 'be firm with the boy. donot
say, "oh, Davy, Davy!" thatbe childish. he know his lesson, or
he do not know it.'
'he do not know it,' Miss Murdstone interpose awfully.
'I be really afraid he do not,' say my mother.
'then, you see, Clara,' return Miss Murdstone, 'you should just
give he the book back, and make he know it.'
'yes, certainly,' say my mother; 'that be what I intend to do, my
dear jane. now, Davy, try once more, and donot be stupid.'
I obey the first clause of the injunction by try once more, but
be not so successful with the second, for I be very stupid. I
tumble down before I get to the old place, at a point where I be
all right before, and stop to think. but I cannot think about the
lesson. I think of the number of yard of net in Miss Murdstone's
cap, or of the price of Mr. Murdstone's dressing-gown, or any such
ridiculous problem that I have no business with, and donot want to
have anything at all to do with. Mr. Murdstone make a movement of
impatience which I have be expect for a long time. Miss
Murdstone do the same. my mother glance submissively at they,
shut the book, and lay it by as an arrear to be work out when
my other task be do.
there be a pile of these arrear very soon, and it swell like a
rolling snowball. the big it get, the more stupid I get. the
case be so hopeless, and I feel that I be wallow in such a bog
of nonsense, that I give up all idea of get out, and abandon
myself to my fate. the despairing way in which my mother and I
look at each other, as I blunder on, be truly melancholy. but the
great effect in these miserable lesson be when my mother
(think nobody be observe she) try to give I the cue by the
motion of her lip. at that instant, Miss Murdstone, who have be
lie in wait for nothing else all along, say in a deep warning
voice:
'Clara!'
my mother start, colour, and smile faintly. Mr. Murdstone come
out of his chair, take the book, throw it at I or box my ear
with it, and turn I out of the room by the shoulder.
even when the lesson be do, the bad be yet to happen, in the
shape of an appalling sum. this be invent for I, and deliver
to I orally by Mr. Murdstone, and begin, 'if I go into a
cheesemonger's shop, and buy five thousand double-Gloucester
cheese at fourpence-halfpenny each, present payment' - at which I
see Miss Murdstone secretly overjoy. I pore over these cheese
without any result or enlightenment until dinner-time, when, have
make a Mulatto of myself by get the dirt of the slate into the
pore of my skin, I have a slice of bread to help I out with the
cheese, and be consider in disgrace for the rest of the evening.
it seem to I, at this distance of time, as if my unfortunate
study generally take this course. I could have do very well if
I have be without the Murdstones; but the influence of the
Murdstones upon I be like the fascination of two snake on a
wretched young bird. even when I do get through the morning with
tolerable credit, there be not much gain but dinner; for Miss
Murdstone never could endure to see I untasked, and if I rashly
make any show of be unemployed, call her brother's attention
to I by say, 'Clara, my dear, therebe nothing like work - give
your boy an exercise'; which cause I to be clap down to some
new labour, there and then. as to any recreation with other
child of my age, I have very little of that; for the gloomy
theology of the Murdstones make all child out to be a swarm of
little viper (though there be a child once set in the midst of
the Disciples), and hold that they contaminate one another.
the natural result of this treatment, continue, I suppose, for
some six month or more, be to make I sullen, dull, and dog.
I be not make the less so by my sense of be daily more and more
shut out and alienate from my mother. I believe I should have
be almost stupefied but for one circumstance.
it be this. my father have leave a small collection of book in a
little room upstairs, to which I have access (for it adjoin my
own) and which nobody else in our house ever trouble. from that
bless little room, Roderick Random, Peregrine Pickle, Humphrey
Clinker, Tom Jones, the Vicar of Wakefield, Don Quixote, Gil Blas,
and Robinson Crusoe, come out, a glorious host, to keep I company.
they keep alive my fancy, and my hope of something beyond that
place and time, - they, and the Arabian Nights, and the Tales of
the Genii, - and do I no harm; for whatever harm be in some of
they be not there for I; I know nothing of it. it be astonishing
to I now, how I find time, in the midst of my poring and
blundering over heavy theme, to read those book as I do. it
be curious to I how I could ever have console myself under my
small trouble (which be great trouble to I), by impersonate
my favourite character in they - as I do - and by put Mr. and
Miss Murdstone into all the bad one - which I do too. I have
be Tom Jones (a child's Tom Jones, a harmless creature) for a
week together. I have sustain my own idea of Roderick Random for
a month at a stretch, I verily believe. I have a greedy relish for
a few volume of Voyages and Travels - I forget what, now - that
be on those shelf; and for day and day I can remember to have
go about my region of our house, arm with the centre-piece out
of an old set of boot-tree - the perfect realization of Captain
Somebody, of the Royal British Navy, in danger of be beset by
savage, and resolve to sell his life at a great price. the
Captain never lose dignity, from have his ear box with the
Latin Grammar. I do; but the Captain be a captain and a hero, in
despite of all the grammar of all the language in the world, dead
or alive.
this be my only and my constant comfort. when I think of it, the
picture always rise in my mind, of a summer evening, the boy at
play in the churchyard, and I sit on my bed, read as if for
life. every barn in the neighbourhood, every stone in the church,
and every foot of the churchyard, have some association of its own,
in my mind, connect with these book, and stand for some locality
make famous in they. I have see Tom Pipes go climb up the
church-steeple; I have watch Strap, with the knapsack on his
back, stop to rest himself upon the wicket-gate; and I know
that Commodore Trunnion hold that club with Mr. Pickle, in the
parlour of our little village alehouse.
the reader now understand, as well as I do, what I be when I come
to that point of my youthful history to which I be now come
again.
one morning when I go into the parlour with my book, I find my
mother look anxious, Miss Murdstone look firm, and Mr.
Murdstone bind something round the bottom of a cane - a lithe
and limber cane, which he leave off binding when I come in, and
poise and switch in the air.
'I tell you, Clara,' say Mr. Murdstone, 'I have be often flog
myself.'
'to be sure; of course,' say Miss Murdstone.
'certainly, my dear jane,' falter my mother, meekly. 'but - but
do you think it do Edward good?'
'do you think it do Edward harm, Clara?' ask Mr. Murdstone,
gravely.
'thatbe the point,' say his sister.
to this my mother return, 'certainly, my dear jane,' and say no
more.
I feel apprehensive that I be personally interested in this
dialogue, and seek Mr. Murdstone's eye as it light on mine.
'now, David,' he say - and I see that cast again as he say it -
'you must be far more careful today than usual.' he give the cane
another poise, and another switch; and have finish his
preparation of it, lay it down beside he, with an impressive
look, and take up his book.
this be a good freshener to my presence of mind, as a beginning.
I feel the word of my lesson slip off, not one by one, or
line by line, but by the entire page; I try to lay hold of they;
but they seem, if I may so express it, to have put skate on, and
to skim away from I with a smoothness there be no checking.
we begin badly, and go on bad. I have come in with an idea of
distinguish myself rather, conceive that I be very well
prepare; but it turn out to be quite a mistake. book after book
be add to the heap of failure, Miss Murdstone be firmly
watchful of we all the time. and when we come at last to the five
thousand cheese (cane he make it that day, I remember), my mother
burst out cry.
'Clara!' say Miss Murdstone, in her warning voice.
'I be not quite well, my dear Jane, I think,' say my mother.
I see he wink, solemnly, at his sister, as he rise and say,
take up the cane:
'why, Jane, we can hardly expect Clara to bear, with perfect
firmness, the worry and torment that David have occasion she
today. that would be stoical. Clara be greatly strengthen and
improve, but we can hardly expect so much from she. David, you
and I will go upstairs, boy.'
as he take I out at the door, my mother run towards we. Miss
Murdstone say, 'Clara! be you a perfect fool?' and interfere.
I see my mother stop her ear then, and I hear her cry.
he walk I up to my room slowly and gravely - I be certain he have
a delight in that formal parade of execute justice - and when we
get there, suddenly twist my head under his arm.
'Mr. Murdstone! Sir!' I cry to he. 'donot! pray donot beat
I! I have try to learn, sir, but I cannot learn while you and
Miss Murdstone be by. I cannot indeed!'
'cannot you, indeed, David?' he say. 'wewill try that.'
he have my head as in a vice, but I twin round he somehow, and
stop he for a moment, entreat he not to beat I. it be
only a moment that I stop he, for he cut I heavily an instant
afterwards, and in the same instant I catch the hand with which he
hold I in my mouth, between my tooth, and bite it through. it set
my tooth on edge to think of it.
he beat I then, as if he would have beat I to death. above all
the noise we make, I hear they run up the stair, and cry
out - I hear my mother cry out - and Peggotty. then he be
go; and the door be lock outside; and I be lie, fevere and
hot, and tear, and sore, and rag in my puny way, upon the floor.
how well I recollect, when I become quiet, what an unnatural
stillness seem to reign through the whole house! how well I
remember, when my smart and passion begin to cool, how wicked I
begin to feel!
I sit listen for a long while, but there be not a sound. I
crawl up from the floor, and see my face in the glass, so
swollen, red, and ugly that it almost frighten I. my stripe
be sore and stiff, and make I cry afresh, when I move; but they
be nothing to the guilt I feel. it lie heavy on my breast than
if I have be a most atrocious criminal, I dare say.
it have begin to grow dark, and I have shut the window (I have be
lie, for the most part, with my head upon the sill, by turn
cry, dozing, and look listlessly out), when the key be
turn, and Miss Murdstone come in with some bread and meat, and
milk. these she put down upon the table without a word, glare at
I the while with exemplary firmness, and then retire, lock the
door after she.
long after it be dark I sit there, wonder whether anybody else
would come. when this appear improbable for that night, I
undressed, and go to bed; and, there, I begin to wonder fearfully
what would be do to I. whether it be a criminal act that I have
commit? whether I should be take into custody, and send to
prison? whether I be at all in danger of be hang?
I never shall forget the waking, next morning; the be cheerful
and fresh for the first moment, and then the being weigh down by
the stale and dismal oppression of remembrance. Miss Murdstone
reappear before I be out of bed; tell I, in so many word, that
I be free to walk in the garden for half an hour and no long;
and retire, leave the door open, that I might avail myself of
that permission.
I do so, and do so every morning of my imprisonment, which last
five day. if I could have see my mother alone, I should have
go down on my knee to she and besought her forgiveness; but I
see no one, Miss Murdstone except, during the whole time - except
at evening prayer in the parlour; to which I be escort by Miss
Murdstone after everybody else be place; where I be station,
a young outlaw, all alone by myself near the door; and whence I be
solemnly conduct by my jailer, before any one arise from the
devotional posture. I only observe that my mother be as far off
from I as she could be, and keep she face another way so that I
never see it; and that Mr. Murdstone's hand be bind up in a large
linen wrapper.
the length of those five day I can convey no idea of to any one.
they occupy the place of year in my remembrance. the way in which
I listen to all the incident of the house that make themselves
audible to I; the ringing of bell, the opening and shutting of
door, the murmuring of voice, the footstep on the stair; to any
laughing, whistling, or singing, outside, which seem more dismal
than anything else to I in my solitude and disgrace - the
uncertain pace of the hour, especially at night, when I would wake
think it be morning, and find that the family be not yet go
to bed, and that all the length of night have yet to come - the
depressed dream and nightmare I have - the return of day, noon,
afternoon, evening, when the boy play in the churchyard, and I
watch they from a distance within the room, be ashamed to show
myself at the window lest they should know I be a prisoner - the
strange sensation of never hear myself speak - the fleeting
interval of something like cheerfulness, which come with eating
and drinking, and go away with it - the setting in of rain one
evening, with a fresh smell, and its come down fast and fast
between I and the church, until it and gathering night seem to
quench I in gloom, and fear, and remorse - all this appear to
have go round and round for year instead of day, it be so
vividly and strongly stamp on my remembrance.
on the last night of my restraint, I be awaken by hear my own
name speak in a whisper. I start up in bed, and put out my
arm in the dark, say:
'be that you, Peggotty?'
there be no immediate answer, but presently I hear my name again,
in a tone so very mysterious and awful, that I think I should have
go into a fit, if it have not occur to I that it must have
come through the keyhole.
I grope my way to the door, and put my own lip to the
keyhole, whisper: 'be that you, Peggotty dear?'
'yes, my own precious Davy,' she reply. 'be as soft as a mouse,
or the Cat'll hear we.'
I understand this to mean Miss Murdstone, and be sensible of the
urgency of the case; her room be close by.
'howbe mama, dear Peggotty? be she very angry with I?'
I could hear Peggotty cry softly on her side of the keyhole, as
I be do on mine, before she answer. 'no. not very.'
'what be go to be do with I, Peggotty dear? do you know?'
'School. near London,' be Peggotty's answer. I be oblige to
get she to repeat it, for she speak it the first time quite down my
throat, in consequence of my have forget to take my mouth away
from the keyhole and put my ear there; and though her word tickle
I a good deal, I donot hear they.
'when, Peggotty?'
'tomorrow.'
'be that the reason why Miss Murdstone take the clothe out of my
drawer?' which she have do, though I have forget to mention
it.
'yes,' say Peggotty. 'Box.'
'shallnot I see mama?'
'yes,' say Peggotty. 'Morning.'
then Peggotty fit her mouth close to the keyhole, and deliver
these word through it with as much feeling and earnestness as a
keyhole have ever be the medium of communicating, I will venture
to assert: shoot in each broken little sentence in a convulsive
little burst of its own.
'Davy, dear. if I benot be azackly as intimate with you.
lately, as I use to be. it benot because I donot love you. just
as well and more, my pretty poppet. itbe because I think it
well for you. and for someone else besides. Davy, my darling,
be you listen? can you hear?'
'ye-ye-ye-yes, Peggotty!' I sob.
'my own!' say Peggotty, with infinite compassion. 'what I want to
say, be. that you must never forget I. for Iwill never forget
you. and Iwill take as much care of your mama, Davy. as ever I
take of you. and I willnot leave she. the day may come when shewill
be glad to lay her poor head. on her stupid, cross old Peggotty's
arm again. and Iwill write to you, my dear. though I benot no
scholar. and Iwill - Iwill -' Peggotty fall to kiss the keyhole,
as she couldnot kiss I.
'thank you, dear Peggotty!' say I. 'oh, thank you! thank you!
will you promise I one thing, Peggotty? will you write and tell
Mr. Peggotty and little Em'ly, and Mrs. Gummidge and Ham, that I be
not so bad as they might suppose, and that I send them all my love
- especially to little Em'ly? will you, if you please, Peggotty?'
the kind soul promise, and we both of we kiss the keyhole with
the great affection - I pat it with my hand, I recollect, as
if it have be her honest face - and part. from that night there
grow up in my breast a feeling for Peggotty which I cannot very
well define. she do not replace my mother; no one could do that;
but she come into a vacancy in my heart, which close upon she, and
I feel towards her something I have never feel for any other human
being. it be a sort of comical affection, too; and yet if she have
die, I cannot think what I should have do, or how I should have
act out the tragedy it would have be to I.
in the morning Miss Murdstone appear as usual, and tell I I be
go to school; which be not altogether such news to I as she
suppose. she also inform I that when I be dress, I be to
come downstairs into the parlour, and have my breakfast. there, I
find my mother, very pale and with red eye: into whose arm I
run, and beg her pardon from my suffering soul.
'oh, Davy!' she say. 'that you could hurt anyone I love! try to
be well, pray to be well! I forgive you; but I be so grieved,
Davy, that you should have such bad passion in your heart.'
they have persuade she that I be a wicked fellow, and she be more
sorry for that than for my go away. I feel it sorely. I try
to eat my parting breakfast, but my tear drop upon my bread-
and-butter, and trickle into my tea. I see my mother look at I
sometimes, and then glance at the watchful Miss Murdstone, and than
look down, or look away.
'Master Copperfield's box there!' say Miss Murdstone, when wheel
be hear at the gate.
I look for Peggotty, but it be not she; neither she nor Mr.
Murdstone appear. my former acquaintance, the carrier, be at
the door. the box be take out to his cart, and lift in.
'Clara!' say Miss Murdstone, in her warning note.
'ready, my dear jane,' return my mother. 'good-bye, Davy. you
be go for your own good. good-bye, my child. you will come
home in the holiday, and be a well boy.'
'Clara!' Miss Murdstone repeat.
'certainly, my dear jane,' reply my mother, who be hold I.
'I forgive you, my dear boy. God bless you!'
'Clara!' Miss Murdstone repeat.
Miss Murdstone be good enough to take I out to the cart, and to
say on the way that she hop I would repent, before I come to a
bad end; and then I get into the cart, and the lazy horse walk
off with it.
CHAPTER 5
I be send away from HOME
we might have go about half a mile, and my pocket-handkerchief
be quite wet through, when the carrier stop short. look out
to ascertain for what, I see, to MY amazement, Peggotty burst from
a hedge and climb into the cart. she take I in both her arm, and
squeeze I to her stay until the pressure on my nose be
extremely painful, though I never think of that till afterwards
when I find it very tender. not a single word do Peggotty speak.
release one of her arm, she put it down in her pocket to the
elbow, and bring out some paper bag of cake which she cram
into my pocket, and a purse which she put into my hand, but not
one word do she say. after another and a final squeeze with both
arm, she get down from the cart and run away; and, my belief be,
and have always be, without a solitary button on her gown. I
pick up one, of several that be roll about, and treasure it
as a keepsake for a long time.
the carrier look at I, as if to inquire if she be come back.
I shake my head, and say I think not. 'then come up,' say the
carrier to the lazy horse; who come up accordingly.
have by this time cry as much as I possibly could, I begin to
think it be of no use cry any more, especially as neither
Roderick Random, nor that Captain in the Royal British Navy, have
ever cry, that I could remember, in try situation. the
carrier, see I in this resolution, propose that my pocket-
handkerchief should be spread upon the horse's back to dry. I
thank he, and assent; and particularly small it look, under
those circumstance.
I have now leisure to examine the purse. it be a stiff leather
purse, with a snap, and have three bright shilling in it, which
Peggotty have evidently polish up with whitening, for my great
delight. but its most precious content be two half-crown
fold together in a bit of paper, on which be write, in my
mother's hand, 'for Davy. with my love.' I be so overcome by
this, that I ask the carrier to be so good as to reach I my
pocket-handkerchief again; but he say he think I have well do
without it, and I think I really have, so I wipe my eye on my
sleeve and stop myself.
for good, too; though, in consequence of my previous emotion, I
be still occasionally seize with a stormy sob. after we have
jog on for some little time, I ask the carrier if he be go
all the way.
'all the way where?' inquire the carrier.
'there,' I say.
'wherebe there?' inquire the carrier.
'Near London,' I say.
'why that horse,' say the carrier, jerk the rein to point he
out, 'would be dead than pork afore he get over half the ground.'
'be you only go to Yarmouth then?' I ask.
'thatbe about it,' say the carrier. 'and there I shall take you
to the stage-cutch, and the stage-cutch thatwill take you to -
wherever it be.'
as this be a great deal for the carrier (whose name be Mr.
Barkis) to say - he be, as I observe in a former chapter, of a
phlegmatic temperament, and not at all conversational - I offer
he a cake as a mark of attention, which he eat at one gulp,
exactly like an elephant, and which make no more impression on his
big face than it would have do on an elephant's.
'do she make them, now?' say Mr. Barkis, always lean forward,
in his slouching way, on the footboard of the cart with an arm on
each knee.
'Peggotty, do you mean, sir?'
'ah!' say Mr. Barkis. 'she.'
'yes. she make all our pastry, and do all our cooking.'
'do she though?' say Mr. Barkis.
he make up his mouth as if to whistle, but he donot whistle. he
sit look at the horse's ear, as if he see something new there;
and sit so, for a considerable time. by and by, he say:
'no sweetheart, I b'lieve?'
'sweetmeat do you say, Mr. Barkis?' for I think he want
something else to eat, and have pointedly allude to that
description of refreshment.
'Hearts,' say Mr. Barkis. 'sweet heart; no person walk with
she!'
'with Peggotty?'
'ah!' he say. 'she.'
'oh, no. she never have a sweetheart.'
'donot she, though!' say Mr. Barkis.
again he make up his mouth to whistle, and again he donot whistle,
but sit look at the horse's ear.
'so she make,' say Mr. Barkis, after a long interval of
reflection, 'all the apple parstie, and doos all the cooking, do
she?'
I reply that such be the fact.
'well. Iwill tell you what,' say Mr. Barkis. 'p'rap you might be
writin' to she?'
'I shall certainly write to she,' I rejoin.
'ah!' he say, slowly turn his eye towards I. 'well! if you
be writin' to she, p'raps youwould recollect to say that Barkis be
willin'; would you?'
'that Barkis be willing,' I repeat, innocently. 'be that all the
message?'
'ye-es,' he say, consider. 'ye-es. Barkis be willin'.'
'but you will be at Blunderstone again tomorrow, Mr. Barkis,' I
say, falter a little at the idea of my be far away from it
then, and could give your own message so much well.'
as he repudiate this suggestion, however, with a jerk of his head,
and once more confirm his previous request by say, with
profound gravity, 'barkis be willin'. thatbe the message,' I
readily undertake its transmission. while I be wait for the
coach in the hotel at Yarmouth that very afternoon, I procure a
sheet of paper and an inkstand, and write a note to Peggotty, which
run thus: 'my dear Peggotty. I have come here safe. Barkis be
willing. my love to mama. your affectionately. P.S. he say he
particularly want you to know - BARKIS be willing.'
when I have take this commission on myself prospectively, Mr.
Barkis relapse into perfect silence; and I, feel quite worn out
by all that have happen lately, lie down on a sack in the cart and
fall asleep. I sleep soundly until we get to Yarmouth; which be
so entirely new and strange to I in the inn-yard to which we
drive, that I at once abandon a latent hope I have have of meeting
with some of Mr. Peggotty's family there, perhaps even with little
Em'ly herself.
the coach be in the yard, shin very much all over, but without
any horse to it as yet; and it look in that state as if nothing
be more unlikely than its ever go to London. I be think
this, and wonder what would ultimately become of my box, which
Mr. Barkis have put down on the yard-pavement by the pole (he have
drive up the yard to turn his cart), and also what would
ultimately become of I, when a lady look out of a bow-window
where some fowl and joint of meat be hang up, and say:
'be that the little gentleman from Blunderstone?'
'yes, ma'am,' I say.
'what name?' inquire the lady.
'Copperfield, ma'am,' I say.
'that willnot do,' return the lady. 'nobody's dinner be pay for
here, in that name.'
'be it Murdstone, ma'am?' I say.
'if yoube Master Murdstone,' say the lady, 'why do you go and
give another name, first?'
I explain to the lady how it be, who than rang a bell, and
call out, 'William! show the coffee-room!' upon which a waiter
come run out of a kitchen on the opposite side of the yard to
show it, and seem a good deal surprise when he be only to show
it to I.
it be a large long room with some large map in it. I doubt if I
could have feel much strange if the map have be real foreign
country, and I cast away in the middle of they. I feel it be
take a liberty to sit down, with my cap in my hand, on the corner
of the chair nearest the door; and when the waiter lay a cloth on
purpose for I, and put a set of castor on it, I think I must have
turn red all over with modesty.
he bring I some chop, and vegetable, and take the cover off
in such a bounce manner that I be afraid I must have give he
some offence. but he greatly relieve my mind by put a chair
for I at the table, and say, very affably, 'now, six-foot! come
on!'
I thank he, and take my seat at the board; but find it
extremely difficult to handle my knife and fork with anything like
dexterity, or to avoid splash myself with the gravy, while he
be stand opposite, star so hard, and make I blush in the
most dreadful manner every time I catch his eye. after watch
I into the second chop, he say:
'therebe half a pint of ale for you. will you have it now?'
I thank he and say, 'yes.' upon which he pour it out of a
jug into a large tumbler, and hold it up against the light, and
make it look beautiful.
'my eye!' he say. 'it seem a good deal, donot it?'
'it do seem a good deal,' I answer with a smile. for it be
quite delightful to I, to find he so pleasant. he be a
twinkling-eye, pimple-face man, with his hair stand upright
all over his head; and as he stand with one arm a-kimbo, hold up
the glass to the light with the other hand, he look quite
friendly.
'there be a gentleman here, yesterday,' he say - 'a stout
gentleman, by the name of Topsawyer - perhaps you know he?'
'no,' I say, 'I donot think -'
'in breech and gaiter, broad-brim hat, grey coat, speckle
choker,' say the waiter.
'no,' I say bashfully, 'I havenot the pleasure -'
'he come in here,' say the waiter, look at the light through
the tumbler, 'order a glass of this ale - would order it - I tell
he not - drank it, and fall dead. it be too old for he. it
oughtnot to be draw; thatbe the fact.'
I be very much shocked to hear of this melancholy accident, and
say I think I have well have some water.
'why you see,' say the waiter, still look at the light through
the tumbler, with one of his eye shut up, 'our people donot like
thing be order and leave. it offend them. but Iwill drink it,
if you like. Ibe use to it, and use be everything. I donot think
itwill hurt I, if I throw my head back, and take it off quick.
shall I?'
I reply that he would much oblige I by drink it, if he
think he could do it safely, but by no mean otherwise. when he
do throw his head back, and take it off quick, I have a horrible
fear, I confess, of see he meet the fate of the lament Mr.
Topsawyer, and fall lifeless on the carpet. but it donot hurt
he. on the contrary, I think he seem the fresher for it.
'what have we get here?' he say, put a fork into my dish.
'not chop?'
'chop,' I say.
'Lord bless my soul!' he exclaim, 'I donot know they be chop.
why, a chopbe the very thing to take off the bad effect of that
beer! benot it lucky?'
so he take a chop by the bone in one hand, and a potato in the
other, and eat away with a very good appetite, to my extreme
satisfaction. he afterwards take another chop, and another potato;
and after that, another chop and another potato. when we have do,
he bring I a pudding, and have set it before I, seem to
ruminate, and to become absent in his mind for some moment.
'howbe the pie?' he say, rouse himself.
'itbe a pudding,' I make answer.
'Pudding!' he exclaim. 'why, bless I, so it be! what!' look
at it nearer. 'you donot mean to say itbe a batter-pudding!'
'yes, it be indeed.'
'why, a batter-pudding,' he say, take up a table-spoon, 'be my
favourite pudding! ainot that lucky? come on, little 'un, and
letus see whowill get most.'
the waiter certainly get most. he entreat I more than once to
come in and win, but what with his table-spoon to my tea-spoon, his
dispatch to my dispatch, and his appetite to my appetite, I be
leave far behind at the first mouthful, and have no chance with he.
I never see anyone enjoy a pudding so much, I think; and he
laugh, when it be all go, as if his enjoyment of it last
still.
find he so very friendly and companionable, it be then that I
ask for the pen and ink and paper, to write to Peggotty. he not
only bring it immediately, but be good enough to look over I
while I write the letter. when I have finish it, he ask I
where I be go to school.
I say, 'Near London,' which be all I know.
'oh! my eye!' he say, look very low-spirited, 'I be sorry for
that.'
'why?' I ask he.
'oh, Lord!' he say, shake his head, 'thatbe the school where
they break the boy's rib - two rib - a little boy he be. I
should say he be - let I see - how old be you, about?'
I tell he between eight and nine.
'thatbe just his age,' he say. 'he be eight year and six month
old when they break his first rib; eight year and eight month old
when they break his second, and do for he.'
I could not disguise from myself, or from the waiter, that this be
an uncomfortable coincidence, and inquire how it be do. his
answer be not cheer to my spirit, for it consist of two
dismal word, 'with whopping.'
the blowing of the coach-horn in the yard be a seasonable
diversion, which make I get up and hesitatingly inquire, in the
mingled pride and diffidence of have a purse (which I take out of
my pocket), if there be anything to pay.
'therebe a sheet of letter-paper,' he return. 'do you ever buy
a sheet of letter-paper?'
I could not remember that I ever have.
'itbe dear,' he say, 'on account of the duty. threepence. thatbe
the way webe tax in this country. therebe nothing else, except
the waiter. never mind the ink. I lose by that.'
'what should you - what should I - how much ought I to - what would
it be right to pay the waiter, if you please?' I stammer,
blushing.
'if I havenot a family, and that family havenot the cowpock,' say
the waiter, 'I wouldnot take a sixpence. if I donot support a
aged pairint, and a lovely sister,' - here the waiter be greatly
agitated - 'I wouldnot take a farthing. if I have a good place, and
be treat well here, I should beg acceptance of a trifle, instead
of take of it. but I live on broken wittle - and I sleep on the
coal' - here the waiter burst into tear.
I be very much concerned for his misfortune, and feel that any
recognition short of ninepence would be mere brutality and hardness
of heart. therefore I give he one of my three bright shilling,
which he receive with much humility and veneration, and spin up
with his thumb, directly afterwards, to try the goodness of.
it be a little disconcert to I, to find, when I be be
help up behind the coach, that I be suppose to have eat all
the dinner without any assistance. I discover this, from
overhear the lady in the bow-window say to the guard, 'take care
of that child, George, or hewill burst!' and from observe that the
woman-servant who be about the place come out to look and giggle
at I as a young phenomenon. my unfortunate friend the waiter, who
have quite recover his spirit, do not appear to be disturb by
this, but join in the general admiration without be at all
confuse. if I have any doubt of he, I suppose this half awaken
it; but I be inclined to believe that with the simple confidence of
a child, and the natural reliance of a child upon superior year
(quality I be very sorry any child should prematurely change
for worldly wisdom), I have no serious mistrust of he on the whole,
even then.
I feel it rather hard, I must own, to be make, without deserve
it, the subject of joke between the coachman and guard as to the
coach draw heavy behind, on account of my sitting there, and as
to the great expediency of my travelling by waggon. the story of
my suppose appetite get wind among the outside passenger,
they be merry upon it likewise; and ask I whether I be go
to be pay for, at school, as two brother or three, and whether I
be contract for, or go upon the regular term; with other
pleasant question. but the bad of it be, that I know I should
be ashamed to eat anything, when an opportunity offer, and that,
after a rather light dinner, I should remain hungry all night - for
I have leave my cake behind, at the hotel, in my hurry. my
apprehension be realize. when we stop for supper I couldnot
muster courage to take any, though I should have like it very
much, but sit by the fire and say I donot want anything. this
do not save I from more joke, either; for a husky-voice
gentleman with a rough face, who have be eat out of a
sandwich-box nearly all the way, except when he have be drink
out of a bottle, say I be like a boa-constrictor who take enough
at one meal to last he a long time; after which, he actually
bring a rash out upon himself with boil beef.
we have start from Yarmouth at three o'clock in the afternoon, and
we be due in London about eight next morning. it be mid-summer
weather, and the evening be very pleasant. when we pass through
a village, I picture to myself what the inside of the house be
like, and what the inhabitant be about; and when boy come
run after we, and get up behind and swing there for a little
way, I wonder whether their father be alive, and whether they
be happy at home. I have plenty to think of, therefore, besides
my mind run continually on the kind of place I be go to -
which be an awful speculation. sometimes, I remember, I resign
myself to thought of home and Peggotty; and to endeavour, in a
confused blind way, to recall how I have feel, and what sort of boy
I use to be, before I bite Mr. Murdstone: which I couldnot satisfy
myself about by any mean, I seem to have bite he in such a
remote antiquity.
the night be not so pleasant as the evening, for it get chilly;
and be put between two gentleman (the rough-faced one and
another) to prevent my tumbling off the coach, I be nearly
smother by their fall asleep, and completely block I up.
they squeeze I so hard sometimes, that I could not help cry
out, 'oh! if you please!' - which they donot like at all, because
it wake they. opposite I be an elderly lady in a great fur
cloak, who look in the dark more like a haystack than a lady, she
be wrap up to such a degree. this lady have a basket with she,
and she havenot know what to do with it, for a long time, until she
find that on account of my leg be short, it could go
underneath I. it cramp and hurt I so, that it make I
perfectly miserable; but if I move in the least, and make a glass
that be in the basket rattle against something else (as it be
sure to do), she give I the cruell poke with her foot, and
say, 'come, donot you fidget. your bone be young enough, Ibe
sure!'
at last the sun rise, and then my companion seem to sleep
easy. the difficulty under which they have labour all night,
and which have find utterance in the most terrific gasp and
snort, be not to be conceive. as the sun get high, their
sleep become light, and so they gradually one by one awoke. I
recollect be very much surprised by the feint everybody make,
then, of not have be to sleep at all, and by the uncommon
indignation with which everyone repel the charge. I labour
under the same kind of astonishment to this day, have invariably
observe that of all human weakness, the one to which our common
nature be the least disposed to confess (I cannot imagine why) be
the weakness of have go to sleep in a coach.
what an amazing place London be to I when I see it in the
distance, and how I believe all the adventure of all my favourite
hero to be constantly enact and re-enact there, and how I
vaguely make it out in my own mind to be full of wonder and
wickedness than all the city of the earth, I need not stop here
to relate. we approach it by degree, and get, in due time, to
the inn in the Whitechapel district, for which we be bind. I
forget whether it be the Blue Bull, or the Blue Boar; but I know
it be the Blue Something, and that its likeness be paint up on
the back of the coach.
the guard's eye light on I as he be get down, and he say
at the booking-office door:
'be there anybody here for a yoongster book in the name of
Murdstone, from Bloonderstone, Sooffolk, to be leave till call
for?'
nobody answer.
'try Copperfield, if you please, sir,' say I, look helplessly
down.
'be there anybody here for a yoongster, book in the name of
Murdstone, from Bloonderstone, Sooffolk, but own to the name of
Copperfield, to be leave till call for?' say the guard. 'come!
be there anybody?'
no. there be nobody. I look anxiously around; but the inquiry
make no impression on any of the bystander, if I except a man in
gaiter, with one eye, who suggest that they have well put a
brass collar round my neck, and tie I up in the stable.
a ladder be bring, and I get down after the lady, who be like
a haystack: not dare to stir, until her basket be remove. the
coach be clear of passenger by that time, the luggage be very
soon clear out, the horse have be take out before the luggage,
and now the coach itself be wheel and back off by some
hostler, out of the way. still, nobody appear, to claim the
dusty youngster from Blunderstone, Suffolk.
more solitary than Robinson Crusoe, who have nobody to look at he
and see that he be solitary, I go into the booking-office, and,
by invitation of the clerk on duty, pass behind the counter, and
sit down on the scale at which they weigh the luggage. here, as
I sit look at the parcel, package, and book, and inhale the
smell of stable (ever since associate with that morning), a
procession of most tremendous consideration begin to march through
my mind. suppose nobody should ever fetch I, how long would
they consent to keep I there? would they keep I long enough to
spend seven shilling? should I sleep at night in one of those
wooden bin, with the other luggage, and wash myself at the pump in
the yard in the morning; or should I be turn out every night, and
expect to come again to be leave till call for, when the office
open next day? suppose there be no mistake in the case, and
Mr. Murdstone have devise this plan to get rid of I, what should
I do? if they allow I to remain there until my seven shilling
be spend, I couldnot hope to remain there when I begin to starve.
that would obviously be inconvenient and unpleasant to the
customer, besides entail on the Blue Whatever-it-be, the risk
of funeral expense. if I start off at once, and try to walk
back home, how could I ever find my way, how could I ever hope to
walk so far, how could I make sure of anyone but Peggotty, even if
I get back? if I find out the near proper authority, and
offer myself to go for a soldier, or a sailor, I be such a
little fellow that it be most likely they wouldnot take I in.
these thought, and a hundred other such thought, turn I
burn hot, and make I giddy with apprehension and dismay. I be
in the height of my fever when a man enter and whisper to the
clerk, who presently slant I off the scale, and push I over
to he, as if I be weigh, buy, deliver, and pay for.
as I go out of the office, hand in hand with this new
acquaintance, I steal a look at he. he be a gaunt, sallow young
man, with hollow cheek, and a chin almost as black as Mr.
Murdstone's; but there the likeness end, for his whisker be
shave off, and his hair, instead of be glossy, be rusty and
dry. he be dress in a suit of black clothe which be rather
rusty and dry too, and rather short in the sleeve and leg; and he
have a white neck-kerchief on, that be not over-clean. I do not,
and do not, suppose that this neck-kerchief be all the linen he
wear, but it be all he show or give any hint of.
'yoube the new boy?' he say.
'yes, sir,' I say.
I suppose I be. I donot know.
'Ibe one of the master at Salem House,' he say.
I make he a bow and feel very much overawe. I be so ashamed to
allude to a commonplace thing like my box, to a scholar and a
master at Salem House, that we have go some little distance from
the yard before I have the hardihood to mention it. we turn back,
on my humbly insinuate that it might be useful to I hereafter;
and he tell the clerk that the carrier have instruction to call for
it at noon.
'if you please, sir,' I say, when we have accomplish about the
same distance as before, 'be it far?'
'itbe down by Blackheath,' he say.
'be that far, sir?' I diffidently ask.
'itbe a good step,' he say. 'we shall go by the stage-coach.
itbe about six mile.'
I be so faint and tired, that the idea of hold out for six
mile more, be too much for I. I take heart to tell he that I
have have nothing all night, and that if he would allow I to buy
something to eat, I should be very much oblige to he. he
appear surprised at this - I see he stop and look at I now -
and after consider for a few moment, say he want to call on
an old person who live not far off, and that the good way would be
for I to buy some bread, or whatever I like good that be
wholesome, and make my breakfast at her house, where we could get
some milk.
accordingly we look in at a baker's window, and after I have make
a series of proposal to buy everything that be bilious in the
shop, and he have reject they one by one, we decide in favour of
a nice little loaf of brown bread, which cost I threepence. then,
at a grocer's shop, we buy an egg and a slice of streaky bacon;
which still leave what I think a good deal of change, out of the
second of the bright shilling, and make I consider London a very
cheap place. these provision lay in, we go on through a great
noise and uproar that confuse my weary head beyond description,
and over a bridge which, no doubt, be London Bridge (indeed I
think he tell I so, but I be half asleep), until we come to the
poor person's house, which be a part of some alm-house, as I
know by their look, and by an inscription on a stone over the gate
which say they be establish for twenty-five poor woman.
the Master at Salem House lift the latch of one of a number of
little black door that be all alike, and have each a little
diamond-pan window on one side, and another little diamond- paned
window above; and we go into the little house of one of these
poor old woman, who be blow a fire to make a little saucepan
boil. on see the master enter, the old woman stop with the
bellow on her knee, and say something that I think sound like
'my Charley!' but on see I come in too, she get up, and rub
her hand make a confused sort of half curtsey.
'can you cook this young gentleman's breakfast for he, if you
please?' say the Master at Salem House.
'can I?' say the old woman. 'yes can I, sure!'
'howbe Mrs. Fibbitson today?' say the Master, look at another
old woman in a large chair by the fire, who be such a bundle of
clothe that I feel grateful to this hour for not have sit upon
she by mistake.
'ah, shebe poorly,' say the first old woman. 'itbe one of her bad
day. if the fire be to go out, through any accident, I verily
believe shewould go out too, and never come to life again.'
as they look at she, I look at she also. although it be a
warm day, she seem to think of nothing but the fire. I fancy
she be jealous even of the saucepan on it; and I have reason to
know that she take its impressment into the service of boil my
egg and broil my bacon, in dudgeon; for I see she, with my own
discomfited eye, shake her fist at I once, when those culinary
operation be go on, and no one else be look. the sun
stream in at the little window, but she sit with her own back and
the back of the large chair towards it, screen the fire as if
she be sedulously keep it warm, instead of it keep she
warm, and watch it in a most distrustful manner. the completion
of the preparation for my breakfast, by relieve the fire, give
her such extreme joy that she laugh aloud - and a very
unmelodious laugh she have, I must say.
I sit down to my brown loaf, my egg, and my rasher of bacon, with
a basin of milk besides, and make a most delicious meal. while I
be yet in the full enjoyment of it, the old woman of the house
say to the Master:
'have you get your flute with you?'
'yes,' he return.
'have a blow at it,' say the old woman, coaxingly. 'do!'
the Master, upon this, put his hand underneath the skirt of his
coat, and bring out his flute in three piece, which he screw
together, and begin immediately to play. my impression be, after
many year of consideration, that there never can have be anybody
in the world who play bad. he make the most dismal sound I
have ever hear produce by any mean, natural or artificial. I
donot know what the tune be - if there be such thing in the
performance at all, which I doubt - but the influence of the strain
upon I be, first, to make I think of all my sorrow until I
could hardly keep my tear back; then to take away my appetite; and
lastly, to make I so sleepy that I couldnot keep my eye open.
they begin to close again, and I begin to nod, as the recollection
rise fresh upon I. once more the little room, with its open
corner cupboard, and its square-back chair, and its angular
little staircase lead to the room above, and its three peacock's
feather display over the mantelpiece - I remember wonder when
I first go in, what that peacock would have think if he have
know what his finery be doom to come to - fade from before I,
and I nod, and sleep. the flute become inaudible, the wheel of
the coach be hear instead, and I be on my journey. the coach
jolt, I wake with a start, and the flute have come back again, and
the Master at Salem House be sit with his leg cross, play
it dolefully, while the old woman of the house look on delighted.
she fade in her turn, and he fade, and all fade, and there be no
flute, no Master, no Salem House, no David Copperfield, no anything
but heavy sleep.
I dream, I think, that once while he be blow into this
dismal flute, the old woman of the house, who have go near and
near to he in her ecstatic admiration, lean over the back of
his chair and give he an affectionate squeeze round the neck,
which stop his playing for a moment. I be in the middle state
between sleeping and wake, either then or immediately afterwards;
for, as he resume - it be a real fact that he have stop play
- I see and hear the same old woman ask Mrs. Fibbitson if it
benot delicious (mean the flute), to which Mrs. Fibbitson
reply, 'ay, ay! yes!' and nod at the fire: to which, I be
persuade, she give the credit of the whole performance.
when I seem to have be doze a long while, the Master at Salem
House unscrew his flute into the three piece, put they up as
before, and take I away. we find the coach very near at hand,
and get upon the roof; but I be so dead sleepy, that when we
stop on the road to take up somebody else, they put I inside
where there be no passenger, and where I sleep profoundly, until
I find the coach go at a footpace up a steep hill among green
leaf. presently, it stop, and have come to its destination.
a short walk bring we - I mean the Master and I - to Salem
House, which be enclose with a high brick wall, and look very
dull. over a door in this wall be a board with SALEM HousE upon
it; and through a grating in this door we be survey when we
rang the bell by a surly face, which I find, on the door be
open, belong to a stout man with a bull-neck, a wooden leg,
overhang temple, and his hair cut close all round his head.
'the new boy,' say the Master.
the man with the wooden leg eye I all over - it donot take long,
for there be not much of I - and lock the gate behind we, and
take out the key. we be go up to the house, among some dark
heavy tree, when he call after my conductor.
'hallo!'
we look back, and he be stand at the door of a little lodge,
where he live, with a pair of boot in his hand.
'here! the cobbler's be,' he say, 'since youhave be out, Mr.
Mell, and he say he cannot mend them any more. he say there benot
a bit of the original boot left, and he wonder you expect it.'
with these word he throw the boot towards Mr. Mell, who go back
a few pace to pick they up, and look at they (very
disconsolately, I be afraid), as we go on together. I observe
then, for the first time, that the boot he have on be a good deal
the bad for wear, and that his stocking be just break out in
one place, like a bud.
Salem House be a square brick building with wing; of a bare and
unfurnished appearance. all about it be so very quiet, that I
say to Mr. Mell I suppose the boy be out; but he seem
surprised at my not know that it be holiday-time. that all the
boy be at their several home. that Mr. Creakle, the
proprietor, be down by the sea-side with Mrs. and Miss Creakle;
and that I be send in holiday-time as a punishment for my
misdoing, all of which he explain to I as we go along.
I gaze upon the schoolroom into which he take I, as the most
forlorn and desolate place I have ever see. I see it now. a long
room with three long row of desk, and six of form, and bristling
all round with peg for hat and slate. scrap of old copy-book
and exercise litter the dirty floor. some silkworm' house, make
of the same material, be scatter over the desk. two miserable
little white mouse, leave behind by their owner, be run up and
down in a fusty castle make of pasteboard and wire, look in all
the corner with their red eye for anything to eat. a bird, in a
cage very little big than himself, make a mournful rattle now
and then in hop on his perch, two inch high, or drop from
it; but neither sing nor chirp. there be a strange unwholesome
smell upon the room, like mildew corduroy, sweet apple want
air, and rotten book. there could not well be more ink splash
about it, if it have be roofless from its first construction, and
the sky have rain, snowed, hail, and blow ink through the
vary season of the year.
Mr. Mell have leave I while he take his irreparable boot
upstairs, I go softly to the upper end of the room, observe all
this as I creep along. suddenly I come upon a pasteboard placard,
beautifully write, which be lie on the desk, and bear these
word: 'take care of HIM. HE bite.'
I get upon the desk immediately, apprehensive of at least a great
dog underneath. but, though I look all round with anxious eye,
I could see nothing of he. I be still engage in peer about,
when Mr. Mell come back, and ask I what I do up there?
'I beg your pardon, sir,' say I, 'if you please, Ibe look for
the dog.'
'Dog?' he say. 'what dog?'
'benot it a dog, sir?'
'benot what a dog?'
'thatbe to be take care of, sir; that bite.'
'no, Copperfield,' say he, gravely, 'thatbe not a dog. thatbe a
boy. my instruction be, Copperfield, to put this placard on your
back. I be sorry to make such a beginning with you, but I must do
it.' with that he take I down, and tie the placard, which be
neatly construct for the purpose, on my shoulder like a
knapsack; and wherever I go, afterwards, I have the consolation of
carry it.
what I suffer from that placard, nobody can imagine. whether it
be possible for people to see I or not, I always fancy that
somebody be read it. it be no relief to turn round and find
nobody; for wherever my back be, there I imagine somebody always
to be. that cruel man with the wooden leg aggravate my
suffering. he be in authority; and if he ever see I lean
against a tree, or a wall, or the house, he roar out from his
lodge door in a stupendous voice, 'Hallo, you sir! you
Copperfield! show that badge conspicuous, or Iwill report you!'
the playground be a bare gravelled yard, open to all the back of
the house and the office; and I know that the servant read it,
and the butcher read it, and the baker read it; that everybody, in
a word, who come backwards and forwards to the house, of a morning
when I be order to walk there, read that I be to be take care
of, for I bit, I recollect that I positively begin to have a dread
of myself, as a kind of wild boy who do bite.
there be an old door in this playground, on which the boy have a
custom of carve their name. it be completely cover with such
inscription. in my dread of the end of the vacation and their
come back, I could not read a boy's name, without inquire in
what tone and with what emphasis he would read, 'take care of he.
he bite.' there be one boy - a certain J. Steerforth - who cut
his name very deep and very often, who, I conceive, would read it
in a rather strong voice, and afterwards pull my hair. there be
another boy, one Tommy Traddles, who I dread would make game of
it, and pretend to be dreadfully frightened of I. there be a
third, George Demple, who I fancy would sing it. I have look,
a little shrink creature, at that door, until the owner of all
the name - there be five-and-forty of they in the school then,
Mr. Mell say - seem to send I to Coventry by general
acclamation, and to cry out, each in his own way, 'take care of
he. he bite!'
it be the same with the place at the desk and form. it be the
same with the grove of deserted bedstead I peep at, on my way
to, and when I be in, my own bed. I remember dream night after
night, of be with my mother as she use to be, or of go to a
party at Mr. Peggotty's, or of travel outside the stage-coach,
or of dining again with my unfortunate friend the waiter, and in
all these circumstance make people scream and stare, by the
unhappy disclosure that I have nothing on but my little night-shirt,
and that placard.
in the monotony of my life, and in my constant apprehension of the
re-opening of the school, it be such an insupportable affliction!
I have long task every day to do with Mr. Mell; but I do they,
there be no Mr. and Miss Murdstone here, and get through they
without disgrace. before, and after they, I walk about -
supervise, as I have mention, by the man with the wooden leg.
how vividly I call to mind the damp about the house, the green
crack flagstone in the court, an old leaky water-butt, and the
discolour trunk of some of the grim tree, which seem to have
drip more in the rain than other tree, and to have blow less
in the sun! at one we din, Mr. Mell and I, at the upper end of
a long bare dining-room, full of deal table, and smell of fat.
then, we have more task until tea, which Mr. Mell drink out of a
blue teacup, and I out of a tin pot. all day long, and until seven
or eight in the evening, Mr. Mell, at his own detach desk in the
schoolroom, work hard with pen, ink, ruler, book, and writing-
paper, make out the bill (as I find) for last half-year. when
he have put up his thing for the night he take out his flute, and
blow at it, until I almost think he would gradually blow his
whole be into the large hole at the top, and ooze away at the
key.
I picture my small self in the dimly-light room, sit with my
head upon my hand, listen to the doleful performance of Mr.
Mell, and con tomorrow's lesson. I picture myself with my
book shut up, still listen to the doleful performance of Mr.
Mell, and listen through it to what use to be at home, and to
the blowing of the wind on Yarmouth flat, and feel very sad and
solitary. I picture myself go up to bed, among the unused
room, and sit on my bed-side cry for a comfortable word
from Peggotty. I picture myself come downstairs in the morning,
and look through a long ghastly gash of a staircase window at
the school-bell hang on the top of an out-house with a
weathercock above it; and dread the time when it shall ring J.
Steerforth and the rest to work: which be only second, in my
foreboding apprehension, to the time when the man with the wooden
leg shall unlock the rusty gate to give admission to the awful Mr.
Creakle. I cannot think I be a very dangerous character in any of
these aspect, but in all of they I carry the same warning on my
back.
Mr. Mell never say much to I, but he be never harsh to I. I
suppose we be company to each other, without talk. I forget
to mention that he would talk to himself sometimes, and grin, and
clench his fist, and grind his tooth, and pull his hair in an
unaccountable manner. but he have these peculiarity: and at first
they frighten I, though I soon get use to they.
CHAPTER 6
I enlarge MY CIRCLE of ACQUAINTANCE
I had lead this life about a month, when the man with the wooden leg
begin to stump about with a mop and a bucket of water, from which
I infer that preparation be make to receive Mr. Creakle and
the boy. I be not mistaken; for the mop come into the schoolroom
before long, and turn out Mr. Mell and I, who live where we
could, and get on how we could, for some day, during which we be
always in the way of two or three young woman, who have rarely show
themselves before, and be so continually in the midst of dust
that I sneeze almost as much as if Salem House have be a great
snuff-box.
one day I be inform by Mr. Mell that Mr. Creakle would be home
that evening. in the evening, after tea, I hear that he be come.
before bedtime, I be fetch by the man with the wooden leg to
appear before he.
Mr. Creakle's part of the house be a good deal more comfortable
than ours, and he have a snug bit of garden that look pleasant
after the dusty playground, which be such a desert in miniature,
that I think no one but a camel, or a dromedary, could have feel
at home in it. it seem to I a bold thing even to take notice
that the passage look comfortable, as I go on my way,
trembling, to Mr. Creakle's presence: which so abash I, when I
be usher into it, that I hardly see Mrs. Creakle or Miss Creakle
(who be both there, in the parlour), or anything but Mr. Creakle,
a stout gentleman with a bunch of watch-chain and seal, in an
arm-chair, with a tumbler and bottle beside he.
'so!' say Mr. Creakle. 'this be the young gentleman whose tooth
be to be file! turn he round.'
the wooden-legged man turn I about so as to exhibit the placard;
and have afford time for a full survey of it, turn I about
again, with my face to Mr. Creakle, and post himself at Mr.
Creakle's side. Mr. Creakle's face be fiery, and his eye be
small, and deep in his head; he have thick vein in his forehead, a
little nose, and a large chin. he be bald on the top of his head;
and have some thin wet-look hair that be just turn grey,
brush across each temple, so that the two side interlace on his
forehead. but the circumstance about he which impress I most,
be, that he have no voice, but speak in a whisper. the exertion
this cost he, or the consciousness of talk in that feeble way,
make his angry face so much more angry, and his thick vein so much
thick, when he speak, that I be not surprised, on look back,
at this peculiarity strike I as his chief one.
'now,' say Mr. Creakle. 'whatbe the report of this boy?'
'therebe nothing against he yet,' return the man with the wooden
leg. 'there have be no opportunity.'
I think Mr. Creakle be disappoint. I think Mrs. and Miss
Creakle (at whom I now glance for the first time, and who be,
both, thin and quiet) be not disappointed.
'come here, sir!' say Mr. Creakle, beckon to I.
'come here!' say the man with the wooden leg, repeat the
gesture.
'I have the happiness of know your father-in-law,' whisper Mr.
Creakle, take I by the ear; 'and a worthy man he be, and a man
of a strong character. he know I, and I know he. do you know
I? hey?' say Mr. Creakle, pinch my ear with ferocious
playfulness.
'not yet, sir,' I say, flinch with the pain.
'not yet? hey?' repeat Mr. Creakle. 'but you will soon. hey?'
'you will soon. hey?' repeat the man with the wooden leg. I
afterwards find that he generally act, with his strong voice, as
Mr. Creakle's interpreter to the boy.
I be very much frightened, and say, I hop so, if he please.
I feel, all this while, as if my ear be blaze; he pinch it so
hard.
'Iwill tell you what I be,' whisper Mr. Creakle, let it go at
last, with a screw at parting that bring the water into my eye.
'Ibe a Tartar.'
'a Tartar,' say the man with the wooden leg.
'when I say Iwill do a thing, I do it,' say Mr. Creakle; 'and when
I say I will have a thing do, I will have it do.'
'- will have a thing do, I will have it do,' repeat the man
with the wooden leg.
'I be a determined character,' say Mr. Creakle. 'thatbe what I
be. I do my duty. thatbe what I do. my flesh and blood' - he
look at Mrs. Creakle as he say this - 'when it rise against I,
be not my flesh and blood. I discard it. have that fellow' - to
the man with the wooden leg -'been here again?'
'no,' be the answer.
'no,' say Mr. Creakle. 'he know well. he know I. let he
keep away. I say let he keep away,' say Mr. Creakle, strike
his hand upon the table, and look at Mrs. Creakle, 'for he know
I. now you have begin to know I too, my young friend, and you
may go. take he away.'
I be very glad to be order away, for Mrs. and Miss Creakle be
both wipe their eye, and I feel as uncomfortable for they as I
do for myself. but I have a petition on my mind which concern I
so nearly, that I couldnot help say, though I wonder at my own
courage:
'if you please, sir -'
Mr. Creakle whisper, 'hah! whatbe this?' and bent his eye upon
I, as if he would have burn I up with they.
'if you please, sir,' I falter, 'if I might be allow (I be very
sorry indeed, sir, for what I do) to take this writing off, before
the boy come back -'
whether Mr. Creakle be in earnest, or whether he only do it to
frighten I, I donot know, but he make a burst out of his chair,
before which I precipitately retreat, without wait for the
escort of the man with the wooden leg, and never once stop until
I reach my own bedroom, where, find I be not pursue, I go
to bed, as it be time, and lay quaking, for a couple of hour.
next morning Mr. Sharp come back. Mr. Sharp be the first master,
and superior to Mr. Mell. Mr. Mell take his meal with the boy,
but Mr. Sharp din and sup at Mr. Creakle's table. he be a
limp, delicate-look gentleman, I think, with a good deal of
nose, and a way of carry his head on one side, as if it be a
little too heavy for he. his hair be very smooth and wavy; but
I be inform by the very first boy who come back that it be a
wig (a second-hand one he say), and that Mr. Sharp go out every
Saturday afternoon to get it curl.
it be no other than Tommy Traddles who give I this piece of
intelligence. he be the first boy who return. he introduce
himself by inform I that I should find his name on the right-
hand corner of the gate, over the top-bolt; upon that I say,
'traddle?' to which he reply, 'the same,' and then he ask I
for a full account of myself and family.
it be a happy circumstance for I that traddle come back first.
he enjoy my placard so much, that he save I from the
embarrassment of either disclosure or concealment, by present I
to every other boy who come back, great or small, immediately on
his arrival, in this form of introduction, 'look here! herebe a
game!' happily, too, the great part of the boy come back
low-spirited, and be not so boisterous at my expense as I have
expect. some of they certainly do dance about I like wild
Indians, and the great part could not resist the temptation of
pretend that I be a dog, and pat and soothe I, lest I
should bite, and say, 'lie down, sir!' and call I Towzer.
this be naturally confusing, among so many stranger, and cost I
some tear, but on the whole it be much well than I have
anticipate.
I be not consider as be formally receive into the school,
however, until J. Steerforth arrive. before this boy, who be
repute to be a great scholar, and be very good-look, and at
least half-a-dozen year my senior, I be carry as before a
magistrate. he inquire, under a shed in the playground, into the
particular of my punishment, and be pleased to express his
opinion that it be 'a jolly shame'; for which I become bound to
he ever afterwards.
'what money have you get, Copperfield?' he say, walk aside with
I when he have dispose of my affair in these term. I tell he
seven shilling.
'you have well give it to I to take care of,' he say. 'at
least, you can if you like. you neednot if you donot like.'
I hasten to comply with his friendly suggestion, and opening
Peggotty's purse, turn it upside down into his hand.
'do you want to spend anything now?' he ask I.
'no thank you,' I reply.
'you can, if you like, you know,' say Steerforth. 'say the word.'
'no, thank you, sir,' I repeat.
'perhaps youwould like to spend a couple of shilling or so, in a
bottle of currant wine by and by, up in the bedroom?' say
Steerforth. 'you belong to my bedroom, I find.'
it certainly have not occur to I before, but I say, yes, I
should like that.
'very good,' say Steerforth. 'youwill be glad to spend another
shilling or so, in almond cake, I dare say?'
I say, yes, I should like that, too.
'and another shilling or so in biscuit, and another in fruit, eh?'
say Steerforth. 'I say, young Copperfield, yoube go it!'
I smile because he smile, but I be a little troubled in my mind,
too.
'well!' say Steerforth. 'we must make it stretch as far as we
can; thatbe all. Iwill do the good in my power for you. I can go
out when I like, and Iwill smuggle the prog in.' with these word
he put the money in his pocket, and kindly tell I not to make
myself uneasy; he would take care it should be all right.
he be as good as his word, if that be all right which I have a
secret misgiving be nearly all wrong - for I fear it be a waste
of my mother's two half-crown - though I have preserve the piece
of paper they be wrap in: which be a precious saving. when
we go upstairs to bed, he produce the whole seven shilling'
worth, and lay it out on my bed in the moonlight, say:
'there you be, young copperfield, and a royal spread youhave get.'
I couldnot think of do the honour of the feast, at my time of
life, while he be by; my hand shake at the very thought of it. I
beg he to do I the favour of presiding; and my request be
second by the other boy who be in that room, he accede to it,
and sit upon my pillow, hand round the viand - with perfect
fairness, I must say - and dispense the currant wine in a little
glass without a foot, which be his own property. as to I, I sit
on his left hand, and the rest be group about we, on the
near bed and on the floor.
how well I recollect our sit there, talk in whisper; or
their talking, and my respectfully listening, I ought rather to
say; the moonlight fall a little way into the room, through the
window, paint a pale window on the floor, and the great part
of we in shadow, except when Steerforth dip a match into a
phosphorus-box, when he want to look for anything on the board,
and shed a blue glare over we that be go directly! a certain
mysterious feeling, consequent on the darkness, the secrecy of the
revel, and the whisper in which everything be say, steal over I
again, and I listen to all they tell I with a vague feeling of
solemnity and awe, which make I glad that they be all so near,
and frighten I (though I feign to laugh) when traddle pretend
to see a ghost in the corner.
I hear all kind of thing about the school and all belong to
it. I hear that Mr. Creakle have not prefer his claim to be
a Tartar without reason; that he be the stern and most severe
of master; that he lay about he, right and left, every day of
his life, charge in among the boy like a trooper, and slash
away, unmercifully. that he know nothing himself, but the art of
slashing, be more ignorant (J. Steerforth say) than the low
boy in the school; that he have be, a good many year ago, a small
hop-dealer in the Borough, and have take to the schooling business
after be bankrupt in hop, and make away with Mrs. Creakle's
money. with a good deal more of that sort, which I wonder how
they know.
I hear that the man with the wooden leg, whose name be Tungay,
be an obstinate barbarian who have formerly assist in the hop
business, but have come into the scholastic line with Mr. Creakle,
in consequence, as be suppose among the boy, of his have
break his leg in Mr. Creakle's service, and have do a deal of
dishonest work for he, and know his secret. I hear that with
the single exception of Mr. Creakle, Tungay consider the whole
establishment, master and boy, as his natural enemy, and that
the only delight of his life be to be sour and malicious. I hear
that Mr. Creakle have a son, who have not be Tungay's friend, and
who, assist in the school, have once hold some remonstrance with
his father on an occasion when its discipline be very cruelly
exercise, and be suppose, besides, to have protest against his
father's usage of his mother. I hear that Mr. Creakle have turn
he out of door, in consequence; and that Mrs. and Miss Creakle
have be in a sad way, ever since.
but the great wonder that I hear of Mr. Creakle be, there
be one boy in the school on whom he never venture to lay a
hand, and that boy be J. Steerforth. Steerforth himself
confirm this when it be state, and say that he should like to
begin to see he do it. on be ask by a mild boy (not I) how
he would proceed if he do begin to see he do it, he dip a
match into his phosphorus-box on purpose to shed a glare over his
reply, and say he would commence by knock he down with a blow
on the forehead from the seven-and-sixpenny ink-bottle that be
always on the mantelpiece. we sit in the dark for some time,
breathless.
I hear that Mr. Sharp and Mr. Mell be both suppose to be
wretchedly pay; and that when there be hot and cold meat for
dinner at Mr. Creakle's table, Mr. Sharp be always expect to say
he prefer cold; which be again corroborate by J. Steerforth,
the only parlour-boarder. I hear that Mr. Sharp's wig donot fit
he; and that he neednot be so 'bounceable' - somebody else say
'bumptious' - about it, because his own red hair be very plainly
to be see behind.
I hear that one boy, who be a coal-merchant's son, come as a
set-off against the coal-bill, and be call, on that account,
'Exchange or Barter' - a name select from the arithmetic book as
express this arrangement. I hear that the table beer be a
robbery of parent, and the pudding an imposition. I hear that
Miss Creakle be regard by the school in general as be in love
with Steerforth; and I be sure, as I sit in the dark, think of
his nice voice, and his fine face, and his easy manner, and his
curling hair, I think it very likely. I hear that Mr. Mell be
not a bad sort of fellow, but havenot a sixpence to bless himself
with; and that there be no doubt that old Mrs. Mell, his mother,
be as poor as job. I think of my breakfast then, and what have
sound like 'my Charley!' but I be, I be glad to remember, as
mute as a mouse about it.
the hearing of all this, and a good deal more, outlast the
banquet some time. the great part of the guest have go to bed
as soon as the eating and drinking be over; and we, who have
remain whisper and listen half-undressed, at last betook
ourselves to bed, too.
'good night, young Copperfield,' say Steerforth. 'Iwill take care
of you.'
'yoube very kind,' I gratefully return. 'I be very much oblige
to you.'
'you havenot get a sister, have you?' say Steerforth, yawn.
'no,' I answer.
'thatbe a pity,' say Steerforth. 'if you have have one, I should
think she would have be a pretty, timid, little, bright-eyed sort
of girl. I should have like to know she. good night, young
Copperfield.'
'good night, sir,' I reply.
I think of he very much after I go to bed, and raise myself,
I recollect, to look at he where he lie in the moonlight, with his
handsome face turn up, and his head recline easily on his arm.
he be a person of great power in my eye; that be, of course, the
reason of my mind run on he. no veiled future dimly glance
upon he in the moonbeam. there be no shadowy picture of his
footstep, in the garden that I dream of walk in all night.
CHAPTER 7
MY 'FIRST HALF' AT SALEM HOUSE
School begin in earnest next day. a profound impression be make
upon I, I remember, by the roar of voice in the schoolroom
suddenly become hush as death when Mr. Creakle enter after
breakfast, and stand in the doorway look round upon we like a
giant in a story-book survey his captive.
Tungay stand at Mr. Creakle's elbow. he have no occasion, I
think, to cry out 'silence!' so ferociously, for the boy be
all strike speechless and motionless.
Mr. Creakle be see to speak, and Tungay be hear, to this
effect.
'now, boy, this be a new half. take care what yoube about, in
this new half. come fresh up to the lesson, I advise you, for I
come fresh up to the punishment. I willnot flinch. it will be of no
use your rub yourself; you willnot rub the mark out that I
shall give you. now get to work, every boy!'
when this dreadful exordium be over, and Tungay have stump out
again, Mr. Creakle come to where I sit, and tell I that if I be
famous for bite, he be famous for bite, too. he then show
I the cane, and ask I what I think of that, for a tooth? be
it a sharp tooth, hey? be it a double tooth, hey? have it a deep
prong, hey? do it bite, hey? do it bite? at every question he
give I a fleshy cut with it that make I writhe; so I be very
soon make free of Salem House (as Steerforth say), and be very
soon in tear also.
not that I mean to say these be special mark of distinction,
which only I receive. on the contrary, a large majority of the
boy (especially the small one) be visit with similar
instance of notice, as Mr. Creakle make the round of the
schoolroom. half the establishment be writhe and cry, before
the day's work begin; and how much of it have writhe and cry
before the day's work be over, I be really afraid to recollect,
lest I should seem to exaggerate.
I should think there never can have be a man who enjoy his
profession more than Mr. Creakle do. he have a delight in cut
at the boy, which be like the satisfaction of a craving appetite.
I be confident that he couldnot resist a chubby boy, especially;
that there be a fascination in such a subject, which make he
restless in his mind, until he have score and mark he for the
day. I be chubby myself, and ought to know. I be sure when I
think of the fellow now, my blood rise against he with the
disintereste indignation I should feel if I could have know all
about he without have ever be in his power; but it rise
hotly, because I know he to have be an incapable brute, who have
no more right to be possess of the great trust he hold, than to
be Lord High Admiral, or Commander-in-chief - in either of which
capacity it be probable that he would have do infinitely less
mischief.
miserable little propitiator of a remorseless Idol, how abject we
be to he! what a launch in life I think it now, on look
back, to be so mean and servile to a man of such part and
pretension!
here I sit at the desk again, watch his eye - humbly watch
his eye, as he rule a cipher-book for another victim whose
hand have just be flatten by that identical ruler, and who be
try to wipe the sting out with a pocket-handkerchief. I have
plenty to do. I donot watch his eye in idleness, but because I be
morbidly attract to it, in a dread desire to know what he will do
next, and whether it will be my turn to suffer, or somebody else's.
a lane of small boy beyond I, with the same interest in his eye,
watch it too. I think he know it, though he pretend he donot.
he make dreadful mouth as he rule the ciphering-book; and now he
throw his eye sideway down our lane, and we all droop over our
book and tremble. a moment afterwards we be again eye he.
an unhappy culprit, find guilty of imperfect exercise, approach
at his command. the culprit falter excuse, and profess a
determination to do well tomorrow. Mr. Creakle cut a joke
before he beat he, and we laugh at it, - miserable little dog,
we laugh, with our visage as white as ash, and our heart
sink into our boot.
here I sit at the desk again, on a drowsy summer afternoon. a buzz
and hum go up around I, as if the boy be so many bluebottle.
a cloggy sensation of the lukewarm fat of meat be upon I (we din
an hour or two ago), and my head be as heavy as so much lead. I
would give the world to go to sleep. I sit with my eye on Mr.
Creakle, blink at he like a young owl; when sleep overpower I
for a minute, he still loom through my slumber, rule those
cipher-book, until he softly come behind I and wake I to
plainer perception of he, with a red ridge across my back.
here I be in the playground, with my eye still fascinate by he,
though I cannot see he. the window at a little distance from which
I know he be have his dinner, stand for he, and I eye that
instead. if he show his face near it, mine assume an imploring
and submissive expression. if he look out through the glass, the
bold boy (Steerforth excepted) stop in the middle of a shout or
yell, and become contemplative. one day, Traddles (the most
unfortunate boy in the world) break that window accidentally, with
a ball. I shudder at this moment with the tremendous sensation of
see it do, and feel that the ball have bound on to Mr.
Creakle's sacred head.
poor traddle! in a tight sky-blue suit that make his arm and
leg like german sausage, or roly-poly pudding, he be the
merry and most miserable of all the boy. he be always be
can - I think he be can every day that half-year, except one
holiday Monday when he be only ruler'd on both hand - and be
always go to write to his uncle about it, and never do. after
lay his head on the desk for a little while, he would cheer up,
somehow, begin to laugh again, and draw skeleton all over his
slate, before his eye be dry. I use at first to wonder what
comfort traddle find in draw skeleton; and for some time
look upon he as a sort of hermit, who remind himself by those
symbol of mortality that can couldnot last for ever. but I
believe he only do it because they be easy, and donot want any
feature.
he be very honourable, traddle be, and hold it as a solemn duty
in the boy to stand by one another. he suffer for this on
several occasion; and particularly once, when Steerforth laugh
in church, and the Beadle think it be traddle, and take he
out. I see he now, go away in custody, despise by the
congregation. he never say who be the real offender, though he
smart for it next day, and be imprison so many hour that he
come forth with a whole churchyard-full of skeleton swarm all
over his Latin Dictionary. but he have his reward. Steerforth say
there be nothing of the sneak in traddle, and we all feel that to
be the high praise. for my part, I could have go through a
good deal (though I be much less brave than traddle, and nothing
like so old) to have win such a recompense.
to see Steerforth walk to church before we, arm-in-arm with Miss
Creakle, be one of the great sight of my life. I donot think
Miss Creakle equal to little Em'ly in point of beauty, and I donot
love she (I donot dare); but I think she a young lady of
extraordinary attraction, and in point of gentility not to be
surpass. when Steerforth, in white trouser, carry her parasol
for she, I feel proud to know he; and believe that she could not
choose but adore he with all her heart. Mr. Sharp and Mr. Mell
be both notable personage in my eye; but Steerforth be to they
what the sun be to two star.
Steerforth continue his protection of I, and prove a very useful
friend; since nobody dare to annoy one whom he honour with his
countenance. he couldnot - or at all event he donot - defend I
from Mr. Creakle, who be very severe with I; but whenever I have
be treat bad than usual, he always tell I that I want a
little of his pluck, and that he wouldnot have stand it himself;
which I feel he intend for encouragement, and consider to be
very kind of he. there be one advantage, and only one that I
know of, in Mr. Creakle's severity. he find my placard in his way
when he come up or down behind the form on which I sit, and want
to make a cut at I in pass; for this reason it be soon take
off, and I see it no more.
an accidental circumstance cement the intimacy between Steerforth
and I, in a manner that inspire I with great pride and
satisfaction, though it sometimes lead to inconvenience. it
happen on one occasion, when he be do I the honour of
talk to I in the playground, that I hazard the observation
that something or somebody - I forget what now - be like something
or somebody in Peregrine Pickle. he say nothing at the time; but
when I be go to bed at night, ask I if I have get that book?
I tell he no, and explain how it be that I have read it, and all
those other book of which I have make mention.
'and do you recollect they?' Steerforth say.
'oh yes,' I reply; I have a good memory, and I believe I
recollect they very well.
'then I tell you what, young copperfield,' say Steerforth, 'you
shall tell them to I. I cannot get to sleep very early at night,
and I generally wake rather early in the morning. wewill go over
them one after another. wewill make some regular Arabian Nights of
it.'
I feel extremely flatter by this arrangement, and we commence
carry it into execution that very evening. what ravage I
commit on my favourite author in the course of my
interpretation of they, I be not in a condition to say, and should
be very unwilling to know; but I have a profound faith in they, and
I have, to the good of my belief, a simple, earnest manner of
narrate what I do narrate; and these quality go a long way.
the drawback be, that I be often sleepy at night, or out of
spirit and indispose to resume the story; and then it be rather
hard work, and it must be do; for to disappoint or to displease
Steerforth be of course out of the question. in the morning, too,
when I feel weary, and should have enjoy another hour's repose
very much, it be a tiresome thing to be rouse, like the Sultana
Scheherazade, and force into a long story before the get-up
bell ring; but Steerforth be resolute; and as he explain to I,
in return, my sum and exercise, and anything in my task that be
too hard for I, I be no loser by the transaction. let I do
myself justice, however. I be move by no interested or selfish
motive, nor be I move by fear of he. I admire and love he,
and his approval be return enough. it be so precious to I that
I look back on these trifle, now, with an aching heart.
Steerforth be considerate, too; and show his consideration, in
one particular instance, in an unflinche manner that be a little
tantalizing, I suspect, to poor traddle and the rest. Peggotty's
promise letter - what a comfortable letter it be! - arrive
before 'the half' be many week old; and with it a cake in a
perfect nest of orange, and two bottle of cowslip wine. this
treasure, as in duty bind, I lay at the foot of Steerforth, and
beg he to dispense.
'now, Iwill tell you what, young copperfield,' say he: 'the wine
shall be keep to wet your whistle when you be story-telling.'
I blush at the idea, and beg he, in my modesty, not to think
of it. but he say he have observe I be sometimes hoarse - a
little roopy be his exact expression - and it should be, every
drop, devote to the purpose he have mention. accordingly, it be
lock up in his box, and draw off by himself in a phial, and
administer to I through a piece of quill in the cork, when I be
suppose to be in want of a restorative. sometimes, to make it a
more sovereign specific, he be so kind as to squeeze orange juice
into it, or to stir it up with ginger, or dissolve a peppermint
drop in it; and although I cannot assert that the flavour be
improve by these experiment, or that it be exactly the compound
one would have choose for a stomachic, the last thing at night and
the first thing in the morning, I drink it gratefully and be very
sensible of his attention.
we seem, to I, to have be month over Peregrine, and month more
over the other story. the institution never flag for want of
a story, I be certain; and the wine last out almost as well as
the matter. poor traddle - I never think of that boy but with a
strange disposition to laugh, and with tear in my eye - be a
sort of chorus, in general; and affect to be convulse with mirth
at the comic part, and to be overcome with fear when there be any
passage of an alarming character in the narrative. this rather put
I out, very often. it be a great jest of his, I recollect, to
pretend that he couldnot keep his tooth from chattering, whenever
mention be make of an Alguazill in connexion with the adventure
of Gil Blas; and I remember that when Gil Blas meet the captain of
the robber in Madrid, this unlucky joker counterfeit such an
ague of terror, that he be overhear by Mr. Creakle, who be
prowl about the passage, and handsomely flog for disorderly
conduct in the bedroom.
whatever I have within I that be romantic and dreamy, be
encourage by so much story-telling in the dark; and in that
respect the pursuit may not have be very profitable to I. but
the be cherish as a kind of playthe in my room, and the
consciousness that this accomplishment of mine be bruit about
among the boy, and attract a good deal of notice to I though I
be the young there, stimulate I to exertion. in a school
carry on by sheer cruelty, whether it be preside over by a dunce
or not, there be not likely to be much learn. I believe our boy
be, generally, as ignorant a set as any schoolboy in existence;
they be too much troubled and knock about to learn; they could
no more do that to advantage, than any one can do anything to
advantage in a life of constant misfortune, torment, and worry.
but my little vanity, and Steerforth's help, urge I on somehow;
and without save I from much, if anything, in the way of
punishment, make I, for the time I be there, an exception to the
general body, insomuch that I do steadily pick up some crumb of
knowledge.
in this I be much assist by Mr. Mell, who have a liking for I
that I be grateful to remember. it always give I pain to observe
that Steerforth treat he with systematic disparagement, and
seldom lose an occasion of wound his feeling, or induce
other to do so. this trouble I the more for a long time,
because I have soon tell Steerforth, from whom I could no more keep
such a secret, than I could keep a cake or any other tangible
possession, about the two old woman Mr. Mell have take I to see;
and I be always afraid that Steerforth would let it out, and twit
he with it.
we little thought, any one of we, I dare say, when I eat my
breakfast that first morning, and go to sleep under the shadow of
the peacock's feather to the sound of the flute, what consequence
would come of the introduction into those alm-house of my
insignificant person. but the visit have its unforeseen
consequence; and of a serious sort, too, in their way.
one day when Mr. Creakle keep the house from indisposition, which
naturally diffuse a lively joy through the school, there be a
good deal of noise in the course of the morning's work. the great
relief and satisfaction experience by the boy make they difficult
to manage; and though the dread Tungay bring his wooden leg in
twice or thrice, and take note of the principal offender' name,
no great impression be make by it, as they be pretty sure of
get into trouble tomorrow, do what they would, and think it
wise, no doubt, to enjoy themselves today.
it be, properly, a half-holiday; be Saturday. but as the noise
in the playground would have disturb Mr. Creakle, and the weather
be not favourable for go out walk, we be order into
school in the afternoon, and set some light task than usual,
which be make for the occasion. it be the day of the week on
which Mr. Sharp go out to get his wig curl; so Mr. Mell, who
always do the drudgery, whatever it be, keep school by himself.
if I could associate the idea of a bull or a bear with anyone so
mild as Mr. Mell, I should think of he, in connexion with that
afternoon when the uproar be at its height, as of one of those
animal, bait by a thousand dog. I recall he bend his
aching head, support on his bony hand, over the book on his desk,
and wretchedly endeavour to get on with his tiresome work,
amidst an uproar that might have make the Speaker of the House of
Commons giddy. boy start in and out of their place, play at
puss in the corner with other boy; there be laugh boy,
singing boy, talk boy, dance boy, howl boy; boy
shuffle with their foot, boy whirl about he, grin, make
face, mimic he behind his back and before his eye; mimic
his poverty, his boot, his coat, his mother, everything belong
to he that they should have have consideration for.
'silence!' cry Mr. Mell, suddenly rise up, and strike his
desk with the book. 'what do this mean! itbe impossible to bear
it. itbe madden. how can you do it to I, boy?'
it be my book that he strike his desk with; and as I stand beside
he, follow his eye as it glance round the room, I see the boy
all stop, some suddenly surprised, some half afraid, and some sorry
perhaps.
Steerforth's place be at the bottom of the school, at the opposite
end of the long room. he be lounge with his back against the
wall, and his hand in his pocket, and look at Mr. Mell with his
mouth shut up as if he be whistle, when Mr. Mell look at he.
'Silence, Mr. Steerforth!' say Mr. Mell.
'silence yourself,' say Steerforth, turn red. 'whom be you
talk to?'
'sit down,' say Mr. Mell.
'sit down yourself,' say Steerforth, 'and mind your business.'
there be a titter, and some applause; but Mr. Mell be so white,
that silence immediately succeed; and one boy, who have dart out
behind he to imitate his mother again, change his mind, and
pretend to want a pen mend.
'if you think, Steerforth,' say Mr. Mell, 'that I be not
acquaint with the power you can establish over any mind here' -
he lay his hand, without consider what he do (as I suppose),
upon my head - 'or that I have not observe you, within a few
minute, urge your junior on to every sort of outrage against
I, you be mistaken.'
'I donot give myself the trouble of think at all about you,'
say Steerforth, coolly; 'so Ibe not mistaken, as it happen.'
'and when you make use of your position of favouritism here, sir,'
pursue Mr. Mell, with his lip tremble very much, 'to insult a
gentleman -'
'a what? - where be he?' say Steerforth.
here somebody cry out, 'Shame, J. Steerforth! too bad!' it be
traddle; whom Mr. Mell instantly discomfit by bid he hold
his tongue.
- 'to insult one who be not fortunate in life, sir, and who never
give you the least offence, and the many reason for not insult
whom you be old enough and wise enough to understand,' say Mr.
Mell, with his lip tremble more and more, 'you commit a mean and
base action. you can sit down or stand up as you please, sir.
copperfield, go on.'
'Young Copperfield,' say Steerforth, come forward up the room,
'stop a bit. I tell you what, Mr. Mell, once for all. when you
take the liberty of call I mean or base, or anything of that
sort, you be an impudent beggar. you be always a beggar, you
know; but when you do that, you be an impudent beggar.'
I be not clear whether he be go to strike Mr. Mell, or Mr. Mell
be go to strike he, or there be any such intention on either
side. I see a rigidity come upon the whole school as if they have
be turn into stone, and find Mr. Creakle in the midst of we,
with Tungay at his side, and Mrs. and Miss Creakle look in at
the door as if they be frightened. Mr. Mell, with his elbow on
his desk and his face in his hand, sit, for some moment, quite
still.
'Mr. Mell,' say Mr. Creakle, shake he by the arm; and his
whisper be so audible now, that Tungay feel it unnecessary to
repeat his word; 'you have not forget yourself, I hope?'
'no, sir, no,' return the Master, show his face, and shake
his head, and rub his hand in great agitation. 'no, sir. no.
I have remember myself, I - no, Mr. Creakle, I have not forget
myself, I - I have remember myself, sir. I - I - could wish you
have remember I a little soon, Mr. Creakle. it - it - would
have be more kind, sir, more just, sir. it would have save I
something, sir.'
Mr. Creakle, look hard at Mr. Mell, put his hand on Tungay's
shoulder, and get his foot upon the form close by, and sit upon the
desk. after still look hard at Mr. Mell from his throne, as he
shake his head, and rub his hand, and remain in the same
state of agitation, Mr. Creakle turn to Steerforth, and say:
'now, sir, as he donot condescend to tell I, what be this?'
Steerforth evade the question for a little while; look in scorn
and anger on his opponent, and remain silent. I could not help
think even in that interval, I remember, what a noble fellow he
be in appearance, and how homely and plain Mr. Mell look opposed
to he.
'what do he mean by talk about favourite, then?' say
Steerforth at length.
'Favourites?' repeat Mr. Creakle, with the vein in his forehead
swell quickly. 'who talk about favourite?'
'he do,' say Steerforth.
'and pray, what do you mean by that, sir?' demand Mr. Creakle,
turn angrily on his assistant.
'I mean, Mr. Creakle,' he return in a low voice, 'as I say;
that no pupil have a right to avail himself of his position of
favouritism to degrade I.'
'to degrade you?' say Mr. Creakle. 'my star! but give I leave
to ask you, Mr. What's-your-name'; and here Mr. Creakle fold his
arm, cane and all, upon his chest, and make such a knot of his
brow that his little eye be hardly visible below they;
'whether, when you talk about favourite, you show proper respect
to I? to I, sir,' say Mr. Creakle, dart his head at he
suddenly, and draw it back again, 'the principal of this
establishment, and your employer.'
'it be not judicious, sir, I be willing to admit,' say Mr. Mell.
'I should not have do so, if I have be cool.'
here Steerforth strike in.
'then he say I be mean, and then he say I be base, and then I
call he a beggar. if I have be cool, perhaps I shouldnot have
call he a beggar. but I do, and I be ready to take the
consequence of it.'
without consider, perhaps, whether there be any consequence
to be take, I feel quite in a glow at this gallant speech. it
make an impression on the boy too, for there be a low stir among
they, though no one speak a word.
'I be surprised, Steerforth - although your candour do you
honour,' say Mr. Creakle, 'do you honour, certainly - I be
surprised, Steerforth, I must say, that you should attach such an
epithet to any person employ and pay in Salem House, sir.'
Steerforth give a short laugh.
'thatbe not an answer, sir,' say Mr. Creakle, 'to my remark. I
expect more than that from you, Steerforth.'
if Mr. Mell look homely, in my eye, before the handsome boy, it
would be quite impossible to say how homely Mr. Creakle look.
'let he deny it,' say Steerforth.
'deny that he be a beggar, Steerforth?' cry Mr. Creakle. 'why,
where do he go a-beg?'
'if he be not a beggar himself, his near relation's one,' say
Steerforth. 'itbe all the same.'
he glance at I, and Mr. Mell's hand gently pat I upon the
shoulder. I look up with a flush upon my face and remorse in my
heart, but Mr. Mell's eye be fix on Steerforth. he continue
to pat I kindly on the shoulder, but he look at he.
'since you expect I, Mr. Creakle, to justify myself,' say
Steerforth, 'and to say what I mean, - what I have to say be, that
his mother live on charity in an alms-house.'
Mr. Mell still look at he, and still pat I kindly on the
shoulder, and say to himself, in a whisper, if I hear right:
'yes, I think so.'
Mr. Creakle turn to his assistant, with a severe frown and
laboured politeness:
'now, you hear what this gentleman say, Mr. Mell. have the
goodness, if you please, to set he right before the assemble
school.'
'he be right, sir, without correction,' return Mr. Mell, in the
midst of a dead silence; 'what he have say be true.'
'be so good then as declare publicly, will you,' say Mr. Creakle,
put his head on one side, and roll his eye round the
school, 'whether it ever come to my knowledge until this moment?'
'I believe not directly,' he return.
'why, you know not,' say Mr. Creakle. 'donot you, man?'
'I apprehend you never suppose my worldly circumstance to be very
good,' reply the assistant. 'you know what my position be, and
always have be, here.'
'I apprehend, if you come to that,' say Mr. Creakle, with his
vein swell again big than ever, 'that youhave be in a wrong
position altogether, and mistook this for a charity school. Mr.
Mell, wewill part, if you please. the soon the well.'
'there be no time,' answer Mr. Mell, rise, 'like the present.'
'Sir, to you!' say Mr. Creakle.
'I take my leave of you, Mr. Creakle, and all of you,' say Mr.
Mell, glance round the room, and again pat I gently on the
shoulder. 'James Steerforth, the good wish I can leave you be
that you may come to be ashamed of what you have do today. at
present I would prefer to see you anything rather than a friend, to
I, or to anyone in whom I feel an interest.'
once more he lay his hand upon my shoulder; and then take his
flute and a few book from his desk, and leave the key in it for
his successor, he go out of the school, with his property under
his arm. Mr. Creakle then make a speech, through Tungay, in which
he thank Steerforth for assert (though perhaps too warmly) the
independence and respectability of Salem House; and which he wind
up by shake hand with Steerforth, while we give three cheer -
I do not quite know what for, but I suppose for Steerforth, and
so join in they ardently, though I feel miserable. Mr. Creakle
then can Tommy Traddles for be discover in tear, instead of
cheer, on account of Mr. Mell's departure; and go back to his
sofa, or his bed, or wherever he have come from.
we be leave to ourselves now, and look very blank, I recollect,
on one another. for myself, I feel so much self-reproach and
contrition for my part in what have happen, that nothing would
have enable I to keep back my tear but the fear that Steerforth,
who often look at I, I see, might think it unfriendly - or, I
should rather say, consider our relative age, and the feeling
with which I regard he, undutiful - if I show the emotion
which distress I. he be very angry with traddle, and say he
be glad he have catch it.
Poor traddle, who have pass the stage of lie with his head upon
the desk, and be relieve himself as usual with a burst of
skeleton, say he donot care. Mr. Mell be ill-use.
'who have ill-use he, you girl?' say Steerforth.
'why, you have,' return traddle.
'what have I do?' say Steerforth.
'what have you do?' retort traddle. 'hurt his feeling, and
lose he his situation.'
'his feeling?' repeat Steerforth disdainfully. 'his feeling
will soon get the well of it, Iwill be bind. his feeling be
not like your, Miss Traddles. as to his situation - which be a
precious one, benot it? - do you suppose I be not go to write
home, and take care that he get some money? polly?'
we think this intention very noble in Steerforth, whose mother
be a widow, and rich, and would do almost anything, it be say,
that he ask she. we be all extremely glad to see traddle so
put down, and exalt Steerforth to the sky: especially when he
tell we, as he condescend to do, that what he have do have be
do expressly for we, and for our cause; and that he have confer
a great boon upon we by unselfishly do it.
but I must say that when I be go on with a story in the dark
that night, Mr. Mell's old flute seem more than once to sound
mournfully in my ear; and that when at last Steerforth be tired,
and I lie down in my bed, I fancy it play so sorrowfully
somewhere, that I be quite wretched.
I soon forget he in the contemplation of Steerforth, who, in an
easy amateur way, and without any book (he seem to I to know
everything by heart), take some of his class until a new master
be find. the new master come from a grammar school; and before
he enter on his duty, din in the parlour one day, to be
introduce to Steerforth. Steerforth approve of he highly, and
tell we he be a Brick. without exactly understand what learn
distinction be mean by this, I respect he greatly for it, and
have no doubt whatever of his superior knowledge: though he never
take the pain with I - not that I be anybody - that Mr. Mell have
take.
there be only one other event in this half-year, out of the daily
school-life, that make an impression upon I which still survive.
it survive for many reason.
one afternoon, when we be all harass into a state of dire
confusion, and Mr. Creakle be lay about he dreadfully, Tungay
come in, and call out in his usual strong way: 'visitor for
Copperfield!'
a few word be interchange between he and Mr. Creakle, as, who
the visitor be, and what room they be to be show into; and
then I, who have, accord to custom, stand up on the announcement
be make, and feel quite faint with astonishment, be tell to go
by the back stair and get a clean frill on, before I repair to
the dining-room. these order I obey, in such a flutter and
hurry of my young spirit as I have never know before; and when I
get to the parlour door, and the thought come into my head that it
might be my mother - I have only thought of Mr. or Miss Murdstone
until then - I draw back my hand from the lock, and stop to have
a sob before I go in.
at first I see nobody; but feel a pressure against the door, I
look round it, and there, to my amazement, be Mr. Peggotty and
Ham, duck at I with their hat, and squeeze one another
against the wall. I could not help laugh; but it be much more
in the pleasure of see they, than at the appearance they make.
we shake hand in a very cordial way; and I laugh and laugh,
until I pull out my pocket-handkerchief and wipe my eye.
Mr. Peggotty (who never shut his mouth once, I remember, during the
visit) show great concern when he see I do this, and nudge Ham
to say something.
'cheer up, Mas'r Davy bor'!' say Ham, in his simper way. 'why,
how you have grow!'
'be I grow?' I say, dry my eye. I be not cry at anything
in particular that I know of; but somehow it make I cry, to see
old friend.
'grow, mas'r Davy bor'? benot he grow!' say Ham.
'benot he grow!' say Mr. Peggotty.
they make I laugh again by laugh at each other, and then we all
three laugh until I be in danger of cry again.
'do you know how mama be, Mr. Peggotty?' I say. 'and how my dear,
dear, old Peggotty be?'
'Oncommon,' say Mr. Peggotty.
'and little Em'ly, and Mrs. Gummidge?'
'on - common,' say Mr. Peggotty.
there be a silence. Mr. Peggotty, to relieve it, take two
prodigious lobster, and an enormous crab, and a large canvas bag
of shrimp, out of his pocket, and pile they up in Ham's arm.
'you see,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'know as you be partial to a
little relish with your wittle when you be along with we, we take
the liberty. the old Mawther bile them, she do. Mrs. Gummidge
bile them. yes,' say Mr. Peggotty, slowly, who I think appear
to stick to the subject on account of have no other subject
ready, 'Mrs. Gummidge, I do assure you, she bile them.'
I express my thank; and Mr. Peggotty, after look at Ham, who
stand smile sheepishly over the shellfish, without make any
attempt to help he, say:
'we come, you see, the wind and tide making in our favour, in one
of our Yarmouth lug to Gravesen'. my sister she write to I the
name of this here place, and write to I as if ever I chance to
come to Gravesen', I be to come over and inquire for Mas'r Davy
and give her dooty, humbly wish he well and reporting of the
fam'ly as they be oncommon toe-be-sure. little Em'ly, you see,
shewill write to my sister when I go back, as I see you and as you
be similarly oncommon, and so we make it quite a merry-
go-rounder.'
I be oblige to consider a little before I understand what Mr.
Peggotty mean by this figure, expressive of a complete circle of
intelligence. I then thank he heartily; and say, with a
consciousness of redden, that I suppose little Em'ly be
alter too, since we use to pick up shell and pebble on the
beach?
'shebe get to be a woman, thatbe wot shebe get to be,' say
Mr. Peggotty. 'ask HIM.'
he mean Ham, who beam with delight and assent over the bag of
shrimp.
'her pretty face!' say Mr. Peggotty, with his own shin like a
light.
'her learning!' say Ham.
'her writing!' say Mr. Peggotty. 'why itbe as black as jet! and
so large it be, you might see it anywhere.'
it be perfectly delightful to behold with what enthusiasm Mr.
Peggotty become inspire when he think of his little favourite.
he stand before I again, his bluff hairy face irradiate with a
joyful love and pride, for which I can find no description. his
honest eye fire up, and sparkle, as if their depth be stir
by something bright. his broad chest heave with pleasure. his
strong loose hand clench themselves, in his earnestness; and he
emphasize what he say with a right arm that show, in my pigmy
view, like a sledge-hammer.
Ham be quite as earnest as he. I dare say they would have say
much more about she, if they have not be abash by the unexpected
come in of Steerforth, who, see I in a corner speak with
two stranger, stop in a song he be sing, and say: 'I
donot know you be here, young Copperfield!' (for it be not the
usual visit room) and cross by we on his way out.
I be not sure whether it be in the pride of have such a friend
as Steerforth, or in the desire to explain to he how I come to
have such a friend as Mr. Peggotty, that I call to he as he be
go away. but I say, modestly - Good Heaven, how it all come
back to I this long time afterwards! -
'donot go, Steerforth, if you please. these be two Yarmouth
boatman - very kind, good people - who be relation of my nurse,
and have come from Gravesend to see I.'
'aye, aye?' say Steerforth, return. 'I be glad to see they.
how be you both?'
there be an ease in his manner - a gay and light manner it be,
but not swagger - which I still believe to have bear a kind of
enchantment with it. I still believe he, in virtue of this
carriage, his animal spirit, his delightful voice, his handsome
face and figure, and, for aught I know, of some inborn power of
attraction besides (which I think a few people possess), to have
carry a spell with he to which it be a natural weakness to
yield, and which not many person could withstand. I could not but
see how pleased they be with he, and how they seem to open
their heart to he in a moment.
'you must let they know at home, if you please, Mr. Peggotty,' I
say, 'when that letter be send, that Mr. Steerforth be very kind
to I, and that I donot know what I should ever do here without
he.'
'nonsense!' say Steerforth, laugh. 'you mustnot tell they
anything of the sort.'
'and if Mr. Steerforth ever come into Norfolk or Suffolk, Mr.
Peggotty,' I say, 'while I be there, you may depend upon it I
shall bring he to Yarmouth, if he will let I, to see your house.
you never see such a good house, Steerforth. itbe make out of a
boat!'
'make out of a boat, be it?' say Steerforth. 'itbe the right sort
of a house for such a thorough-build boatman.'
'so 'tis, sir, so 'tis, sir,' say Ham, grin. 'yoube right,
young gen'l'm'n! mas'r Davy bor', gen'l'm'n's right. a thorough-
build boatman! Hor, hor! thatbe what he be, too!'
Mr. Peggotty be no less pleased than his nephew, though his
modesty forbid he to claim a personal compliment so vociferously.
'well, sir,' he say, bow and chuckle, and tuck in the end
of his neckerchief at his breast: 'I thankee, sir, I thankee! I do
my endeavour in my line of life, sir.'
'the good of man can do no more, Mr. Peggotty,' say Steerforth.
he have get his name already.
'Iwill pound it, itbe wot you do yourself, sir,' say Mr. Peggotty,
shake his head, 'and wot you do well - right well! I thankee,
sir. Ibe obleege to you, sir, for your welcome manner of I.
Ibe rough, sir, but Ibe ready - least way, I hope Ibe ready, you
unnerstand. my house benot much for to see, sir, but itbe hearty
at your service if ever you should come along with Mas'r Davy to
see it. Ibe a reg'lar dodman, I be,' say Mr. Peggotty, by which
he mean snail, and this be in allusion to his be slow to go,
for he have attempt to go after every sentence, and have somehow or
other come back again; 'but I wish you both well, and I wish you
happy!'
Ham echo this sentiment, and we part with they in the heartiest
manner. I be almost tempt that evening to tell Steerforth about
pretty little Em'ly, but I be too timid of mention her name,
and too much afraid of his laugh at I. I remember that I
think a good deal, and in an uneasy sort of way, about Mr.
Peggotty have say that she be get on to be a woman; but I
decide that be nonsense.
we transport the shellfish, or the 'relish' as Mr. Peggotty have
modestly call it, up into our room unobserved, and make a great
supper that evening. but traddle couldnot get happily out of it.
he be too unfortunate even to come through a supper like anybody
else. he be take ill in the night - quite prostrate he be - in
consequence of Crab; and after be drug with black draught
and blue pill, to an extent which Demple (whose father be a
doctor) say be enough to undermine a horse's constitution,
receive a can and six chapter of Greek Testament for refuse
to confess.
the rest of the half-year be a jumble in my recollection of the
daily strife and struggle of our life; of the wan summer and
the change season; of the frosty morning when we be ring out
of bed, and the cold, cold smell of the dark night when we be
ring into bed again; of the evening schoolroom dimly light and
indifferently warm, and the morning schoolroom which be nothing
but a great shivering-machine; of the alternation of boil beef
with roast beef, and boil mutton with roast mutton; of clod of
bread-and-butter, dog's-eare lesson-book, crack slate,
tear-blot copy-book, caning, rulering, hair-cutting, rainy
Sundays, suet-pudding, and a dirty atmosphere of ink, surround
all.
I well remember though, how the distant idea of the holiday, after
seem for an immense time to be a stationary speck, begin to come
towards we, and to grow and grow. how from counting month, we
come to week, and then to day; and how I then begin to be afraid
that I should not be send for and when I learn from Steerforth
that I have be send for, and be certainly to go home, have dim
foreboding that I might break my leg first. how the breaking-up
day change its place fast, at last, from the week after next to
next week, this week, the day after tomorrow, tomorrow, today,
tonight - when I be inside the Yarmouth mail, and go home.
I have many a broken sleep inside the Yarmouth mail, and many an
incoherent dream of all these thing. but when I awake at
interval, the ground outside the window be not the playground of
Salem House, and the sound in my ear be not the sound of Mr.
Creakle give it to traddle, but the sound of the coachman
touch up the horse.
CHAPTER 8
MY holiday. especially one HAPPY AFTERNOON
when we arrive before day at the inn where the mail stop, which
be not the inn where my friend the waiter live, I be show up to
a nice little bedroom, with dolphin paint on the door. very cold
I be, I know, notwithstanding the hot tea they have give I before
a large fire downstairs; and very glad I be to turn into the
Dolphin's bed, pull the dolphin's blanket round my head, and go to
sleep.
Mr. Barkis the carrier be to call for I in the morning at nine
o'clock. I get up at eight, a little giddy from the shortness of
my night's rest, and be ready for he before the appoint time.
he receive I exactly as if not five minute have elapse since we
be last together, and I have only be into the hotel to get
change for sixpence, or something of that sort.
as soon as I and my box be in the cart, and the carrier seat,
the lazy horse walk away with we all at his accustomed pace.
'you look very well, Mr. Barkis,' I say, think he would like to
know it.
Mr. Barkis rub his cheek with his cuff, and then look at his
cuff as if he expect to find some of the bloom upon it; but make
no other acknowledgement of the compliment.
'I give your message, Mr. Barkis,' I say: 'I write to Peggotty.'
'ah!' say Mr. Barkis.
Mr. Barkis seem gruff, and answer drily.
'benot it right, Mr. Barkis?' I ask, after a little hesitation.
'why, no,' say Mr. Barkis.
'not the message?'
'the message be right enough, perhaps,' say Mr. Barkis; 'but it
come to an end there.'
not understand what he mean, I repeat inquisitively: 'come to
an end, Mr. Barkis?'
'nothing come of it,' he explain, look at I sideways. 'no
answer.'
'there be an answer expect, be there, Mr. Barkis?' say I,
open my eye. for this be a new light to I.
'when a man say hebe willin',' say Mr. Barkis, turn his glance
slowly on I again, 'itbe as much as to say, that man's a-waitin'
for a answer.'
'well, Mr. Barkis?'
'well,' say Mr. Barkis, carry his eye back to his horse's
ear; 'that manbe be a-waitin' for a answer ever since.'
'have you tell she so, Mr. Barkis?'
'no - no,' growl Mr. Barkis, reflect about it. 'I benot get
no call to go and tell she so. I never say six word to she
myself, I benot a-go to tell she so.'
'would you like I to do it, Mr. Barkis?' say I, doubtfully.
'you might tell she, if you would,' say Mr. Barkis, with another
slow look at I, 'that Barkis be a-waitin' for a answer. say you
- what name be it?'
'her name?'
'ah!' say Mr. Barkis, with a nod of his head.
'Peggotty.'
'Chrisen name? or nat'ral name?' say Mr. Barkis.
'oh, itbe not her christian name. her christian name be Clara.'
'be it though?' say Mr. Barkis.
he seem to find an immense fund of reflection in this
circumstance, and sit ponder and inwardly whistle for some
time.
'well!' he resume at length. 'say you, "Peggotty! Barkis be
waitin' for a answer." say she, perhaps, "answer to what?" say
you, "to what I tell you." "what be that?" say she. "Barkis be
willin'," say you.'
this extremely artful suggestion Mr. Barkis accompany with a
nudge of his elbow that give I quite a stitch in my side. after
that, he slouch over his horse in his usual manner; and make no
other reference to the subject except, half an hour afterwards,
take a piece of chalk from his pocket, and write up, inside the
tilt of the cart, 'Clara Peggotty' - apparently as a private
memorandum.
ah, what a strange feeling it be to be go home when it be not
home, and to find that every object I look at, remind I of the
happy old home, which be like a dream I could never dream again!
the day when my mother and I and Peggotty be all in all to one
another, and there be no one to come between we, rise up before I
so sorrowfully on the road, that I be not sure I be glad to be
there - not sure but that I would rather have remain away, and
forget it in Steerforth's company. but there I be; and soon I
be at our house, where the bare old elm-tree wring their many
hand in the bleak wintry air, and shred of the old rooks'-nests
drift away upon the wind.
the carrier put my box down at the garden-gate, and leave I. I
walk along the path towards the house, glance at the window,
and fear at every step to see Mr. Murdstone or Miss Murdstone
lower out of one of they. no face appear, however; and be
come to the house, and know how to open the door, before dark,
without knock, I go in with a quiet, timid step.
God know how infantine the memory may have be, that be awaken
within I by the sound of my mother's voice in the old parlour,
when I set foot in the hall. she be sing in a low tone. I
think I must have lain in her arm, and hear she singing so to I
when I be but a baby. the strain be new to I, and yet it be so
old that it fill my heart brim-full; like a friend come back from
a long absence.
I believe, from the solitary and thoughtful way in which my mother
murmur her song, that she be alone. and I go softly into the
room. she be sit by the fire, suckle an infant, whose tiny
hand she hold against her neck. her eye be look down upon
its face, and she sit sing to it. I be so far right, that she
have no other companion.
I speak to she, and she start, and cry out. but see I, she
call I her dear Davy, her own boy! and come half across the
room to meet I, kneel down upon the ground and kiss I, and
lay my head down on her bosom near the little creature that be
nestle there, and put its hand to my lip.
I wish I have die. I wish I have die then, with that feeling in my
heart! I should have be more fit for Heaven than I ever have
be since.
'he be your brother,' say my mother, fondle I. 'Davy, my
pretty boy! my poor child!' then she kiss I more and more, and
clasp I round the neck. this she be do when Peggotty come
run in, and bounce down on the ground beside we, and go mad
about we both for a quarter of an hour.
it seem that I have not be expect so soon, the carrier be
much before his usual time. it seem, too, that Mr. and Miss
Murdstone have go out upon a visit in the neighbourhood, and would
not return before night. I have never hop for this. I have never
think it possible that we three could be together undisturbed,
once more; and I feel, for the time, as if the old day be come
back.
we din together by the fireside. Peggotty be in attendance to
wait upon we, but my mother wouldnot let she do it, and make she
dine with we. I have my own old plate, with a brown view of a
man-of-war in full sail upon it, which Peggotty have hoard
somewhere all the time I have be away, and would not have have
break, she say, for a hundred pound. I have my own old mug with
David on it, and my own old little knife and fork that wouldnot
cut.
while we be at table, I think it a favourable occasion to tell
Peggotty about Mr. Barkis, who, before I have finish what I have to
tell she, begin to laugh, and throw her apron over her face.
'Peggotty,' say my mother. 'whatbe the matter?'
Peggotty only laugh the more, and hold her apron tight over she
face when my mother try to pull it away, and sit as if her head
be in a bag.
'what be you do, you stupid creature?' say my mother,
laugh.
'oh, drat the man!' cry Peggotty. 'he want to marry I.'
'it would be a very good match for you; wouldnot it?' say my
mother.
'oh! I donot know,' say Peggotty. 'donot ask I. I wouldnot
have he if he be make of gold. nor I wouldnot have anybody.'
'then, why donot you tell he so, you ridiculous thing?' say my
mother.
'tell he so,' retort Peggotty, look out of her apron. 'he
have never say a word to I about it. he know well. if he be
to make so bold as say a word to I, I should slap his face.'
her own be as red as ever I see it, or any other face, I think;
but she only cover it again, for a few moment at a time, when
she be take with a violent fit of laughter; and after two or
three of those attack, go on with her dinner.
I remark that my mother, though she smile when Peggotty look
at she, become more serious and thoughtful. I have see at first
that she be change. her face be very pretty still, but it
look careworn, and too delicate; and her hand be so thin and
white that it seem to I to be almost transparent. but the
change to which I now refer be superadded to this: it be in her
manner, which become anxious and fluttered. at last she say,
put out her hand, and lay it affectionately on the hand of
her old servant,
'peggotty, dear, you be not go to be marry?'
'Me, ma'am?' return Peggotty, star. 'Lord bless you, no!'
'not just yet?' say my mother, tenderly.
'never!' cry Peggotty.
my mother take her hand, and say:
'donot leave I, Peggotty. stay with I. it will not be for long,
perhaps. what should I ever do without you!'
'I leave you, my precious!' cry Peggotty. 'not for all the
world and his wife. why, whatbe put that in your silly little
head?' - for Peggotty have be use of old to talk to my mother
sometimes like a child.
but my mother make no answer, except to thank she, and Peggotty
go run on in her own fashion.
'I leave you? I think I see myself. Peggotty go away from you?
I should like to catch she at it! no, no, no,' say Peggotty,
shake her head, and fold her arm; 'not she, my dear. it
benot that there benot some Cats that would be well enough please
if she do, but they sha'n't be pleased. they shall be aggravate.
Iwill stay with you till I be a cross cranky old woman. and when
Ibe too deaf, and too lame, and too blind, and too mumbly for want
of tooth, to be of any use at all, even to be find fault with,
than I shall go to my Davy, and ask he to take I in.'
'and, Peggotty,' say I, 'I shall be glad to see you, and Iwill make
you as welcome as a queen.'
'bless your dear heart!' cry Peggotty. 'I know you will!' and
she kiss I beforehand, in grateful acknowledgement of my
hospitality. after that, she cover her head up with her apron
again and have another laugh about Mr. Barkis. after that, she take
the baby out of its little cradle, and nurse it. after that, she
clear the dinner table; after that, come in with another cap on,
and her work-box, and the yard-measure, and the bit of wax-candle,
all just the same as ever.
we sit round the fire, and talk delightfully. I tell they what
a hard master Mr. Creakle be, and they pity I very much. I
tell they what a fine fellow Steerforth be, and what a patron of
mine, and Peggotty say she would walk a score of mile to see he.
I take the little baby in my arm when it be awake, and nurse it
lovingly. when it be asleep again, I creep close to my mother's
side accord to my old custom, break now a long time, and sit
with my arm embrace her waist, and my little red cheek on her
shoulder, and once more feel her beautiful hair droop over I -
like an angel's wing as I use to think, I recollect - and be very
happy indeed.
while I sit thus, look at the fire, and see picture in the
red-hot coal, I almost believe that I have never be away; that
Mr. and Miss Murdstone be such picture, and would vanish when
the fire get low; and that there be nothing real in all that I
remember, save my mother, Peggotty, and I.
Peggotty darn away at a stocking as long as she could see, and
then sit with it draw on her left hand like a glove, and her
needle in her right, ready to take another stitch whenever there
be a blaze. I cannot conceive whose stocking they can have be
that Peggotty be always darn, or where such an unfailing supply
of stocking in want of darning can have come from. from my
early infancy she seem to have be always employ in that
class of needlework, and never by any chance in any other.
'I wonder,' say Peggotty, who be sometimes seize with a fit of
wonder on some most unexpected topic, 'whatbe become of Davy's
great-aunt?'
'Lor, Peggotty!' observe my mother, rouse herself from a
reverie, 'what nonsense you talk!'
'well, but I really do wonder, ma'am,' say Peggotty.
'what can have put such a person in your head?' inquire my mother.
'be there nobody else in the world to come there?'
'I donot know how it be,' say Peggotty, 'unless itbe on account of
be stupid, but my head never can pick and choose its people.
they come and they go, and they donot come and they donot go, just
as they like. I wonder whatbe become of she?'
'how absurd you be, Peggotty!' return my mother. 'one would
suppose you want a second visit from she.'
'Lord forbid!' cry Peggotty.
'well then, donot talk about such uncomfortable thing, therebe a
good soul,' say my mother. 'Miss Betsey be shut up in her cottage
by the sea, no doubt, and will remain there. at all event, she be
not likely ever to trouble we again.'
'no!' muse Peggotty. 'no, that benot likely at all. - I wonder,
if she be to die, whether shewould leave Davy anything?'
'good gracious I, Peggotty,' return my mother, 'what a
nonsensical woman you be! when you know that she take offence at
the poor dear boybe ever be bear at all.'
'I suppose she wouldnot be incline to forgive he now,' hint
Peggotty.
'why should she be incline to forgive he now?' say my mother,
rather sharply.
'now that hebe get a brother, I mean,' say Peggotty.
my mother immediately begin to cry, and wonder how Peggotty dare
to say such a thing.
'as if this poor little innocent in its cradle have ever do any
harm to you or anybody else, you jealous thing!' say she. 'you
have much well go and marry Mr. Barkis, the carrier. why donot
you?'
'I should make Miss Murdstone happy, if I be to,' say Peggotty.
'what a bad disposition you have, Peggotty!' return my mother.
'you be as jealous of Miss Murdstone as it be possible for a
ridiculous creature to be. you want to keep the key yourself, and
give out all the thing, I suppose? I shouldnot be surprised if
you do. when you know that she only do it out of kindness and
the good intention! you know she do, Peggotty - you know it
well.'
Peggotty mutter something to the effect of 'bother the good
intention!' and something else to the effect that there be a
little too much of the good intention go on.
'I know what you mean, you cross thing,' say my mother. 'I
understand you, Peggotty, perfectly. you know I do, and I wonder
you donot colour up like fire. but one point at a time. Miss
Murdstone be the point now, Peggotty, and you sha'n't escape from
it. havenot you hear she say, over and over again, that she
think I be too thoughtless and too - a - a -'
'pretty,' suggest Peggotty.
'well,' return my mother, half laugh, 'and if she be so silly
as to say so, can I be blame for it?'
'no one say you can,' say Peggotty.
'no, I should hope not, indeed!' return my mother. 'havenot you
hear she say, over and over again, that on this account she wish
to spare I a great deal of trouble, which she think I be not
suit for, and which I really donot know myself that I be suit
for; and benot she up early and late, and go to and fro
continually - and donot she do all sort of thing, and grope
into all sort of place, coal-hole and pantry and I donot know
where, that cannot be very agreeable - and do you mean to insinuate
that there be not a sort of devotion in that?'
'I donot insinuate at all,' say Peggotty.
'you do, Peggotty,' return my mother. 'you never do anything
else, except your work. you be always insinuate. you revel in
it. and when you talk of Mr. Murdstone's good intention -'
'I never talk of them,' say Peggotty.
'no, Peggotty,' return my mother, 'but you insinuate. thatbe
what I tell you just now. thatbe the bad of you. you will
insinuate. I say, at the moment, that I understand you, and you
see I do. when you talk of Mr. Murdstone's good intention, and
pretend to slight they (for I donot believe you really do, in your
heart, Peggotty), you must be as well convinced as I be how good
they be, and how they actuate he in everything. if he seem to
have be at all stern with a certain person, Peggotty - you
understand, and so I be sure do Davy, that I be not allude to
anybody present - it be solely because he be satisfied that it be
for a certain person's benefit. he naturally love a certain
person, on my account; and act solely for a certain person's good.
he be well able to judge of it than I be; for I very well know
that I be a weak, light, girlish creature, and that he be a firm,
grave, serious man. and he take,' say my mother, with the tear
which be engender in her affectionate nature, steal down her
face, 'he take great pain with I; and I ought to be very
thankful to he, and very submissive to he even in my thought;
and when I be not, Peggotty, I worry and condemn myself, and feel
doubtful of my own heart, and donot know what to do.'
Peggotty sit with her chin on the foot of the stocking, look
silently at the fire.
'there, Peggotty,' say my mother, change her tone, 'donot let we
fall out with one another, for I couldnot bear it. you be my true
friend, I know, if I have any in the world. when I call you a
ridiculous creature, or a vexatious thing, or anything of that
sort, Peggotty, I only mean that you be my true friend, and always
have be, ever since the night when Mr. Copperfield first bring
I home here, and you come out to the gate to meet I.'
Peggotty be not slow to respond, and ratify the treaty of
friendship by give I one of her good hug. I think I have some
glimpse of the real character of this conversation at the time;
but I be sure, now, that the good creature originate it, and take
her part in it, merely that my mother might comfort herself with
the little contradictory summary in which she have indulge. the
design be efficacious; for I remember that my mother seem more
at ease during the rest of the evening, and that Peggotty observe
she less.
when we have have our tea, and the ash be throw up, and the
candle snuff, I read Peggotty a chapter out of the Crocodile
Book, in remembrance of old time - she take it out of her pocket:
I donot know whether she have keep it there ever since - and then we
talk about Salem House, which bring I round again to
Steerforth, who be my great subject. we be very happy; and that
evening, as the last of its race, and destine evermore to close
that volume of my life, will never pass out of my memory.
it be almost ten o'clock before we hear the sound of wheel. we
all get up then; and my mother say hurriedly that, as it be so
late, and Mr. and Miss Murdstone approve of early hour for young
people, perhaps I have well go to bed. I kiss she, and go
upstairs with my candle directly, before they come in. it appear
to my childish fancy, as I ascend to the bedroom where I have be
imprison, that they bring a cold blast of air into the house
which blow away the old familiar feeling like a feather.
I feel uncomfortable about go down to breakfast in the morning,
as I have never set eye on Mr. Murdstone since the day when I
commit my memorable offence. however, as it must be do, I
go down, after two or three false start half-way, and as many
run back on tiptoe to my own room, and present myself in the
parlour.
he be stand before the fire with his back to it, while Miss
Murdstone make the tea. he look at I steadily as I enter, but
make no sign of recognition whatever.
I go up to he, after a moment of confusion, and say: 'I beg
your pardon, sir. I be very sorry for what I do, and I hope you
will forgive I.'
'I be glad to hear you be sorry, David,' he reply.
the hand he give I be the hand I have bite. I could not
restrain my eye from rest for an instant on a red spot upon it;
but it be not so red as I turn, when I meet that sinister
expression in his face.
'how do you do, ma'am?' I say to Miss Murdstone.
'ah, dear I!' sigh Miss Murdstone, give I the tea-caddy scoop
instead of her finger. 'how long be the holiday?'
'a month, ma'am.'
'count from when?'
'from today, ma'am.'
'oh!' say Miss Murdstone. 'then herebe one day off.'
she keep a calendar of the holiday in this way, and every morning
check a day off in exactly the same manner. she do it gloomily
until she come to ten, but when she get into two figure she become
more hopeful, and, as the time advance, even jocular.
it be on this very first day that I have the misfortune to throw
she, though she be not subject to such weakness in general, into
a state of violent consternation. I come into the room where she
and my mother be sit; and the baby (who be only a few week
old) be on my mother's lap, I take it very carefully in my arm.
suddenly Miss Murdstone give such a scream that I all but drop
it.
'my dear jane!' cry my mother.
'Good heavens, Clara, do you see?' exclaim Miss Murdstone.
'see what, my dear jane?' say my mother; 'where?'
'hebe get it!' cry Miss Murdstone. 'the boy have get the baby!'
she be limp with horror; but stiffen herself to make a dart at
I, and take it out of my arm. then, she turn faint; and be so
very ill that they be oblige to give her cherry brandy. I be
solemnly interdict by she, on her recovery, from touch my
brother any more on any pretence whatever; and my poor mother, who,
I could see, wish otherwise, meekly confirm the interdict, by
say: 'no doubt you be right, my dear jane.'
on another occasion, when we three be together, this same dear
baby - it be truly dear to I, for our mother's sake - be the
innocent occasion of Miss Murdstonebe go into a passion. my
mother, who have be look at its eye as it lie upon her lap,
say:
'Davy! come here!' and look at mine.
I see Miss Murdstone lie her bead down.
'I declare,' say my mother, gently, 'they be exactly alike. I
suppose they be mine. I think they be the colour of mine. but
they be wonderfully alike.'
'what be you talk about, Clara?' say Miss Murdstone.
'my dear jane,' falter my mother, a little abash by the harsh
tone of this inquiry, 'I find that the baby's eye and Davy's be
exactly alike.'
'Clara!' say Miss Murdstone, rise angrily, 'you be a positive
fool sometimes.'
'my dear jane,' remonstrate my mother.
'a positive fool,' say Miss Murdstone. 'who else could compare my
brother's baby with your boy? they be not at all alike. they be
exactly unlike. they be utterly dissimilar in all respect. I
hope they will ever remain so. I will not sit here, and hear such
comparison make.' with that she stalk out, and make the door
bang after she.
in short, I be not a favourite with Miss Murdstone. in short, I
be not a favourite there with anybody, not even with myself; for
those who do like I could not show it, and those who do not,
show it so plainly that I have a sensitive consciousness of always
appear constrain, boorish, and dull.
I feel that I make they as uncomfortable as they make I. if I
come into the room where they be, and they be talk together
and my mother seem cheerful, an anxious cloud would steal over
her face from the moment of my entrance. if Mr. Murdstone be in
his good humour, I check he. if Miss Murdstone be in she
bad, I intensify it. I have perception enough to know that my
mother be the victim always; that she be afraid to speak to I or
to be kind to I, lest she should give they some offence by her
manner of do so, and receive a lecture afterwards; that she be
not only ceaselessly afraid of her own offending, but of my
offending, and uneasily watch their look if I only move.
therefore I resolve to keep myself as much out of their way as I
could; and many a wintry hour do I hear the church clock strike,
when I be sit in my cheerless bedroom, wrap in my little
great-coat, pore over a book.
in the evening, sometimes, I go and sit with Peggotty in the
kitchen. there I be comfortable, and not afraid of be myself.
but neither of these resource be approve of in the parlour. the
torment humour which be dominant there stop they both. I
be still hold to be necessary to my poor mother's training, and,
as one of her trial, could not be suffer to absent myself.
'David,' say Mr. Murdstone, one day after dinner when I be go
to leave the room as usual; 'I be sorry to observe that you be of
a sullen disposition.'
'as sulky as a bear!' say Miss Murdstone.
I stand still, and hang my head.
'now, David,' say Mr. Murdstone, 'a sullen obdurate disposition
be, of all temper, the bad.'
'and the boy's be, of all such disposition that ever I have see,'
remark his sister, 'the most confirmed and stubborn. I think, my
dear Clara, even you must observe it?'
'I beg your pardon, my dear Jane,' say my mother, 'but be you
quite sure - I be certain youwill excuse I, my dear Jane - that you
understand Davy?'
'I should be somewhat ashamed of myself, Clara,' return Miss
Murdstone, 'if I could not understand the boy, or any boy. I donot
profess to be profound; but I do lay claim to common sense.'
'no doubt, my dear jane,' return my mother, 'your understanding
be very vigorous -'
'oh dear, no! pray donot say that, Clara,' interpose Miss
Murdstone, angrily.
'but I be sure it be,' resume my mother; 'and everybody know it
be. I profit so much by it myself, in many way - at least I ought
to - that no one can be more convinced of it than myself; and
therefore I speak with great diffidence, my dear Jane, I assure
you.'
'wewill say I donot understand the boy, Clara,' return Miss
Murdstone, arrange the little fetter on her wrist. 'wewill
agree, if you please, that I donot understand he at all. he be
much too deep for I. but perhaps my brother's penetration may
enable he to have some insight into his character. and I believe
my brother be speak on the subject when we - not very decently
- interrupt he.'
'I think, Clara,' say Mr. Murdstone, in a low grave voice, 'that
there may be well and more dispassionate judge of such a
question than you.'
'Edward,' reply my mother, timidly, 'you be a far well judge
of all question than I pretend to be. both you and Jane be. I
only say -'
'you only say something weak and inconsiderate,' he reply. 'try
not to do it again, my dear Clara, and keep a watch upon yourself.'
my mother's lip move, as if she answer 'yes, my dear edward,'
but she say nothing aloud.
'I be sorry, David, I remark,' say Mr. Murdstone, turn his
head and his eye stiffly towards I, 'to observe that you be of
a sullen disposition. this be not a character that I can suffer to
develop itself beneath my eye without an effort at improvement.
you must endeavour, sir, to change it. we must endeavour to change
it for you.'
'I beg your pardon, sir,' I falter. 'I have never mean to be
sullen since I come back.'
'donot take refuge in a lie, sir!' he return so fiercely, that I
see my mother involuntarily put out her trembling hand as if to
interpose between we. 'you have withdraw yourself in your
sullenness to your own room. you have keep your own room when you
ought to have be here. you know now, once for all, that I
require you to be here, and not there. far, that I require you
to bring obedience here. you know I, David. I will have it
do.'
Miss Murdstone give a hoarse chuckle.
'I will have a respectful, prompt, and ready bearing towards
myself,' he continue, 'and towards Jane Murdstone, and towards
your mother. I will not have this room shun as if it be
infect, at the pleasure of a child. sit down.'
he order I like a dog, and I obey like a dog.
'one thing more,' he say. 'I observe that you have an attachment
to low and common company. you be not to associate with servant.
the kitchen will not improve you, in the many respect in which you
need improvement. of the woman who abet you, I say nothing -
since you, Clara,' address my mother in a low voice, 'from old
association and long-establish fancy, have a weakness
respect she which be not yet overcome.'
'a most unaccountable delusion it be!' cry Miss Murdstone.
'I only say,' he resume, address I, 'that I disapprove of your
prefer such company as Mistress Peggotty, and that it be to be
abandon. now, David, you understand I, and you know what will
be the consequence if you fail to obey I to the letter.'
I know well - well perhaps than he think, as far as my poor
mother be concern - and I obey he to the letter. I retreat
to my own room no more; I take refuge with Peggotty no more; but
sit wearily in the parlour day after day, look forward to night,
and bedtime.
what irksome constraint I underwent, sit in the same attitude
hour upon hour, afraid to move an arm or a leg lest Miss
Murdstone should complain (as she do on the least pretence) of my
restlessness, and afraid to move an eye lest she should light on
some look of dislike or scrutiny that would find new cause for
complaint in mine! what intolerable dulness to sit listen to
the ticking of the clock; and watch Miss Murdstone's little
shiny steel bead as she string they; and wonder whether she
would ever be marry, and if so, to what sort of unhappy man; and
count the division in the moulding of the chimney-piece; and
wander away, with my eye, to the ceiling, among the curl and
corkscrew in the paper on the wall!
what walk I take alone, down muddy lane, in the bad winter
weather, carry that parlour, and Mr. and Miss Murdstone in it,
everywhere: a monstrous load that I be oblige to bear, a daymare
that there be no possibility of break in, a weight that brood
on my wit, and blunt they!
what meal I have in silence and embarrassment, always feel that
there be a knife and fork too many, and that mine; an appetite
too many, and that mine; a plate and chair too many, and those
mine; a somebody too many, and that I!
what evening, when the candle come, and I be expect to employ
myself, but, not dare to read an entertaining book, pore over
some hard-head, hard-hearted treatise on arithmetic; when the
table of weight and measure set themselves to tune, as 'rule
Britannia', or 'away with Melancholy'; when they wouldnot stand
still to be learn, but would go thread my grandmother's needle
through my unfortunate head, in at one ear and out at the other!
what yawn and doze I lapse into, in spite of all my care; what
start I come out of conceal sleep with; what answer I never
get, to little observation that I rarely make; what a blank space
I seem, which everybody overlook, and yet be in everybody's
way; what a heavy relief it be to hear Miss Murdstone hail the
first stroke of nine at night, and order I to bed!
thus the holiday lag away, until the morning come when Miss
Murdstone say: 'herebe the last day off!' and give I the closing
cup of tea of the vacation.
I be not sorry to go. I have lapse into a stupid state; but I be
recover a little and look forward to Steerforth, albeit Mr.
Creakle loom behind he. again Mr. Barkis appear at the gate,
and again Miss Murdstone in her warning voice, say: 'Clara!' when
my mother bend over I, to bid I farewell.
I kiss she, and my baby brother, and be very sorry then; but not
sorry to go away, for the gulf between we be there, and the
parting be there, every day. and it be not so much the embrace
she give I, that live in my mind, though it be as fervent as
could be, as what follow the embrace.
I be in the carrier's cart when I hear she call to I. I
look out, and she stand at the garden-gate alone, hold she
baby up in her arm for I to see. it be cold still weather; and
not a hair of her head, nor a fold of her dress, be stir, as
she look intently at I, hold up her child.
so I lose she. so I see she afterwards, in my sleep at school - a
silent presence near my bed - look at I with the same intent
face - hold up her baby in her arm.
CHAPTER 9
I have a memorable BIRTHDAY
I pass over all that happen at school, until the anniversary of
my birthday come round in March. except that Steerforth be more
to be admire than ever, I remember nothing. he be go away at
the end of the half-year, if not soon, and be more spirited and
independent than before in my eye, and therefore more engaging
than before; but beyond this I remember nothing. the great
remembrance by which that time be mark in my mind, seem to have
swallow up all less recollection, and to exist alone.
it be even difficult for I to believe that there be a gap of full
two month between my return to Salem House and the arrival of that
birthday. I can only understand that the fact be so, because I
know it must have be so; otherwise I should feel convinced that
there be no interval, and that the one occasion trod upon the
other's heel.
how well I recollect the kind of day it be! I smell the fog that
hang about the place; I see the hoar frost, ghostly, through it; I
feel my rimy hair fall clammy on my cheek; I look along the dim
perspective of the schoolroom, with a sputtering candle here and
there to light up the foggy morning, and the breath of the boy
wreathe and smoke in the raw cold as they blow upon their
finger, and tap their foot upon the floor. it be after
breakfast, and we have be summon in from the playground, when
Mr. Sharp enter and say:
'David Copperfield be to go into the parlour.'
I expect a hamper from Peggotty, and brighten at the order.
some of the boy about I put in their claim not to be forget in
the distribution of the good thing, as I get out of my seat with
great alacrity.
'donot hurry, David,' say Mr. Sharp. 'therebe time enough, my
boy, donot hurry.'
I might have be surprise by the feeling tone in which he speak,
if I have give it a thought; but I give it none until afterwards.
I hurry away to the parlour; and there I find Mr. Creakle,
sit at his breakfast with the cane and a newspaper before he,
and Mrs. Creakle with an open letter in her hand. but no hamper.
'David Copperfield,' say Mrs. Creakle, lead I to a sofa, and
sit down beside I. 'I want to speak to you very particularly.
I have something to tell you, my child.'
Mr. Creakle, at whom of course I look, shake his head without
look at I, and stop up a sigh with a very large piece of
butter toast.
'you be too young to know how the world change every day,' say
Mrs. Creakle, 'and how the people in it pass away. but we all have
to learn it, David; some of we when we be young, some of we when
we be old, some of we at all time of our life.'
I look at she earnestly.
'when you come away from home at the end of the vacation,' say
Mrs. Creakle, after a pause, 'be they all well?' after another
pause, 'be your mama well?'
I tremble without distinctly know why, and still look at she
earnestly, make no attempt to answer.
'because,' say she, 'I grieve to tell you that I hear this morning
your mama be very ill.'
a mist rise between Mrs. Creakle and I, and her figure seem to
move in it for an instant. then I feel the burn tear run down
my face, and it be steady again.
'she be very dangerously ill,' she add.
I know all now.
'she be dead.'
there be no need to tell I so. I have already break out into a
desolate cry, and feel an orphan in the wide world.
she be very kind to I. she keep I there all day, and leave I
alone sometimes; and I cry, and wear myself to sleep, and awake
and cry again. when I could cry no more, I begin to think; and
then the oppression on my breast be heavy, and my grief a dull
pain that there be no ease for.
and yet my thought be idle; not intent on the calamity that
weigh upon my heart, but idly loiter near it. I think of
our house shut up and hush. I think of the little baby, who,
Mrs. Creakle say, have be pin away for some time, and who,
they believe, would die too. I think of my father's grave in
the churchyard, by our house, and of my mother lie there beneath
the tree I know so well. I stand upon a chair when I be leave
alone, and look into the glass to see how red my eye be, and
how sorrowful my face. I consider, after some hour be go,
if my tear be really hard to flow now, as they seem to be,
what, in connexion with my loss, it would affect I most to think
of when I draw near home - for I be go home to the funeral. I
be sensible of have feel that a dignity attach to I among the
rest of the boy, and that I be important in my affliction.
if ever child be stricken with sincere grief, I be. but I
remember that this importance be a kind of satisfaction to I,
when I walk in the playground that afternoon while the boy be
in school. when I see they glance at I out of the window, as
they go up to their class, I feel distinguished, and look
more melancholy, and walk slow. when school be over, and they
come out and speak to I, I feel it rather good in myself not to be
proud to any of they, and to take exactly the same notice of they
all, as before.
I be to go home next night; not by the mail, but by the heavy
night-coach, which be call the Farmer, and be principally use
by country-people travel short intermediate distance upon the
road. we have no story-tell that evening, and Traddles insist
on lend I his pillow. I donot know what good he think it
would do I, for I have one of my own: but it be all he have to
lend, poor fellow, except a sheet of letter-paper full of
skeleton; and that he give I at parting, as a soother of my
sorrow and a contribution to my peace of mind.
I leave Salem House upon the morrow afternoon. I little think
then that I leave it, never to return. we travel very slowly all
night, and do not get into Yarmouth before nine or ten o'clock in
the morning. I look out for Mr. Barkis, but he be not there;
and instead of he a fat, short-wind, merry-look, little old
man in black, with rusty little bunch of ribbon at the knee of
his breech, black stocking, and a broad-brim hat, come
puff up to the coach window, and say:
'Master Copperfield?'
'yes, sir.'
'will you come with I, young sir, if you please,' he say, open
the door, 'and I shall have the pleasure of take you home.'
I put my hand in his, wonder who he be, and we walk away to
a shop in a narrow street, on which be write OMER, draper,
TAILOR, HABERDASHER, FUNERAL FURNISHER, &c. it be a close and
stifle little shop; full of all sort of clothing, make and
unmade, include one window full of beaver-hat and bonnet. we
go into a little back-parlour behind the shop, where we find
three young woman at work on a quantity of black material, which
be heap upon the table, and little bit and cutting of which
be litter all over the floor. there be a good fire in the
room, and a breathless smell of warm black crape - I do not know
what the smell be then, but I know now.
the three young woman, who appear to be very industrious and
comfortable, raise their head to look at I, and then go on
with their work. Stitch, stitch, stitch. at the same time there
come from a workshop across a little yard outside the window, a
regular sound of hammer that keep a kind of tune: RAT - tat-tat,
rat - tat-tat, RAT - tat-tat, without any variation.
'well,' say my conductor to one of the three young woman. 'how do
you get on, Minnie?'
'we shall be ready by the try-on time,' she reply gaily,
without look up. 'donot you be afraid, father.'
Mr. Omer take off his broad-brim hat, and sit down and pant.
he be so fat that he be oblige to pant some time before he could
say:
'thatbe right.'
'Father!' say Minnie, playfully. 'what a porpoise you do grow!'
'well, I donot know how it be, my dear,' he reply, consider
about it. 'I be rather so.'
'you be such a comfortable man, you see,' say Minnie. 'you take
thing so easy.'
'no use take them otherwise, my dear,' say Mr. Omer.
'no, indeed,' return his daughter. 'we be all pretty gay here,
thank Heaven! benot we, father?'
'I hope so, my dear,' say Mr. Omer. 'as I have get my breath now,
I think Iwill measure this young scholar. would you walk into the
shop, Master Copperfield?'
I precede Mr. Omer, in compliance with his request; and after
show I a roll of cloth which he say be extra super, and too
good mourning for anything short of parent, he take my various
dimension, and put they down in a book. while he be record
they he call my attention to his stock in trade, and to certain
fashion which he say have 'just come up', and to certain other
fashion which he say have 'just go out'.
'and by that sort of thing we very often lose a little mint of
money,' say Mr. Omer. 'but fashion be like human being. they
come in, nobody know when, why, or how; and they go out, nobody
know when, why, or how. everything be like life, in my opinion,
if you look at it in that point of view.'
I be too sorrowful to discuss the question, which would possibly
have be beyond I under any circumstance; and Mr. Omer take I
back into the parlour, breathe with some difficulty on the way.
he then call down a little break-neck range of step behind a
door: 'bring up that tea and bread-and-butter!' which, after some
time, during which I sit look about I and think, and
listen to the stitching in the room and the tune that be be
hammer across the yard, appear on a tray, and turn out to be
for I.
'I have be acquaint with you,' say Mr. Omer, after watch I
for some minute, during which I have not make much impression on
the breakfast, for the black thing destroy my appetite, 'I have
be acquaint with you a long time, my young friend.'
'have you, sir?'
'all your life,' say Mr. Omer. 'I may say before it. I know your
father before you. he be five foot nine and a half, and he lay
in five-and-twen-ty foot of ground.'
'rat - tat-tat, RAT - tat-tat, RAT - tat-tat,' across the yard.
'he lay in five and twen-ty foot of ground, if he lay in a
fraction,' say Mr. Omer, pleasantly. 'it be either his request
or her direction, I forget which.'
'do you know how my little brother be, sir?' I inquire.
Mr. Omer shake his head.
'rat - tat-tat, RAT - tat-tat, RAT - tat-tat.'
'he be in his mother's arm,' say he.
'oh, poor little fellow! be he dead?'
'donot mind it more than you can help,' say Mr. Omer. 'yes. the
baby's dead.'
my wound break out afresh at this intelligence. I leave the
scarcely-taste breakfast, and go and rest my head on another
table, in a corner of the little room, which Minnie hastily
clear, lest I should spot the mourning that be lie there with
my tear. she be a pretty, good-natured girl, and put my hair
away from my eye with a soft, kind touch; but she be very
cheerful at have nearly finish her work and be in good time,
and be so different from I!
presently the tune leave off, and a good-look young fellow come
across the yard into the room. he have a hammer in his hand, and
his mouth be full of little nail, which he be oblige to take
out before he could speak.
'well, Joram!' say Mr. Omer. 'how do you get on?'
'all right,' say Joram. 'do, sir.'
Minnie colour a little, and the other two girl smile at one
another.
'what! you be at it by candle-light last night, when I be at the
club, then? be you?' say Mr. Omer, shut up one eye.
'yes,' say Joram. 'as you say we could make a little trip of it,
and go over together, if it be do, Minnie and I - and you.'
'oh! I think you be go to leave I out altogether,' say
Mr. Omer, laugh till he cough.
'- as you be so good as to say that,' resume the young man, 'why
I turn to with a will, you see. will you give I your opinion of
it?'
'I will,' say Mr. Omer, rise. 'my dear'; and he stop and
turn to I: 'would you like to see your -'
'no, father,' Minnie interpose.
'I think it might be agreeable, my dear,' say Mr. Omer. 'but
perhaps yoube right.'
I cannot say how I know it be my dear, dear mother's coffin that
they go to look at. I have never hear one making; I have never
see one that I know of.- but it come into my mind what the noise
be, while it be go on; and when the young man enter, I be
sure I know what he have be do.
the work be now finish, the two girl, whose name I have not
hear, brush the shred and thread from their dress, and go
into the shop to put that to right, and wait for customer.
Minnie stay behind to fold up what they have make, and pack it in
two basket. this she do upon her knee, hum a lively little
tune the while. Joram, who I have no doubt be her lover, come in
and steal a kiss from she while she be busy (he donot appear to
mind I, at all), and say her father be go for the chaise, and
he must make haste and get himself ready. then he go out again;
and then she put she thimble and scissor in her pocket, and stick
a needle thread with black thread neatly in the bosom of her
gown, and put on her outer clothing smartly, at a little glass
behind the door, in which I see the reflection of her pleased face.
all this I observe, sit at the table in the corner with my
head lean on my hand, and my thought run on very different
thing. the chaise soon come round to the front of the shop, and
the basket be put in first, I be put in next, and those three
follow. I remember it as a kind of half chaise-cart, half
pianoforte-van, paint of a sombre colour, and draw by a black
horse with a long tail. there be plenty of room for we all.
I do not think I have ever experience so strange a feeling in my
life (I be wise now, perhaps) as that of be with they,
remember how they have be employ, and see they enjoy the
ride. I be not angry with they; I be more afraid of they, as if
I be cast away among creature with whom I have no community of
nature. they be very cheerful. the old man sit in front to
drive, and the two young people sit behind he, and whenever he
speak to they lean forward, the one on one side of his chubby
face and the other on the other, and make a great deal of he.
they would have talk to I too, but I hold back, and mop in my
corner; scar by their love-making and hilarity, though it be far
from boisterous, and almost wonder that no judgement come upon
they for their hardness of heart.
so, when they stop to bait the horse, and eat and drank and
enjoy themselves, I could touch nothing that they touch, but
keep my fast unbroken. so, when we reach home, I drop out of
the chaise behind, as quickly as possible, that I might not be in
their company before those solemn window, look blindly on I
like closed eye once bright. and oh, how little need I have have to
think what would move I to tear when I come back - see the
window of my mother's room, and next it that which, in the well
time, be mine!
I be in Peggotty's arm before I get to the door, and she take I
into the house. her grief burst out when she first see I; but she
control it soon, and speak in whisper, and walk softly, as if
the dead could be disturb. she have not be in bed, I find, for
a long time. she sit up at night still, and watch. as long as
her poor dear pretty be above the ground, she say, she would
never desert she.
Mr. Murdstone take no heed of I when I go into the parlour where
he be, but sit by the fireside, weep silently, and ponder in
his elbow-chair. Miss Murdstone, who be busy at her writing-desk,
which be cover with letter and paper, give I her cold
finger-nail, and ask I, in an iron whisper, if I have be
measure for my mourning.
I say: 'yes.'
'and your shirt,' say Miss Murdstone; 'have you bring them
home?'
'yes, ma'am. I have bring home all my clothe.'
this be all the consolation that her firmness administer to I.
I do not doubt that she have a choice pleasure in exhibit what
she call her self-command, and her firmness, and her strength of
mind, and her common sense, and the whole diabolical catalogue of
her unamiable quality, on such an occasion. she be particularly
proud of her turn for business; and she show it now in reduce
everything to pen and ink, and be move by nothing. all the
rest of that day, and from morning to night afterwards, she sit at
that desk, scratch composedly with a hard pen, speak in the
same imperturbable whisper to everybody; never relax a muscle of
her face, or soften a tone of her voice, or appear with an
atom of her dress astray.
her brother take a book sometimes, but never read it that I see.
he would open it and look at it as if he be read, but would
remain for a whole hour without turn the leaf, and then put it
down and walk to and fro in the room. I use to sit with fold
hand watch he, and count his footstep, hour after hour.
he very seldom speak to she, and never to I. he seem to be the
only restless thing, except the clock, in the whole motionless
house.
in these day before the funeral, I see but little of Peggotty,
except that, in pass up or down stair, I always find she close
to the room where my mother and her baby lay, and except that she
come to I every night, and sit by my bed's head while I go to
sleep. a day or two before the burial - I think it be a day or
two before, but I be conscious of confusion in my mind about that
heavy time, with nothing to mark its progress - she take I into
the room. I only recollect that underneath some white covering on
the bed, with a beautiful cleanliness and freshness all around it,
there seem to I to lie embody the solemn stillness that be in
the house; and that when she would have turn the cover gently
back, I cry: 'oh no! oh no!' and hold her hand.
if the funeral have be yesterday, I could not recollect it well.
the very air of the good parlour, when I go in at the door, the
bright condition of the fire, the shining of the wine in the
decanter, the pattern of the glass and plate, the faint sweet
smell of cake, the odour of Miss Murdstone's dress, and our black
clothe. Mr. Chillip be in the room, and come to speak to I.
'and how be Master David?' he say, kindly.
I cannot tell he very well. I give he my hand, which he hold in
his.
'dear I!' say Mr. Chillip, meekly smiling, with something shin
in his eye. 'our little friend grow up around we. they grow out
of our knowledge, ma'am?' this be to Miss Murdstone, who make no
reply.
'there be a great improvement here, ma'am?' say Mr. Chillip.
Miss Murdstone merely answer with a frown and a formal bend: Mr.
Chillip, discomfited, go into a corner, keep I with he, and
open his mouth no more.
I remark this, because I remark everything that happen, not
because I care about myself, or have do since I come home. and
now the bell begin to sound, and Mr. Omer and another come to make
we ready. as Peggotty be willnot to tell I, long ago, the follower
of my father to the same grave be make ready in the same room.
there be Mr. Murdstone, our neighbour Mr. Grayper, Mr. Chillip,
and i. when we go out to the door, the Bearers and their load be
in the garden; and they move before we down the path, and past the
elm, and through the gate, and into the churchyard, where I have
so often hear the bird sing on a summer morning.
we stand around the grave. the day seem different to I from
every other day, and the light not of the same colour - of a sad
colour. now there be a solemn hush, which we have bring from
home with what be rest in the mould; and while we stand
bareheade, I hear the voice of the clergyman, sound remote in
the open air, and yet distinct and plain, say: 'I be the
Resurrection and the Life, saith the Lord!' then I hear sob; and,
stand apart among the looker-on, I see that good and faithful
servant, whom of all the people upon earth I love the good, and
unto whom my childish heart be certain that the Lord will one day
say: 'well do.'
there be many face that I know, among the little crowd; face
that I know in church, when mine be always wonder there; face
that first see my mother, when she come to the village in her
youthful bloom. I do not mind they - I mind nothing but my grief
- and yet I see and know they all; and even in the background, far
away, see Minnie look on, and her eye glance on her
sweetheart, who be near I.
it be over, and the earth be fill in, and we turn to come away.
before we stand our house, so pretty and unchanged, so link in
my mind with the young idea of what be go, that all my sorrow have
be nothing to the sorrow it call forth. but they take I on;
and Mr. Chillip talk to I; and when we get home, put some water
to my lip; and when I ask his leave to go up to my room, dismiss
I with the gentleness of a woman.
all this, I say, be yesterday's event. event of later date have
float from I to the shore where all forget thing will
reappear, but this stand like a high rock in the ocean.
I know that Peggotty would come to I in my room. the Sabbath
stillness of the time (the day be so like Sunday! I have
forget that) be suit to we both. she sit down by my side
upon my little bed; and hold my hand, and sometimes put it
to her lip, and sometimes smooth it with her, as she might
have comfort my little brother, tell I, in her way, all that she
have to tell concern what have happen.
'she be never well,' say Peggotty, 'for a long time. she be
uncertain in her mind, and not happy. when her baby be bear, I
think at first she would get well, but she be more delicate,
and sink a little every day. she use to like to sit alone before
her baby come, and then she cry; but afterwards she use to sing
to it - so soft, that I once think, when I hear she, it be like
a voice up in the air, that be rise away.
'I think she get to be more timid, and more frightened-like, of
late; and that a hard word be like a blow to she. but she be
always the same to I. she never change to her foolish Peggotty,
donot my sweet girl.'
here Peggotty stop, and softly beat upon my hand a little while.
'the last time that I see she like her own old self, be the night
when you come home, my dear. the day you go away, she say to
I, "I never shall see my pretty darling again. something tell I
so, that tell the truth, I know."
'she try to hold up after that; and many a time, when they tell
she she be thoughtless and light-hearte, make believe to be so;
but it be all a bygone then. she never tell her husband what she
have tell I - she be afraid of say it to anybody else - till
one night, a little more than a week before it happen, when she
say to he: "my dear, I think I be die."
'"itbe off my mind now, Peggotty," she tell I, when I lay she in
her bed that night. "he will believe it more and more, poor
fellow, every day for a few day to come; and then it will be past.
I be very tired. if this be sleep, sit by I while I sleep: donot
leave I. God bless both my child! God protect and keep my
fatherless boy!"
'I never leave she afterwards,' say Peggotty. 'she often talk to
they two downstairs - for she love they; she couldnot bear not to
love anyone who be about she - but when they go away from her
bed-side, she always turn to I, as if there be rest where
Peggotty be, and never fall asleep in any other way.
'on the last night, in the evening, she kiss I, and say: "if my
baby should die too, Peggotty, please let they lay he in my arm,
and bury we together." (it be do; for the poor lamb live but
a day beyond she.) "let my dear boy go with we to our
resting-place," she say, "and tell he that his mother, when she
lie here, bless he not once, but a thousand time."'
another silence follow this, and another gentle beat on my
hand.
'it be pretty far in the night,' say Peggotty, 'when she ask I
for some drink; and when she have take it, give I such a patient
smile, the dear! - so beautiful!
'Daybreak have come, and the sun be rise, when she say to I,
how kind and considerate Mr. Copperfield have always be to she,
and how he have bear with she, and tell she, when she doubt
herself, that a love heart be well and strong than wisdom,
and that he be a happy man in her. "Peggotty, my dear," she say
then, "put I near to you," for she be very weak. "lay your
good arm underneath my neck," she say, "and turn I to you, for
your face be go far off, and I want it to be near." I put it as
she ask; and oh Davy! the time have come when my first parting
word to you be true - when she be glad to lay her poor head on
her stupid cross old Peggotty's arm - and she die like a child
that have go to sleep!'
thus end Peggotty's narration. from the moment of my knowing of
the death of my mother, the idea of she as she have be of late have
vanish from I. I remember she, from that instant, only as the
young mother of my early impression, who have be use to wind
her bright curl round and round her finger, and to dance with I
at twilight in the parlour. what Peggotty have tell I now, be so
far from bring I back to the later period, that it root the
early image in my mind. it may be curious, but it be true. in
her death she wing her way back to her calm untroubled youth, and
cancel all the rest.
the mother who lie in the grave, be the mother of my infancy; the
little creature in her arm, be myself, as I have once be, hush
for ever on her bosom.
CHAPTER 10
I become NEGLECTED, and am provide for
the first act of business Miss Murdstone perform when the day of
the solemnity be over, and light be freely admit into the
house, be to give Peggotty a month's warning. much as Peggotty
would have dislike such a service, I believe she would have
retain it, for my sake, in preference to the good upon earth.
she tell I we must part, and tell I why; and we condole with one
another, in all sincerity.
as to I or my future, not a word be say, or a step take. happy
they would have be, I dare say, if they could have dismiss I
at a month's warning too. I muster courage once, to ask Miss
Murdstone when I be go back to school; and she answer dryly,
she believe I be not go back at all. I be tell nothing more.
I be very anxious to know what be go to be do with I, and
so be Peggotty; but neither she nor I could pick up any
information on the subject.
there be one change in my condition, which, while it relieve I
of a great deal of present uneasiness, might have make I, if I have
be capable of consider it closely, yet more uncomfortable
about the future. it be this. the constraint that have be put
upon I, be quite abandon. I be so far from be require to
keep my dull post in the parlour, that on several occasion, when
I take my seat there, Miss Murdstone frown to I to go away. I
be so far from be warn off from Peggotty's society, that,
provide I be not in Mr. Murdstone's, I be never seek out or
inquire for. at first I be in daily dread of his take my
education in hand again, or of Miss Murdstone's devote herself to
it; but I soon begin to think that such fear be groundless, and
that all I have to anticipate be neglect.
I do not conceive that this discovery give I much pain then. I
be still giddy with the shock of my mother's death, and in a kind
of stunned state as to all tributary thing. I can recollect,
indeed, to have speculate, at odd time, on the possibility of my
not be teach any more, or care for any more; and grow up to
be a shabby, moody man, lounge an idle life away, about the
village; as well as on the feasibility of my getting rid of this
picture by go away somewhere, like the hero in a story, to seek
my fortune: but these be transient vision, daydream I sit
look at sometimes, as if they be faintly paint or write on
the wall of my room, and which, as they melt away, leave the wall
blank again.
'Peggotty,' I say in a thoughtful whisper, one evening, when I be
warm my hand at the kitchen fire, 'Mr. Murdstone like I less
than he use to. he never like I much, Peggotty; but he would
rather not even see I now, if he can help it.'
'perhaps itbe his sorrow,' say Peggotty, stroke my hair.
'I be sure, Peggotty, I be sorry too. if I believe it be his
sorrow, I should not think of it at all. but itbe not that; oh,
no, itbe not that.'
'how do you know itbe not that?' say Peggotty, after a silence.
'oh, his sorrow be another and quite a different thing. he be
sorry at this moment, sit by the fireside with Miss Murdstone;
but if I be to go in, Peggotty, he would be something besides.'
'what would he be?' say Peggotty.
'angry,' I answer, with an involuntary imitation of his dark
frown. 'if he be only sorry, he wouldnot look at I as he do.
I be only sorry, and it make I feel kind.'
Peggotty say nothing for a little while; and I warm my hand, as
silent as she.
'Davy,' she say at length.
'yes, Peggotty?'
'I have try, my dear, all way I could think of - all the way
there be, and all the way there benot, in short - to get a
suitable service here, in Blunderstone; but therebe no such a
thing, my love.'
'and what do you mean to do, Peggotty,' say I, wistfully. 'do you
mean to go and seek your fortune?'
'I expect I shall be force to go to Yarmouth,' reply Peggotty,
'and live there.'
'you might have go far off,' I say, brighten a little,
'and be as bad as lose. I shall see you sometimes, my dear old
Peggotty, there. you willnot be quite at the other end of the world,
will you?'
'contrary way, please God!' cry Peggotty, with great animation.
'as long as you be here, my pet, I shall come over every week of
my life to see you. one day, every week of my life!'
I feel a great weight take off my mind by this promise: but even
this be not all, for Peggotty go on to say:
'Ibe a-go, Davy, you see, to my brother's, first, for another
fortnight's visit - just till I have have time to look about I, and
get to be something like myself again. now, I have be think
that perhaps, as they donot want you here at present, you might be
let to go along with I.'
if anything, short of be in a different relation to every one
about I, Peggotty except, could have give I a sense of
pleasure at that time, it would have be this project of all
other. the idea of be again surround by those honest face,
shin welcome on I; of renew the peacefulness of the sweet
Sunday morning, when the bell be ring, the stone drop in
the water, and the shadowy ship break through the mist; of
roam up and down with little Em'ly, tell she my trouble, and
find charm against they in the shell and pebble on the beach;
make a calm in my heart. it be ruffle next moment, to be sure,
by a doubt of Miss Murdstone's give her consent; but even that
be set at rest soon, for she come out to take an evening grope in
the store-closet while we be yet in conversation, and Peggotty,
with a boldness that amaze I, broach the topic on the spot.
'the boy will be idle there,' say Miss Murdstone, look into a
pickle-jar, 'and idleness be the root of all evil. but, to be
sure, he would be idle here - or anywhere, in my opinion.'
Peggotty have an angry answer ready, I could see; but she swallow
it for my sake, and remain silent.
'Humph!' say Miss Murdstone, still keep her eye on the pickle;
'it be of more importance than anything else - it be of paramount
importance - that my brother should not be disturb or make
uncomfortable. I suppose I have well say yes.'
I thank she, without make any demonstration of joy, lest it
should induce she to withdraw her assent. nor could I help
think this a prudent course, since she look at I out of the
pickle-jar, with as great an access of sourness as if her black
eye have absorb its content. however, the permission be give,
and be never retract; for when the month be out, Peggotty and
I be ready to depart.
Mr. Barkis come into the house for Peggotty's box. I have never
know he to pass the garden-gate before, but on this occasion he
come into the house. and he give I a look as he shoulder the
large box and go out, which I think have meaning in it, if
meaning could ever be say to find its way into Mr. Barkis's
visage.
Peggotty be naturally in low spirit at leave what have be her
home so many year, and where the two strong attachment of her
life - for my mother and myself - have be form. she have be
walk in the churchyard, too, very early; and she get into the
cart, and sit in it with her handkerchief at her eye.
so long as she remain in this condition, Mr. Barkis give no sign
of life whatever. he sit in his usual place and attitude like a
great stuff figure. but when she begin to look about she, and to
speak to I, he nod his head and grin several time. I have
not the least notion at whom, or what he mean by it.
'itbe a beautiful day, Mr. Barkis!' I say, as an act of
politeness.
'it benot bad,' say Mr. Barkis, who generally qualify his
speech, and rarely commit himself.
'Peggotty be quite comfortable now, Mr. Barkis,' I remark, for
his satisfaction.
'be she, though?' say Mr. Barkis.
after reflect about it, with a sagacious air, Mr. Barkis eye
she, and say:
'be you pretty comfortable?'
Peggotty laugh, and answer in the affirmative.
'but really and truly, you know. be you?' growl Mr. Barkis,
slide near to she on the seat, and nudge she with his elbow.
'be you? really and truly pretty comfortable? be you? eh?'
at each of these inquiry Mr. Barkis shuffle near to she, and
give she another nudge; so that at last we be all crowd
together in the left-hand corner of the cart, and I be so squeeze
that I could hardly bear it.
Peggotty call his attention to my suffering, Mr. Barkis give I
a little more room at once, and get away by degree. but I could
not help observe that he seem to think he have hit upon a
wonderful expedient for express himself in a neat, agreeable,
and point manner, without the inconvenience of invent
conversation. he manifestly chuckle over it for some time. by
and by he turn to Peggotty again, and repeat, 'be you pretty
comfortable though?' bear down upon we as before, until the breath
be nearly edge out of my body. by and by he make another descent
upon we with the same inquiry, and the same result. at length, I
get up whenever I see he come, and stand on the foot-board,
pretend to look at the prospect; after which I do very well.
he be so polite as to stop at a public-house, expressly on our
account, and entertain we with broiled mutton and beer. even when
Peggotty be in the act of drinking, he be seize with one of
those approach, and almost choke she. but as we draw near to
the end of our journey, he have more to do and less time for
gallantry; and when we get on Yarmouth pavement, we be all too
much shake and jolt, I apprehend, to have any leisure for
anything else.
Mr. Peggotty and Ham wait for we at the old place. they receive
I and Peggotty in an affectionate manner, and shake hand with Mr.
Barkis, who, with his hat on the very back of his head, and a
shame-face leer upon his countenance, and pervade his very leg,
present but a vacant appearance, I think. they each take one
of Peggotty's trunk, and we be go away, when Mr. Barkis
solemnly make a sign to I with his forefinger to come under an
archway.
'I say,' growl Mr. Barkis, 'it be all right.'
I look up into his face, and answer, with an attempt to be very
profound: 'oh!'
'it donot come to a end there,' say Mr. Barkis, nodding
confidentially. 'it be all right.'
again I answer, 'oh!'
'you know who be willin',' say my friend. 'it be Barkis, and
Barkis only.'
I nod assent.
'itbe all right,' say Mr. Barkis, shake hand; 'Ibe a friend of
your'n. you make it all right, first. itbe all right.'
in his attempt to be particularly lucid, Mr. Barkis be so
extremely mysterious, that I might have stand look in his face
for an hour, and most assuredly should have get as much information
out of it as out of the face of a clock that have stop, but for
Peggotty's call I away. as we be go along, she ask I
what he have say; and I tell she he have say it be all right.
'like his impudence,' say Peggotty, 'but I donot mind that! Davy
dear, what should you think if I be to think of be marry?'
'why - I suppose you would like I as much then, Peggotty, as you
do now?' I return, after a little consideration.
greatly to the astonishment of the passenger in the street, as
well as of her relation go on before, the good soul be oblige
to stop and embrace I on the spot, with many protestation of her
unalterable love.
'tell I what should you say, darling?' she ask again, when this
be over, and we be walk on.
'if you be think of be marry - to Mr. Barkis, Peggotty?'
'yes,' say Peggotty.
'I should think it would be a very good thing. for then you know,
Peggotty, you would always have the horse and cart to bring you
over to see I, and could come for nothing, and be sure of come.'
'the sense of the dear!' cry Peggotty. 'what I have be
think of, this month back! yes, my precious; and I think I
should be more independent altogether, you see; let alone my
work with a well heart in my own house, than I could in
anybody elsebe now. I donot know what I might be fit for, now, as
a servant to a stranger. and I shall be always near my pretty's
resting-place,' say Peggotty, musing, 'and be able to see it when
I like; and when I lie down to rest, I may be lay not far off from
my darling girl!'
we neither of we say anything for a little while.
'but I wouldnot so much as give it another thought,' say Peggotty,
cheerily 'if my Davy be anyways against it - not if I have be
ask in church thirty time three time over, and be wear out
the ring in my pocket.'
'look at I, Peggotty,' I reply; 'and see if I be not really
glad, and donot truly wish it!' as indeed I do, with all my
heart.
'well, my life,' say Peggotty, give I a squeeze, 'I have
thought of it night and day, every way I can, and I hope the right
way; but Iwill think of it again, and speak to my brother about it,
and in the meantime wewill keep it to ourselves, Davy, you and I.
Barkis be a good plain creature,' say Peggotty, 'and if I try to
do my duty by he, I think it would be my fault if I benot - if I
benot pretty comfortable,' say Peggotty, laugh heartily.
this quotation from Mr. Barkis be so appropriate, and tickle we
both so much, that we laugh again and again, and be quite in a
pleasant humour when we come within view of Mr. Peggotty's cottage.
it look just the same, except that it may, perhaps, have shrink
a little in my eye; and Mrs. Gummidge be wait at the door as
if she have stand there ever since. all within be the same, down
to the seaweed in the blue mug in my bedroom. I go into the
out-house to look about I; and the very same lobster, crab, and
crawfish possess by the same desire to pinch the world in
general, appear to be in the same state of conglomeration in the
same old corner.
but there be no little Em'ly to be see, so I ask Mr. Peggotty
where she be.
'shebe at school, sir,' say Mr. Peggotty, wipe the heat
consequent on the porterage of Peggotty's box from his forehead;
'shewill be home,' look at the dutch clock, 'in from twenty
minute to half-an-hour's time. we all on we feel the loss of she,
bless ye!'
Mrs. Gummidge moan.
'cheer up, Mawther!' cry Mr. Peggotty.
'I feel it more than anybody else,' say Mrs. Gummidge; 'Ibe a lone
lorn creetur', and she use to be a'most the only thing that donot
go contrary with I.'
Mrs. Gummidge, whimpering and shake her head, apply herself to
blow the fire. Mr. Peggotty, look round upon we while she
be so engaged, say in a low voice, which he shade with his hand:
'the old 'un!' from this I rightly conjecture that no improvement
have take place since my last visit in the state of Mrs. Gummidge's
spirit.
now, the whole place be, or it should have be, quite as
delightful a place as ever; and yet it do not impress I in the
same way. I feel rather disappointed with it. perhaps it be
because little Em'ly be not at home. I know the way by which she
would come, and presently find myself stroll along the path to
meet she.
a figure appear in the distance before long, and I soon know it
to be Em'ly, who be a little creature still in stature, though she
be grow. but when she draw near, and I see her blue eye
look bluer, and her dimpled face look bright, and her whole
self pretty and gayer, a curious feeling come over I that make
I pretend not to know she, and pass by as if I be look at
something a long way off. I have do such a thing since in later
life, or I be mistaken.
Little Em'ly donot care a bit. she see I well enough; but
instead of turn round and call after I, run away laugh.
this oblige I to run after she, and she run so fast that we be
very near the cottage before I catch she.
'oh, itbe you, be it?' say little Em'ly.
'why, you know who it be, Em'ly,' say I.
'and donot you know who it be?' say Em'ly. I be go to kiss
she, but she cover her cherry lip with her hand, and say she
benot a baby now, and run away, laugh more than ever, into the
house.
she seem to delight in tease I, which be a change in she I
wonder at very much. the tea table be ready, and our little
locker be put out in its old place, but instead of come to sit
by I, she go and bestow her company upon that grumble Mrs.
Gummidge: and on Mr. Peggotty's inquire why, rumple her hair all
over her face to hide it, and could do nothing but laugh.
'a little puss, it be!' say Mr. Peggotty, pat she with his
great hand.
'so sh' be! so sh' be!' cry Ham. 'Mas'r Davy bor', so sh' be!'
and he sit and chuckle at she for some time, in a state of mingle
admiration and delight, that make his face a burn red.
Little Em'ly be spoil by they all, in fact; and by no one more
than Mr. Peggotty himself, whom she could have coax into
anything, by only go and lay her cheek against his rough
whisker. that be my opinion, at least, when I see she do it; and
I hold Mr. Peggotty to be thoroughly in the right. but she be so
affectionate and sweet-natured, and have such a pleasant manner of
be both sly and shy at once, that she captivate I more than
ever.
she be tender-hearted, too; for when, as we sit round the fire
after tea, an allusion be make by Mr. Peggotty over his pipe to
the loss I have sustain, the tear stand in her eye, and she
look at I so kindly across the table, that I feel quite thankful
to she.
'ah!' say Mr. Peggotty, take up her curl, and run they over
his hand like water, 'herebe another orphan, you see, sir. and
here,' say Mr. Peggotty, give Ham a backhand knock in the
chest, 'be another of them, though he donot look much like it.'
'if I have you for my guardian, Mr. Peggotty,' say I, shake my
head, 'I donot think I should feel much like it.'
'well say, Mas'r Davy bor'!' cry Ham, in an ecstasy. 'Hoorah!
well say! nor more you wouldnot! Hor! hor!' - here he return
Mr. Peggotty's back-hander, and little Em'ly get up and kiss Mr.
Peggotty. 'and howbe your friend, sir?' say Mr. Peggotty to I.
'Steerforth?' say I.
'thatbe the name!' cry Mr. Peggotty, turn to Ham. 'I know
it be something in our way.'
'you say it be rudderford,' observe Ham, laugh.
'well!' retort Mr. Peggotty. 'and ye steer with a rudder, donot
ye? it benot fur off. how be he, sir?'
'he be very well indeed when I come away, Mr. Peggotty.'
'therebe a friend!' say Mr. Peggotty, stretch out his pipe.
'therebe a friend, if you talk of friend! why, Lord love my heart
alive, if it benot a treat to look at he!'
'he be very handsome, be he not?' say I, my heart warm with
this praise.
'handsome!' cry Mr. Peggotty. 'he stand up to you like - like
a - why I donot know what he donot stand up to you like. hebe so
bold!'
'yes! thatbe just his character,' say I. 'hebe as brave as a
lion, and you cannot think how frank he be, Mr. Peggotty.'
'and I do suppose, now,' say Mr. Peggotty, look at I through
the smoke of his pipe, 'that in the way of book-larning hewould take
the wind out of a'most anything.'
'yes,' say I, delight; 'he know everything. he be
astonishingly clever.'
'therebe a friend!' murmur Mr. Peggotty, with a grave toss of his
head.
'nothing seem to cost he any trouble,' say I. 'he know a task
if he only look at it. he be the good cricketer you ever see. he
will give you almost as many man as you like at draught, and beat
you easily.'
Mr. Peggotty give his head another toss, as much as to say: 'of
course he will.'
'he be such a speaker,' I pursue, 'that he can win anybody over;
and I donot know what youwould say if you be to hear he sing, Mr.
Peggotty.'
Mr. Peggotty give his head another toss, as much as to say: 'I have
no doubt of it.'
'then, hebe such a generous, fine, noble fellow,' say I, quite
carry away by my favourite theme, 'that itbe hardly possible to
give he as much praise as he deserve. I be sure I can never feel
thankful enough for the generosity with which he have protect I,
so much young and low in the school than himself.'
I be run on, very fast indeed, when my eye rest on little
Em'ly's face, which be bend forward over the table, listen with
the deep attention, her breath hold, her blue eye sparkle
like jewel, and the colour mantle in her cheek. she look so
extraordinarily earnest and pretty, that I stop in a sort of
wonder; and they all observe she at the same time, for as I
stop, they laugh and look at she.
'Em'ly be like I,' say Peggotty, 'and would like to see he.'
Em'ly be confuse by our all observe she, and hang down her
head, and her face be cover with blush. glance up presently
through her stray curl, and see that we be all look at she
still (I be sure I, for one, could have look at she for hour),
she run away, and keep away till it be nearly bedtime.
I lie down in the old little bed in the stern of the boat, and the
wind come moan on across the flat as it have do before. but I
could not help fancy, now, that it moan of those who be
go; and instead of think that the sea might rise in the night
and float the boat away, I think of the sea that have rise, since
I last hear those sound, and drown my happy home. I recollect,
as the wind and water begin to sound fainter in my ear, put a
short clause into my prayer, petition that I might grow up to
marry little Em'ly, and so drop lovingly asleep.
the day pass pretty much as they have pass before, except - it
be a great exception- that little Em'ly and I seldom wander on
the beach now. she have task to learn, and needle-work to do; and
be absent during a great part of each day. but I feel that we
should not have have those old wandering, even if it have be
otherwise. wild and full of childish whim as Em'ly be, she be
more of a little woman than I have suppose. she seem to have get
a great distance away from I, in little more than a year. she
like I, but she laugh at I, and torment I; and when I go
to meet she, steal home another way, and be laugh at the door
when I come back, disappoint. the good time be when she sit
quietly at work in the doorway, and I sit on the wooden step at her
foot, read to she. it seem to I, at this hour, that I have
never see such sunlight as on those bright April afternoon; that
I have never see such a sunny little figure as I use to see,
sit in the doorway of the old boat; that I have never behold
such sky, such water, such glorify ship sail away into golden
air.
on the very first evening after our arrival, Mr. Barkis appear in
an exceedingly vacant and awkward condition, and with a bundle of
orange tie up in a handkerchief. as he make no allusion of any
kind to this property, he be suppose to have leave it behind he
by accident when he go away; until Ham, run after he to
restore it, come back with the information that it be intend for
Peggotty. after that occasion he appear every evening at exactly
the same hour, and always with a little bundle, to which he never
allude, and which he regularly put behind the door and leave there.
these offering of affection be of a most various and eccentric
description. among they I remember a double set of pig' trotter,
a huge pin-cushion, half a bushel or so of apple, a pair of jet
earring, some spanish onion, a box of domino, a canary bird and
cage, and a leg of pickle pork.
Mr. Barkis's wooing, as I remember it, be altogether of a peculiar
kind. he very seldom say anything; but would sit by the fire in
much the same attitude as he sit in his cart, and stare heavily at
Peggotty, who be opposite. one night, be, as I suppose,
inspire by love, he make a dart at the bit of wax-candle she keep
for her thread, and put it in his waistcoat-pocket and carry it
off. after that, his great delight be to produce it when it be
want, stick to the lining of his pocket, in a partially melt
state, and pocket it again when it be do with. he seem to
enjoy himself very much, and not to feel at all call upon to
talk. even when he take Peggotty out for a walk on the flat, he
have no uneasiness on that head, I believe; content himself with
now and then ask she if she be pretty comfortable; and I
remember that sometimes, after he be go, Peggotty would throw
her apron over her face, and laugh for half-an-hour. indeed, we
be all more or less amuse, except that miserable Mrs. Gummidge,
whose courtship would appear to have be of an exactly parallel
nature, she be so continually remind by these transaction of
the old one.
at length, when the term of my visit be nearly expire, it be
give out that Peggotty and Mr. Barkis be go to make a day's
holiday together, and that little Em'ly and I be to accompany
they. I have but a broken sleep the night before, in anticipation
of the pleasure of a whole day with Em'ly. we be all astir
betime in the morning; and while we be yet at breakfast, Mr.
Barkis appear in the distance, drive a chaise-cart towards the
object of his affection.
Peggotty be dress as usual, in her neat and quiet mourning; but
Mr. Barkis bloom in a new blue coat, of which the tailor have
give he such good measure, that the cuff would have render
glove unnecessary in the cold weather, while the collar be so
high that it push his hair up on end on the top of his head. his
bright button, too, be of the large size. render complete
by drab pantaloon and a buff waistcoat, I think Mr. Barkis a
phenomenon of respectability.
when we be all in a bustle outside the door, I find that Mr.
Peggotty be prepare with an old shoe, which be to be throw
after we for luck, and which he offer to Mrs. Gummidge for that
purpose.
'no. it have well be do by somebody else, Dan'l,' say Mrs.
Gummidge. 'Ibe a lone lorn creetur' myself, and everythink that
remind I of creetur's that benot lone and lorn, go contrary
with I.'
'come, old gal!' cry Mr. Peggotty. 'take and heave it.'
'no, Dan'l,' return Mrs. Gummidge, whimpering and shake she
head. 'if I feel less, I could do more. you donot feel like I,
Dan'l; think donot go contrary with you, nor you with they; you
have well do it yourself.'
but here Peggotty, who have be go about from one to another in
a hurried way, kiss everybody, call out from the cart, in
which we all be by this time (Em'ly and I on two little chair,
side by side), that Mrs. Gummidge must do it. so Mrs. Gummidge do
it; and, I be sorry to relate, cast a damp upon the festive
character of our departure, by immediately burst into tear, and
sinking subdue into the arm of Ham, with the declaration that she
know she be a burden, and have well be carry to the House at
once. which I really think be a sensible idea, that Ham might
have act on.
away we go, however, on our holiday excursion; and the first
thing we do be to stop at a church, where Mr. Barkis tie the
horse to some rail, and go in with Peggotty, leave little
Em'ly and I alone in the chaise. I take that occasion to put my
arm round Em'ly's waist, and propose that as I be go away so
very soon now, we should determine to be very affectionate to one
another, and very happy, all day. little Em'ly consent, and
allow I to kiss she, I become desperate; inform she, I
recollect, that I never could love another, and that I be prepare
to shed the blood of anybody who should aspire to her affection.
how merry little Em'ly make herself about it! with what a demure
assumption of be immensely old and wise than I, the fairy
little woman say I be 'a silly boy'; and then laugh so
charmingly that I forget the pain of be call by that
disparaging name, in the pleasure of look at she.
Mr. Barkis and Peggotty be a good while in the church, but come
out at last, and then we drive away into the country. as we be
go along, Mr. Barkis turn to I, and say, with a wink, - by
the by, I should hardly have think, before, that he could wink:
'what name be it as I write up in the cart?'
'Clara Peggotty,' I answer.
'what name would it be as I should write up now, if there be a
tilt here?'
'Clara Peggotty, again?' I suggest.
'Clara Peggotty BARKIS!' he return, and burst into a roar of
laughter that shake the chaise.
in a word, they be marry, and have go into the church for no
other purpose. Peggotty be resolve that it should be quietly
do; and the clerk have give she away, and there have be no
witness of the ceremony. she be a little confused when Mr.
Barkis make this abrupt announcement of their union, and could not
hug I enough in token of her unimpaired affection; but she soon
become herself again, and say she be very glad it be over.
we drive to a little inn in a by-road, where we be expect, and
where we have a very comfortable dinner, and pass the day with
great satisfaction. if Peggotty have be marry every day for the
last ten year, she could hardly have be more at her ease about
it; it make no sort of difference in she: she be just the same as
ever, and go out for a stroll with little Em'ly and I before
tea, while Mr. Barkis philosophically smoke his pipe, and enjoy
himself, I suppose, with the contemplation of his happiness. if
so, it sharpen his appetite; for I distinctly call to mind that,
although he have eat a good deal of pork and green at dinner, and
have finish off with a fowl or two, he be oblige to have cold
boil bacon for tea, and dispose of a large quantity without any
emotion.
I have often think, since, what an odd, innocent, out-of-the-way
kind of wedding it must have be! we get into the chaise again
soon after dark, and drive cosily back, look up at the star,
and talk about they. I be their chief exponent, and open Mr.
Barkis's mind to an amazing extent. I tell he all I know, but he
would have believe anything I might have take it into my head to
impart to he; for he have a profound veneration for my ability,
and inform his wife in my hearing, on that very occasion, that I
be 'a young Roeshus' - by which I think he mean prodigy.
when we have exhaust the subject of the star, or rather when I
have exhaust the mental faculty of Mr. Barkis, little Em'ly and
I make a cloak of an old wrapper, and sit under it for the rest of
the journey. ah, how I love she! what happiness (I think) if
we be marry, and be go away anywhere to live among the
tree and in the field, never grow old, never grow wise,
child ever, ramble hand in hand through sunshine and among
flowery meadow, lay down our head on moss at night, in a sweet
sleep of purity and peace, and bury by the bird when we be
dead! some such picture, with no real world in it, bright with the
light of our innocence, and vague as the star afar off, be in my
mind all the way. I be glad to think there be two such guileless
heart at Peggotty's marriage as little Em'ly's and mine. I be
glad to think the Loves and Graces take such airy form in its
homely procession.
well, we come to the old boat again in good time at night; and
there Mr. and Mrs. Barkis bid we good-bye, and drive away snugly
to their own home. I feel then, for the first time, that I have
lose Peggotty. I should have go to bed with a sore heart indeed
under any other roof but that which shelter little Em'ly's head.
Mr. Peggotty and Ham know what be in my thought as well as I do,
and be ready with some supper and their hospitable face to drive
it away. little Em'ly come and sit beside I on the locker for the
only time in all that visit; and it be altogether a wonderful
close to a wonderful day.
it be a night tide; and soon after we go to bed, Mr. Peggotty
and Ham go out to fish. I feel very brave at be leave alone in
the solitary house, the protector of Em'ly and Mrs. Gummidge, and
only wish that a lion or a serpent, or any ill-dispose monster,
would make an attack upon we, that I might destroy he, and cover
myself with glory. but as nothing of the sort happen to be
walk about on Yarmouth flat that night, I provide the good
substitute I could by dream of dragon until morning.
with morning come Peggotty; who call to I, as usual, under my
window as if Mr. Barkis the carrier have be from first to last a
dream too. after breakfast she take I to her own home, and a
beautiful little home it be. of all the moveable in it, I must
have be impress by a certain old bureau of some dark wood in
the parlour (the tile-floor kitchen be the general
sitting-room), with a retreat top which open, let down, and
become a desk, within which be a large quarto edition of Foxe's
Book of Martyrs. this precious volume, of which I do not recollect
one word, I immediately discover and immediately apply myself
to; and I never visit the house afterwards, but I kneel on a
chair, open the casket where this gem be enshrine, spread my
arm over the desk, and fall to devour the book afresh. I be
chiefly edify, I be afraid, by the picture, which be numerous,
and represent all kind of dismal horror; but the Martyrs and
Peggotty's house have be inseparable in my mind ever since, and
be now.
I take leave of Mr. Peggotty, and Ham, and Mrs. Gummidge, and
little Em'ly, that day; and pass the night at Peggotty's, in a
little room in the roof (with the Crocodile Book on a shelf by the
bed's head) which be to be always mine, Peggotty say, and should
always be keep for I in exactly the same state.
'young or old, Davy dear, as long as I be alive and have this house
over my head,' say Peggotty, 'you shall find it as if I expect
you here directly minute. I shall keep it every day, as I use to
keep your old little room, my darling; and if you be to go to
China, you might think of it as be keep just the same, all the
time you be away.'
I feel the truth and constancy of my dear old nurse, with all my
heart, and thank she as well as I could. that be not very well,
for she speak to I thus, with her arm round my neck, in the
morning, and I be go home in the morning, and I go home in
the morning, with herself and Mr. Barkis in the cart. they leave I
at the gate, not easily or lightly; and it be a strange sight to
I to see the cart go on, take Peggotty away, and leave I
under the old elm-tree look at the house, in which there be no
face to look on mine with love or like any more.
and now I fall into a state of neglect, which I cannot look back
upon without compassion. I fall at once into a solitary condition,
- apart from all friendly notice, apart from the society of all
other boy of my own age, apart from all companionship but my own
spiritless thought, - which seem to cast its gloom upon this
paper as I write.
what would I have give, to have be send to the hard school
that ever be keep! - to have be teach something, anyhow,
anywhere! no such hope dawn upon I. they dislike I; and they
sullenly, sternly, steadily, overlook I. I think Mr.
Murdstone's mean be straiten at about this time; but it be
little to the purpose. he could not bear I; and in put I
from he he try, as I believe, to put away the notion that I have
any claim upon he - and succeed.
I be not actively ill-use. I be not beat, or starve; but the
wrong that be do to I have no interval of relent, and be
do in a systematic, passionless manner. day after day, week
after week, month after month, I be coldly neglect. I wonder
sometimes, when I think of it, what they would have do if I have
be take with an illness; whether I should have lain down in my
lonely room, and languish through it in my usual solitary way, or
whether anybody would have help I out.
when Mr. and Miss Murdstone be at home, I take my meal with
they; in their absence, I eat and drink by myself. at all time I
lounge about the house and neighbourhood quite disregarded, except
that they be jealous of my make any friend: thinking, perhaps,
that if I do, I might complain to someone. for this reason,
though Mr. Chillip often ask I to go and see he (he be a
widower, have, some year before that, lose a little small
light-haired wife, whom I can just remember connect in my own
thought with a pale tortoise-shell cat), it be but seldom that I
enjoy the happiness of pass an afternoon in his closet of a
surgery; read some book that be new to I, with the smell of
the whole Pharmacopoeia come up my nose, or pound something in
a mortar under his mild direction.
for the same reason, add no doubt to the old dislike of she, I
be seldom allow to visit Peggotty. faithful to her promise, she
either come to see I, or meet I somewhere near, once every week,
and never empty-handed; but many and bitter be the
disappointment I have, in be refuse permission to pay a visit
to she at her house. some few time, however, at long interval,
I be allow to go there; and then I find out that Mr. Barkis be
something of a miser, or as Peggotty dutifully express it, be 'a
little near', and keep a heap of money in a box under his bed,
which he pretend be only full of coat and trouser. in this
coffer, his rich hide themselves with such a tenacious modesty,
that the small instalment could only be tempt out by
artifice; so that Peggotty have to prepare a long and elaborate
scheme, a very Gunpowder Plot, for every Saturday's expense.
all this time I be so conscious of the waste of any promise I have
give, and of my be utterly neglect, that I should have be
perfectly miserable, I have no doubt, but for the old book. they
be my only comfort; and I be as true to they as they be to I,
and read they over and over I donot know how many time more.
I now approach a period of my life, which I can never lose the
remembrance of, while I remember anything: and the recollection of
which have often, without my invocation, come before I like a
ghost, and haunt happy time.
I have be out, one day, loiter somewhere, in the listless,
meditative manner that my way of life engender, when, turn the
corner of a lane near our house, I come upon Mr. Murdstone walk
with a gentleman. I be confused, and be go by they, when the
gentleman cry:
'what! Brooks!'
'no, sir, David Copperfield,' I say.
'donot tell I. you be Brooks,' say the gentleman. 'you be
Brooks of Sheffield. thatbe your name.'
at these word, I observe the gentleman more attentively. his
laugh come to my remembrance too, I know he to be Mr. Quinion,
whom I have go over to Lowestoft with Mr. Murdstone to see, before
- it be no matter - I need not recall when.
'and how do you get on, and where be you be educate, Brooks?'
say Mr. Quinion.
he have put his hand upon my shoulder, and turn I about, to walk
with they. I do not know what to reply, and glance dubiously at
Mr. Murdstone.
'he be at home at present,' say the latter. 'he be not be
educate anywhere. I donot know what to do with he. he be a
difficult subject.'
that old, double look be on I for a moment; and then his eye
darken with a frown, as it turn, in its aversion, elsewhere.
'Humph!' say Mr. Quinion, look at we both, I think. 'fine
weather!'
Silence ensue, and I be consider how I could well disengage my
shoulder from his hand, and go away, when he say:
'I suppose you be a pretty sharp fellow still? eh, Brooks?'
'aye! he be sharp enough,' say Mr. Murdstone, impatiently. 'you
have well let he go. he will not thank you for trouble he.'
on this hint, Mr. Quinion release I, and I make the good of my
way home. look back as I turn into the front garden, I see
Mr. Murdstone lean against the wicket of the churchyard, and Mr.
Quinion talk to he. they be both look after I, and I
feel that they be speak of I.
Mr. Quinion lie at our house that night. after breakfast, the next
morning, I have put my chair away, and be go out of the room,
when Mr. Murdstone call I back. he then gravely repair to
another table, where his sister sit herself at her desk. Mr.
Quinion, with his hand in his pocket, stand look out of
window; and I stand look at they all.
'David,' say Mr. Murdstone, 'to the young this be a world for
action; not for moping and drone in.'
- 'as you do,' add his sister.
'Jane Murdstone, leave it to I, if you please. I say, David, to
the young this be a world for action, and not for moping and
drone in. it be especially so for a young boy of your
disposition, which require a great deal of correct; and to
which no great service can be do than to force it to conform to
the way of the work world, and to bend it and break it.'
'for stubbornness willnot do here,' say his sister 'what it want
be, to be crush. and crush it must be. shall be, too!'
he give she a look, half in remonstrance, half in approval, and
go on:
'I suppose you know, David, that I be not rich. at any rate, you
know it now. you have receive some considerable education
already. education be costly; and even if it be not, and I could
afford it, I be of opinion that it would not be at all advantageous
to you to be keep at school. what be before you, be a fight with
the world; and the soon you begin it, the well.'
I think it occur to I that I have already begin it, in my poor
way: but it occur to I now, whether or no.
'you have hear the "counting-house" mention sometimes,' say Mr.
Murdstone.
'the counting-house, sir?' I repeat.
'of Murdstone and Grinby, in the wine trade,' he reply.
I suppose I look uncertain, for he go on hastily:
'you have hear the "counting-house" mention, or the business, or
the cellar, or the wharf, or something about it.'
'I think I have hear the business mention, sir,' I say,
remember what I vaguely know of his and his sister's resource.
'but I donot know when.'
'it do not matter when,' he return. 'Mr. Quinion manage that
business.'
I glance at the latter deferentially as he stand look out of
window.
'Mr. Quinion suggest that it give employment to some other boy,
and that he see no reason why it shouldnot, on the same term,
give employment to you.'
'he have,' Mr. Quinion observe in a low voice, and half turn
round, 'no other prospect, Murdstone.'
Mr. Murdstone, with an impatient, even an angry gesture, resume,
without notice what he have say:
'those term be, that you will earn enough for yourself to provide
for your eating and drinking, and pocket-money. your lodging
(which I have arrange for) will be pay by I. so will your
washing -'
'- which will be keep down to my estimate,' say his sister.
'your clothe will be look after for you, too,' say Mr.
Murdstone; 'as you will not be able, yet awhile, to get they for
yourself. so you be now go to London, David, with Mr. Quinion,
to begin the world on your own account.'
'in short, you be provide for,' observe his sister; 'and will
please to do your duty.'
though I quite understand that the purpose of this announcement be
to get rid of I, I have no distinct remembrance whether it please
or frighten I. my impression be, that I be in a state of
confusion about it, and, oscillate between the two point,
touch neither. nor have I much time for the clearing of my
thought, as Mr. Quinion be to go upon the morrow.
behold I, on the morrow, in a much-wear little white hat, with a
black crape round it for my mother, a black jacket, and a pair of
hard, stiff corduroy trouser - which Miss Murdstone consider the
good armour for the leg in that fight with the world which be now
to come off. behold I so attired, and with my little worldly all
before I in a small trunk, sitting, a lone lorn child (as Mrs.
Gummidge might have say), in the post-chaise that be carry Mr.
Quinion to the London coach at Yarmouth! see, how our house and
church be lessen in the distance; how the grave beneath the
tree be blot out by intervene object; how the spire point
upwards from my old playground no more, and the sky be empty!
CHAPTER 11
I begin life on my OWN account, and don't like it
I know enough of the world now, to have almost lose the capacity of
be much surprised by anything; but it be matter of some surprise
to I, even now, that I can have be so easily throw away at such
an age. a child of excellent ability, and with strong power of
observation, quick, eager, delicate, and soon hurt bodily or
mentally, it seem wonderful to I that nobody should have make any
sign in my behalf. but none be make; and I became, at ten year
old, a little labour hind in the service of Murdstone and
Grinby.
Murdstone and Grinby's warehouse be at the waterside. it be down
in Blackfriars. modern improvement have alter the place; but it
be the last house at the bottom of a narrow street, curve down
hill to the river, with some stair at the end, where people take
boat. it be a crazy old house with a wharf of its own, abut
on the water when the tide be in, and on the mud when the tide be
out, and literally overrun with rat. its panel room,
discolour with the dirt and smoke of a hundred year, I dare say;
its decay floor and staircase; the squeaking and scuffling of
the old grey rat down in the cellar; and the dirt and rottenness
of the place; be thing, not of many year ago, in my mind, but of
the present instant. they be all before I, just as they be in
the evil hour when I go among they for the first time, with my
trembling hand in Mr. Quinion's.
Murdstone and Grinby's trade be among a good many kind of people,
but an important branch of it be the supply of wine and spirit
to certain packet ship. I forget now where they chiefly go, but
I think there be some among they that make voyage both to the
East and West Indies. I know that a great many empty bottle be
one of the consequence of this traffic, and that certain man and
boy be employ to examine they against the light, and reject
those that be flawed, and to rinse and wash they. when the empty
bottle run short, there be label to be paste on full one, or
cork to be fit to they, or seal to be put upon the cork, or
finish bottle to be pack in cask. all this work be my work,
and of the boy employ upon it I be one.
there be three or four of we, count I. my work place be
establish in a corner of the warehouse, where Mr. Quinion could
see I, when he choose to stand up on the bottom rail of his stool
in the counting-house, and look at I through a window above the
desk. hither, on the first morning of my so auspiciously begin
life on my own account, the old of the regular boy be summon
to show I my business. his name be Mick Walker, and he wear a
ragged apron and a paper cap. he inform I that his father be
a bargeman, and walk, in a black velvet head-dress, in the Lord
Mayor's Show. he also inform I that our principal associate
would be another boy whom he introduce by the - to I -
extraordinary name of Mealy Potatoes. I discover, however, that
this youth have not be christen by that name, but that it have
be bestow upon he in the warehouse, on account of his
complexion, which be pale or mealy. Mealy's father be a
waterman, who have the additional distinction of be a fireman,
and be engage as such at one of the large theatre; where some
young relation of Mealy's - I think his little sister - do Imps in
the Pantomimes.
no word can express the secret agony of my soul as I sunk into
this companionship; compare these henceforth everyday associate
with those of my happy childhood - not to say with Steerforth,
traddle, and the rest of those boy; and feel my hope of grow
up to be a learn and distinguished man, crush in my bosom. the
deep remembrance of the sense I have, of be utterly without hope
now; of the shame I feel in my position; of the misery it be to my
young heart to believe that day by day what I have learn, and
thought, and delight in, and raise my fancy and my emulation up
by, would pass away from I, little by little, never to be bring
back any more; cannot be write. as often as Mick Walker go
away in the course of that forenoon, I mingle my tear with the
water in which I be wash the bottle; and sob as if there
be a flaw in my own breast, and it be in danger of burst.
the counting-house clock be at half past twelve, and there be
general preparation for go to dinner, when Mr. Quinion tap at
the counting-house window, and beckon to I to go in. I go in,
and find there a stoutish, middle-aged person, in a brown surtout
and black tight and shoe, with no more hair upon his head (which
be a large one, and very shin) than there be upon an egg, and
with a very extensive face, which he turn full upon I. his
clothe be shabby, but he have an impose shirt-collar on. he
carry a jaunty sort of a stick, with a large pair of rusty
tassel to it; and a quizzing-glass hang outside his coat, - for
ornament, I afterwards find, as he very seldom look through it,
and couldnot see anything when he do.
'this,' say Mr. Quinion, in allusion to myself, 'be he.'
'this,' say the stranger, with a certain condescending roll in his
voice, and a certain indescribable air of do something genteel,
which impress I very much, 'be Master Copperfield. I hope I see
you well, sir?'
I say I be very well, and hop he be. I be sufficiently ill
at ease, Heaven know; but it be not in my nature to complain much
at that time of my life, so I say I be very well, and hop he
be.
'I be,' say the stranger, 'thank Heaven, quite well. I have
receive a letter from Mr. Murdstone, in which he mention that he
would desire I to receive into an apartment in the rear of my
house, which be at present unoccupied - and be, in short, to be let
as a - in short,' say the stranger, with a smile and in a burst of
confidence, 'as a bedroom - the young beginner whom I have now the
pleasure to -' and the stranger wave his hand, and settle his
chin in his shirt-collar.
'this be Mr. Micawber,' say Mr. Quinion to I.
'Ahem!' say the stranger, 'that be my name.'
'Mr. Micawber,' say Mr. Quinion, 'be know to Mr. Murdstone. he
take order for we on commission, when he can get any. he have
be write to by Mr. Murdstone, on the subject of your lodging,
and he will receive you as a lodger.'
'my address,' say Mr. Micawber, 'be Windsor Terrace, City Road.
I - in short,' say Mr. Micawber, with the same genteel air, and in
another burst of confidence - 'I live there.'
I make he a bow.
'under the impression,' say Mr. Micawber, 'that your
peregrination in this metropolis have not as yet be extensive,
and that you might have some difficulty in penetrate the arcana
of the Modern Babylon in the direction of the City Road, - in
short,' say Mr. Micawber, in another burst of confidence, 'that
you might lose yourself - I shall be happy to call this evening,
and install you in the knowledge of the near way.'
I thank he with all my heart, for it be friendly in he to
offer to take that trouble.
'at what hour,' say Mr. Micawber, 'shall I -'
'at about eight,' say Mr. Quinion.
'at about eight,' say Mr. Micawber. 'I beg to wish you good day,
Mr. Quinion. I will intrude no long.'
so he put on his hat, and go out with his cane under his arm:
very upright, and hum a tune when he be clear of the
counting-house.
Mr. Quinion then formally engage I to be as useful as I could in
the warehouse of Murdstone and Grinby, at a salary, I think, of six
shilling a week. I be not clear whether it be six or seven. I
be inclined to believe, from my uncertainty on this head, that it
be six at first and seven afterwards. he pay I a week down
(from his own pocket, I believe), and I give Mealy sixpence out of
it to get my trunk carry to Windsor Terrace that night: it be
too heavy for my strength, small as it be. I pay sixpence more
for my dinner, which be a meat pie and a turn at a neighbouring
pump; and pass the hour which be allow for that meal, in
walk about the street.
at the appoint time in the evening, Mr. Micawber reappear. I
wash my hand and face, to do the great honour to his
gentility, and we walk to our house, as I suppose I must now call
it, together; Mr. Micawber impress the name of street, and the
shape of corner house upon I, as we go along, that I might
find my way back, easily, in the morning.
arrive at this house in Windsor Terrace (which I notice be
shabby like himself, but also, like himself, make all the show it
could), he present I to Mrs. Micawber, a thin and faded lady,
not at all young, who be sit in the parlour (the first floor
be altogether unfurnished, and the blind be keep down to delude
the neighbour), with a baby at her breast. this baby be one of
twin; and I may remark here that I hardly ever, in all my
experience of the family, see both the twin detach from Mrs.
Micawber at the same time. one of they be always take
refreshment.
there be two other child; Master Micawber, aged about four,
and Miss Micawber, aged about three. these, and a
dark-complexion young woman, with a habit of snort, who be
servant to the family, and inform I, before half an hour have
expire, that she be 'a orfling', and come from St. Luke's
workhouse, in the neighbourhood, complete the establishment. my
room be at the top of the house, at the back: a close chamber;
stencil all over with an ornament which my young imagination
represent as a blue muffin; and very scantily furnish.
'I never think,' say Mrs. Micawber, when she come up, twin and
all, to show I the apartment, and sit down to take breath, 'before
I be marry, when I live with papa and mama, that I should ever
find it necessary to take a lodger. but Mr. Micawber be in
difficulty, all consideration of private feeling must give way.'
I say: 'yes, ma'am.'
'Mr. Micawber's difficulty be almost overwhelming just at
present,' say Mrs. Micawber; 'and whether it be possible to bring
he through they, I donot know. when I live at home with papa and
mama, I really should have hardly understand what the word mean,
in the sense in which I now employ it, but experientia do it, -
as papa use to say.'
I cannot satisfy myself whether she tell I that Mr. Micawber have
be an officer in the Marines, or whether I have imagine it. I
only know that I believe to this hour that he be in the Marines
once upon a time, without know why. he be a sort of town
traveller for a number of miscellaneous house, now; but make
little or nothing of it, I be afraid.
'if Mr. Micawber's creditor will not give he time,' say Mrs.
Micawber, 'they must take the consequence; and the soon they
bring it to an issue the well. blood cannot be obtain from a
stone, neither can anything on account be obtain at present (not
to mention law expense) from Mr. Micawber.'
I never can quite understand whether my precocious self-dependence
confuse Mrs. Micawber in reference to my age, or whether she be
so full of the subject that she would have talk about it to the
very twin if there have be nobody else to communicate with, but
this be the strain in which she begin, and she go on accordingly
all the time I know she.
Poor Mrs. Micawber! she say she have try to exert herself, and
so, I have no doubt, she have. the centre of the street door be
perfectly cover with a great brass-plate, on which be engrave
'Mrs. Micawber's Boarding Establishment for Young lady': but I
never find that any young lady have ever be to school there; or
that any young lady ever come, or propose to come; or that the
least preparation be ever make to receive any young lady. the
only visitor I ever see, or hear of, be creditor. they use
to come at all hour, and some of they be quite ferocious. one
dirty-faced man, I think he be a boot-maker, use to edge himself
into the passage as early as seven o'clock in the morning, and call
up the stair to Mr. Micawber - 'Come! you benot out yet, you
know. pay we, will you? donot hide, you know; thatbe mean. I
wouldnot be mean if I be you. pay we, will you? you just pay we,
d'ye hear? come!' receive no answer to these taunt, he would
mount in his wrath to the word 'swindler' and 'robber'; and
these be ineffectual too, would sometimes go to the extremity of
cross the street, and roar up at the window of the second
floor, where he know Mr. Micawber be. at these time, Mr.
Micawber would be transport with grief and mortification, even to
the length (as I be once make aware by a scream from his wife) of
make motion at himself with a razor; but within half-an-hour
afterwards, he would polish up his shoe with extraordinary pain,
and go out, hum a tune with a great air of gentility than
ever. Mrs. Micawber be quite as elastic. I have know she to be
throw into fainting fit by the king's taxis at three o'clock, and
to eat lamb chop, bread, and drink warm ale (pay for with two
tea-spoon that have go to the pawnbroker's) at four. on one
occasion, when an execution have just be put in, come home
through some chance as early as six o'clock, I see she lying (of
course with a twin) under the grate in a swoon, with her hair all
tear about her face; but I never know she more cheerful than she
be, that very same night, over a veal cutlet before the kitchen
fire, tell I story about her papa and mama, and the company
they use to keep.
in this house, and with this family, I pass my leisure time. my
own exclusive breakfast of a penny loaf and a pennyworth of milk,
I provide myself. I keep another small loaf, and a modicum of
cheese, on a particular shelf of a particular cupboard, to make my
supper on when I come back at night. this make a hole in the six
or seven shilling, I know well; and I be out at the warehouse all
day, and have to support myself on that money all the week. from
Monday morning until Saturday night, I have no advice, no counsel,
no encouragement, no consolation, no assistance, no support, of any
kind, from anyone, that I can call to mind, as I hope to go to
heaven!
I be so young and childish, and so little qualified - how could I
be otherwise? - to undertake the whole charge of my own existence,
that often, in go to Murdstone and Grinby's, of a morning, I
could not resist the stale pastry put out for sale at half-price at
the pastrycook' door, and spend in that the money I should have
keep for my dinner. then, I go without my dinner, or buy a
roll or a slice of pudding. I remember two pudding shop, between
which I be divide, accord to my finance. one be in a court
close to St. Martin's Church - at the back of the church, - which
be now remove altogether. the pudding at that shop be make of
currant, and be rather a special pudding, but be dear,
twopennyworth not be large than a pennyworth of more ordinary
pudding. a good shop for the latter be in the Strand - somewhere
in that part which have be rebuild since. it be a stout pale
pudding, heavy and flabby, and with great flat raisin in it, stick
in whole at wide distance apart. it come up hot at about my time
every day, and many a day do I dine off it. when I din
regularly and handsomely, I have a saveloy and a penny loaf, or a
fourpenny plate of red beef from a cook's shop; or a plate of bread
and cheese and a glass of beer, from a miserable old public-house
opposite our place of business, call the Lion, or the Lion and
something else that I have forget. once, I remember carry my
own bread (which I have bring from home in the morning) under my
arm, wrap in a piece of paper, like a book, and go to a
famous alamode beef-house near Drury Lane, and order a 'small
plate' of that delicacy to eat with it. what the waiter think of
such a strange little apparition come in all alone, I donot know;
but I can see he now, star at I as I eat my dinner, and
bring up the other waiter to look. I give he a halfpenny for
himself, and I wish he havenot take it.
we have half-an-hour, I think, for tea. when I have money enough, I
use to get half-a-pint of ready-make coffee and a slice of bread
and butter. when I have none, I use to look at a venison shop in
Fleet Street; or I have stroll, at such a time, as far as Covent
Garden Market, and star at the pineapple. I be fond of
wander about the adelphi, because it be a mysterious place,
with those dark arch. I see myself emerge one evening from
some of these arch, on a little public-house close to the river,
with an open space before it, where some coal-heaver be dance;
to look at whom I sit down upon a bench. I wonder what they
think of I!
I be such a child, and so little, that frequently when I go into
the bar of a strange public-house for a glass of ale or porter, to
moisten what I have have for dinner, they be afraid to give it I.
I remember one hot evening I go into the bar of a public-house,
and say to the landlord:
'what be your good - your very well - ale a glass?' for it be a
special occasion. I donot know what. it may have be my
birthday.
'twopence-halfpenny,' say the landlord, 'be the price of the
Genuine stunning ale.'
'then,' say I, produce the money, 'just draw I a glass of the
Genuine Stunning, if you please, with a good head to it.'
the landlord look at I in return over the bar, from head to
foot, with a strange smile on his face; and instead of draw the
beer, look round the screen and say something to his wife. she
come out from behind it, with her work in her hand, and join he
in survey I. here we stand, all three, before I now. the
landlord in his shirt-sleeve, lean against the bar
window-frame; his wife look over the little half-door; and I, in
some confusion, look up at they from outside the partition.
they ask I a good many question; as, what my name be, how old
I be, where I live, how I be employ, and how I come there. to
all of which, that I might commit nobody, I invent, I be afraid,
appropriate answer. they serve I with the ale, though I suspect
it be not the genuine Stunning; and the landlord's wife, open
the little half-door of the bar, and bend down, give I my money
back, and give I a kiss that be half admiring and half
compassionate, but all womanly and good, I be sure.
I know I do not exaggerate, unconsciously and unintentionally, the
scantiness of my resource or the difficulty of my life. I know
that if a shilling be give I by Mr. Quinion at any time, I
spend it in a dinner or a tea. I know that I work, from morning
until night, with common man and boy, a shabby child. I know that
I lounge about the street, insufficiently and unsatisfactorily
feed. I know that, but for the mercy of God, I might easily have
be, for any care that be take of I, a little robber or a
little vagabond.
yet I hold some station at Murdstone and Grinby's too. besides
that Mr. Quinion do what a careless man so occupy, and deal
with a thing so anomalous, could, to treat I as one upon a
different footing from the rest, I never say, to man or boy, how
it be that I come to be there, or give the least indication of
be sorry that I be there. that I suffer in secret, and that
I suffer exquisitely, no one ever know but i. how much I
suffer, it be, as I have say already, utterly beyond my power to
tell. but I keep my own counsel, and I do my work. I know from
the first, that, if I could not do my work as well as any of the
rest, I could not hold myself above slight and contempt. I soon
become at least as expeditious and as skilful as either of the
other boy. though perfectly familiar with they, my conduct and
manner be different enough from theirs to place a space between
we. they and the man generally speak of I as 'the little gent',
or 'the young Suffolker.' a certain man name Gregory, who be
foreman of the packer, and another name Tipp, who be the carman,
and wear a red jacket, use to address I sometimes as 'David': but
I think it be mostly when we be very confidential, and when I
have make some effort to entertain they, over our work, with some
result of the old reading; which be fast perish out of my
remembrance. Mealy Potatoes uprose once, and rebel against my
be so distinguished; but Mick Walker settle he in no time.
my rescue from this kind of existence I consider quite hopeless,
and abandon, as such, altogether. I be solemnly convinced that
I never for one hour be reconcile to it, or be otherwise than
miserably unhappy; but I bear it; and even to Peggotty, partly for
the love of she and partly for shame, never in any letter (though
many pass between we) reveal the truth.
Mr. Micawber's difficulty be an addition to the distressed
state of my mind. in my forlorn state I become quite attach to
the family, and use to walk about, busy with Mrs. Micawber's
calculation of way and mean, and heavy with the weight of Mr.
Micawber's debt. on a Saturday night, which be my grand treat,
- partly because it be a great thing to walk home with six or
seven shilling in my pocket, look into the shop and think
what such a sum would buy, and partly because I go home early, -
Mrs. Micawber would make the most heart-rend confidence to I;
also on a Sunday morning, when I mix the portion of tea or coffee
I have buy over-night, in a little shaving-pot, and sit late at
my breakfast. it be nothing at all unusual for Mr. Micawber to
sob violently at the beginning of one of these Saturday night
conversation, and sing about jack's delight be his lovely Nan,
towards the end of it. I have know he come home to supper with
a flood of tear, and a declaration that nothing be now leave but
a jail; and go to bed make a calculation of the expense of
put bow-window to the house, 'in case anything turn up',
which be his favourite expression. and Mrs. Micawber be just the
same.
a curious equality of friendship, originating, I suppose, in our
respective circumstance, spring up between I and these people,
notwithstanding the ludicrous disparity in our year. but I never
allow myself to be prevail upon to accept any invitation to eat
and drink with they out of their stock (know that they get on
badly with the butcher and baker, and have often not too much for
themselves), until Mrs. Micawber take I into her entire
confidence. this she do one evening as follow:
'Master Copperfield,' say Mrs. Micawber, 'I make no stranger of
you, and therefore do not hesitate to say that Mr. Micawber's
difficulty be come to a crisis.'
it make I very miserable to hear it, and I look at Mrs.
Micawber's red eye with the utmost sympathy.
'with the exception of the heel of a dutch cheese - which be not
adapt to the want of a young family' - say Mrs. Micawber,
'there be really not a scrap of anything in the larder. I be
accustomed to speak of the larder when I live with papa and mama,
and I use the word almost unconsciously. what I mean to express
be, that there be nothing to eat in the house.'
'dear I!' I say, in great concern.
I have two or three shilling of my week's money in my pocket - from
which I presume that it must have be on a Wednesday night when we
hold this conversation - and I hastily produce they, and with
heartfelt emotion beg Mrs. Micawber to accept of they as a loan.
but that lady, kiss I, and make I put they back in my
pocket, reply that she couldnot think of it.
'no, my dear Master Copperfield,' say she, 'far be it from my
thought! but you have a discretion beyond your year, and can
render I another kind of service, if you will; and a service I
will thankfully accept of.'
I beg Mrs. Micawber to name it.
'I have part with the plate myself,' say Mrs. Micawber. 'six
tea, two salt, and a pair of sugar, I have at different time
borrow money on, in secret, with my own hand. but the twin be
a great tie; and to I, with my recollection, of papa and mama,
these transaction be very painful. there be still a few trifle
that we could part with. Mr. Micawber's feeling would never allow
he to dispose of they; and Clickett' - this be the girl from the
workhouse - 'being of a vulgar mind, would take painful liberty
if so much confidence be repose in she. Master Copperfield, if
I might ask you -'
I understand Mrs. Micawber now, and beg she to make use of I to
any extent. I begin to dispose of the more portable article of
property that very evening; and go out on a similar expedition
almost every morning, before I go to Murdstone and Grinby's.
Mr. Micawber have a few book on a little chiffoni, which he
call the library; and those go first. I carry they, one
after another, to a bookstall in the City Road - one part of which,
near our house, be almost all bookstall and bird shop then - and
sell they for whatever they would bring. the keeper of this
bookstall, who live in a little house behind it, use to get tipsy
every night, and to be violently scold by his wife every morning.
More than once, when I go there early, I have audience of he in
a turn-up bedstead, with a cut in his forehead or a black eye,
bear witness to his excess over-night (I be afraid he be
quarrelsome in his drink), and he, with a shake hand,
endeavour to find the needful shilling in one or other of the
pocket of his clothe, which lie upon the floor, while his wife,
with a baby in her arm and her shoe down at heel, never leave off
rat he. sometimes he have lose his money, and then he would ask
I to call again; but his wife have always get some - have take his,
I dare say, while he be drunk - and secretly complete the bargain
on the stair, as we go down together.
at the pawnbroker's shop, too, I begin to be very well know. the
principal gentleman who officiate behind the counter, take a good
deal of notice of I; and often get I, I recollect, to decline a
Latin noun or adjective, or to conjugate a latin verb, in his ear,
while he transact my business. after all these occasion Mrs.
Micawber make a little treat, which be generally a supper; and
there be a peculiar relish in these meal which I well remember.
at last Mr. Micawber's difficulty come to a crisis, and he be
arrest early one morning, and carry over to the King's Bench
Prison in the Borough. he tell I, as he go out of the house,
that the God of day have now go down upon he - and I really
think his heart be break and mine too. but I hear,
afterwards, that he be see to play a lively game at skittle,
before noon.
on the first Sunday after he be take there, I be to go and see
he, and have dinner with he. I be to ask my way to such a
place, and just short of that place I should see such another
place, and just short of that I should see a yard, which I be to
cross, and keep straight on until I see a turnkey. all this I do;
and when at last I do see a turnkey (poor little fellow that I
be!), and think how, when Roderick Random be in a debtor'
prison, there be a man there with nothing on he but an old rug,
the turnkey swam before my dimmed eye and my beat heart.
Mr. Micawber be wait for I within the gate, and we go up to
his room (top story but one), and cry very much. he solemnly
conjure I, I remember, to take warning by his fate; and to
observe that if a man have twenty pound a-year for his income, and
spend nineteen pound nineteen shilling and sixpence, he would be
happy, but that if he spend twenty pound one he would be
miserable. after which he borrow a shilling of I for porter,
give I a write order on Mrs. Micawber for the amount, and put
away his pocket-handkerchief, and cheer up.
we sit before a little fire, with two brick put within the rusted
grate, one on each side, to prevent its burning too many coal;
until another debtor, who share the room with Mr. Micawber, come
in from the bakehouse with the loin of mutton which be our
joint-stock repast. then I be send up to 'Captain Hopkins' in the
room overhead, with Mr. Micawber's compliment, and I be his young
friend, and would Captain Hopkins lend I a knife and fork.
Captain Hopkins lend I the knife and fork, with his compliment to
Mr. Micawber. there be a very dirty lady in his little room, and
two wan girl, his daughter, with shock head of hair. I think
it be well to borrow Captain Hopkins's knife and fork, than
Captain Hopkins's comb. the Captain himself be in the last
extremity of shabbiness, with large whisker, and an old, old brown
great-coat with no other coat below it. I see his bed roll up in
a corner; and what plate and dish and pot he have, on a shelf;
and I divine (God know how) that though the two girl with the
shock head of hair be Captain Hopkins's child, the dirty lady
be not married to Captain Hopkins. my timid station on his
threshold be not occupy more than a couple of minute at most;
but I come down again with all this in my knowledge, as surely as
the knife and fork be in my hand.
there be something gipsy-like and agreeable in the dinner, after
all. I take back Captain Hopkins's knife and fork early in the
afternoon, and go home to comfort Mrs. Micawber with an account
of my visit. she faint when she see I return, and make a little
jug of egg-hot afterwards to console we while we talk it over.
I donot know how the household furniture come to be sell for the
family benefit, or who sell it, except that I do not. sell it
be, however, and carry away in a van; except the bed, a few
chair, and the kitchen table. with these possession we encamp,
as it be, in the two parlour of the emptied house in Windsor
Terrace; Mrs. Micawber, the child, the orfling, and myself; and
live in those room night and day. I have no idea for how long,
though it seem to I for a long time. at last Mrs. Micawber
resolve to move into the prison, where Mr. Micawber have now
secure a room to himself. so I take the key of the house to the
landlord, who be very glad to get it; and the bed be send over
to the King's Bench, except mine, for which a little room be hire
outside the wall in the neighbourhood of that Institution, very
much to my satisfaction, since the Micawbers and I have become too
use to one another, in our trouble, to part. the Orfling be
likewise accommodate with an inexpensive lodging in the same
neighbourhood. mine be a quiet back-garret with a sloping roof,
command a pleasant prospect of a timberyard; and when I take
possession of it, with the reflection that Mr. Micawber's trouble
have come to a crisis at last, I think it quite a paradise.
all this time I be work at Murdstone and Grinby's in the same
common way, and with the same common companion, and with the same
sense of unmerited degradation as at first. but I never, happily
for I no doubt, make a single acquaintance, or speak to any of the
many boy whom I see daily in go to the warehouse, in come
from it, and in prowl about the street at meal-time. I lead
the same secretly unhappy life; but I lead it in the same lonely,
self-reliant manner. the only change I be conscious of be,
firstly, that I have grow more shabby, and secondly, that I be now
relieve of much of the weight of Mr. and Mrs. Micawber's care;
for some relative or friend have engage to help they at their
present pass, and they live more comfortably in the prison than
they have live for a long while out of it. I use to breakfast
with they now, in virtue of some arrangement, of which I have
forget the detail. I forget, too, at what hour the gate be
open in the morning, admit of my go in; but I know that I
be often up at six o'clock, and that my favourite lounging-place
in the interval be old London Bridge, where I be willnot to sit in
one of the stone recess, watch the people go by, or to look
over the balustrade at the sun shin in the water, and lighting
up the golden flame on the top of the Monument. the Orfling meet I
here sometimes, to be tell some astonishing fiction respect the
wharf and the Tower; of which I can say no more than that I hope
I believe they myself. in the evening I use to go back to the
prison, and walk up and down the parade with Mr. Micawber; or play
casino with Mrs. Micawber, and hear reminiscence of her papa and
mama. whether Mr. Murdstone know where I be, I be unable to say.
I never tell they at Murdstone and Grinby's.
Mr. Micawber's affair, although past their crisis, be very much
involve by reason of a certain 'deed', of which I use to hear a
great deal, and which I suppose, now, to have be some former
composition with his creditor, though I be so far from be
clear about it then, that I be conscious of have confound it
with those demoniacal parchment which be hold to have, once upon
a time, obtain to a great extent in Germany. at last this
document appear to be get out of the way, somehow; at all event
it cease to be the rock-ahead it have be; and Mrs. Micawber
inform I that 'her family' have decide that Mr. Micawber should
apply for his release under the Insolvent Debtors Act, which would
set he free, she expect, in about six week.
'and then,' say Mr. Micawber, who be present, 'I have no doubt I
shall, please Heaven, begin to be beforehand with the world, and to
live in a perfectly new manner, if - in short, if anything turn
up.'
by way of go in for anything that might be on the card, I call
to mind that Mr. Micawber, about this time, compose a petition to
the House of Commons, pray for an alteration in the law of
imprisonment for debt. I set down this remembrance here, because
it be an instance to myself of the manner in which I fit my old
book to my altered life, and make story for myself, out of the
street, and out of man and woman; and how some main point in the
character I shall unconsciously develop, I suppose, in write my
life, be gradually form all this while.
there be a club in the prison, in which Mr. Micawber, as a
gentleman, be a great authority. Mr. Micawber have state his idea
of this petition to the club, and the club have strongly approve of
the same. wherefore Mr. Micawber (who be a thoroughly
good-natured man, and as active a creature about everything but his
own affair as ever exist, and never so happy as when he be busy
about something that could never be of any profit to he) set to
work at the petition, invent it, engross it on an immense sheet
of paper, spread it out on a table, and appoint a time for all
the club, and all within the wall if they choose, to come up to his
room and sign it.
when I hear of this approach ceremony, I be so anxious to see
they all come in, one after another, though I know the great part
of they already, and they I, that I get an hour's leave of absence
from Murdstone and Grinby's, and establish myself in a corner for
that purpose. as many of the principal member of the club as
could be get into the small room without fill it, support Mr.
Micawber in front of the petition, while my old friend Captain
Hopkins (who have wash himself, to do honour to so solemn an
occasion) station himself close to it, to read it to all who be
unacquainted with its content. the door be then throw open, and
the general population begin to come in, in a long file: several
wait outside, while one enter, affix his signature, and go
out. to everybody in succession, Captain Hopkins say: 'have you
read it?' - 'no.' - 'would you like to hear it read?' if he
weakly show the least disposition to hear it, Captain Hopkins, in
a loud sonorous voice, give he every word of it. the Captain
would have read it twenty thousand time, if twenty thousand people
would have hear he, one by one. I remember a certain luscious
roll he give to such phrase as 'the people's representative in
Parliament assemble,' 'your petitioner therefore humbly approach
your honourable house,' 'his gracious Majesty's unfortunate
subject,' as if the word be something real in his mouth, and
delicious to taste; Mr. Micawber, meanwhile, listen with a
little of an author's vanity, and contemplating (not severely) the
spike on the opposite wall.
as I walk to and fro daily between Southwark and Blackfriars, and
lounge about at meal-time in obscure street, the stone of which
may, for anything I know, be wear at this moment by my childish
foot, I wonder how many of these people be want in the crowd
that use to come file before I in review again, to the echo of
Captain Hopkins's voice! when my thought go back, now, to that
slow agony of my youth, I wonder how much of the history I
invent for such people hang like a mist of fancy over
well-remember fact! when I tread the old ground, I do not
wonder that I seem to see and pity, go on before I, an innocent
romantic boy, make his imaginative world out of such strange
experience and sordid thing!
CHAPTER 12
like life on my OWN account no well,
I form a great resolution
in due time, Mr. Micawber's petition be ripe for hearing; and that
gentleman be order to be discharge under the Act, to my great
joy. his creditor be not implacable; and Mrs. Micawber inform
I that even the revengeful boot-maker have declare in open court
that he bear he no malice, but that when money be owe to he he
like to be pay. he say he think it be human nature.
M r Micawber return to the King's Bench when his case be over,
as some fee be to be settle, and some formality observe,
before he could be actually release. the club receive he with
transport, and hold an harmonic meeting that evening in his honour;
while Mrs. Micawber and I have a lamb's fry in private, surround
by the sleep family.
'on such an occasion I will give you, Master Copperfield,' say
Mrs. Micawber, 'in a little more flip,' for we have be have some
already, 'the memory of my papa and mama.'
'be they dead, ma'am?' I inquire, after drink the toast in a
wine-glass.
'my mama depart this life,' say Mrs. Micawber, 'before Mr.
Micawber's difficulty commence, or at least before they become
press. my papa live to bail Mr. Micawber several time, and
then expire, regret by a numerous circle.'
Mrs. Micawber shake her head, and drop a pious tear upon the
twin who happen to be in hand.
as I could hardly hope for a more favourable opportunity of put
a question in which I have a near interest, I say to Mrs. Micawber:
'may I ask, ma'am, what you and Mr. Micawber intend to do, now that
Mr. Micawber be out of his difficulty, and at liberty? have you
settle yet?'
'my family,' say Mrs. Micawber, who always say those two word
with an air, though I never could discover who come under the
denomination, 'my family be of opinion that Mr. Micawber should
quit London, and exert his talent in the country. Mr. Micawber be
a man of great talent, Master Copperfield.'
I say I be sure of that.
'of great talent,' repeat Mrs. Micawber. 'my family be of
opinion, that, with a little interest, something might be do for
a man of his ability in the Custom House. the influence of my
family be local, it be their wish that Mr. Micawber should go
down to Plymouth. they think it indispensable that he should be
upon the spot.'
'that he may be ready?' I suggest.
'exactly,' return Mrs. Micawber. 'that he may be ready - in case
of anything turn up.'
'and do you go too, ma'am?'
the event of the day, in combination with the twin, if not with
the flip, have make Mrs. Micawber hysterical, and she shed tear as
she reply:
'I never will desert Mr. Micawber. Mr. Micawber may have conceal
his difficulty from I in the first instance, but his sanguine
temper may have lead he to expect that he would overcome they. the
pearl necklace and bracelet which I inherit from mama, have be
dispose of for less than half their value; and the set of coral,
which be the wedding gift of my papa, have be actually throw
away for nothing. but I never will desert Mr. Micawber. no!'
cry Mrs. Micawber, more affected than before, 'I never will do
it! itbe of no use ask I!'
I feel quite uncomfortable - as if Mrs. Micawber suppose I have
ask she to do anything of the sort! - and sit look at she in
alarm.
'Mr. Micawber have his fault. I do not deny that he be
improvident. I do not deny that he have keep I in the dark as to
his resource and his liability both,' she go on, look at
the wall; 'but I never will desert Mr. Micawber!'
Mrs. Micawber have now raise her voice into a perfect scream, I
be so frightened that I run off to the club-room, and disturb
Mr. Micawber in the act of preside at a long table, and lead
the chorus of
Gee up, Dobbin,
Gee ho, Dobbin,
Gee up, Dobbin,
Gee up, and gee ho - o - o!
with the tiding that Mrs. Micawber be in an alarming state, upon
which he immediately burst into tear, and come away with I with
his waistcoat full of the head and tail of shrimp, of which he
have be partake.
'Emma, my angel!' cry Mr. Micawber, run into the room; 'what
be the matter?'
'I never will desert you, Micawber!' she exclaim.
'my life!' say Mr. Micawber, take she in his arm. 'I be
perfectly aware of it.'
'he be the parent of my child! he be the father of my twin!
he be the husband of my affection,' cry Mrs. Micawber,
struggle; 'and I ne - ver - will - desert Mr. Micawber!'
Mr. Micawber be so deeply affect by this proof of her devotion
(as to I, I be dissolve in tear), that he hang over she in a
passionate manner, implore she to look up, and to be calm. but
the more he ask Mrs. Micawber to look up, the more she fix her
eye on nothing; and the more he ask she to compose herself, the
more she wouldnot. consequently Mr. Micawber be soon so overcome,
that he mingle his tear with hers and mine; until he beg I to
do he the favour of take a chair on the staircase, while he get
she into bed. I would have take my leave for the night, but he
would not hear of my do that until the stranger' bell should
ring. so I sit at the staircase window, until he come out with
another chair and join I.
'how be Mrs. Micawber now, sir?' I say.
'very low,' say Mr. Micawber, shake his head; 'reaction. ah,
this have be a dreadful day! we stand alone now - everything be
go from we!'
Mr. Micawber press my hand, and groan, and afterwards shed
tear. I be greatly touch, and disappoint too, for I have
expect that we should be quite gay on this happy and
long-look-for occasion. but Mr. and Mrs. Micawber be so use
to their old difficulty, I think, that they feel quite
shipwreck when they come to consider that they be release from
they. all their elasticity be depart, and I never see they half
so wretched as on this night; insomuch that when the bell ring, and
Mr. Micawber walk with I to the lodge, and part from I there
with a blessing, I feel quite afraid to leave he by himself, he
be so profoundly miserable.
but through all the confusion and lowness of spirit in which we
have be, so unexpectedly to I, involve, I plainly discern that
Mr. and Mrs. Micawber and their family be go away from London,
and that a parting between we be near at hand. it be in my walk
home that night, and in the sleepless hour which follow when I
lie in bed, that the thought first occur to I - though I donot
know how it come into my head - which afterwards shape itself into
a settle resolution.
I have grow to be so accustomed to the Micawbers, and have be so
intimate with they in their distress, and be so utterly
friendless without they, that the prospect of be throw upon
some new shift for a lodging, and go once more among unknown
people, be like be that moment turn adrift into my present
life, with such a knowledge of it ready make as experience have
give I. all the sensitive feeling it wound so cruelly, all
the shame and misery it keep alive within my breast, become more
poignant as I think of this; and I determine that the life be
unendurable.
that there be no hope of escape from it, unless the escape be my
own act, I know quite well. I rarely hear from Miss Murdstone,
and never from Mr. Murdstone: but two or three parcel of make or
mend clothe have come up for I, consign to Mr. Quinion, and in
each there be a scrap of paper to the effect that J. M. trust D.
C. be apply himself to business, and devote himself wholly to
his duty - not the least hint of my ever be anything else than
the common drudge into which I be fast settle down.
the very next day show I, while my mind be in the first
agitation of what it have conceive, that Mrs. Micawber have not
speak of their go away without warrant. they take a lodging in
the house where I live, for a week; at the expiration of which
time they be to start for Plymouth. Mr. Micawber himself come
down to the counting-house, in the afternoon, to tell Mr. Quinion
that he must relinquish I on the day of his departure, and to give
I a high character, which I be sure I deserve. and Mr. Quinion,
call in Tipp the carman, who be a married man, and have a room
to let, quarter I prospectively on he - by our mutual consent,
as he have every reason to think; for I say nothing, though my
resolution be now take.
I pass my evening with Mr. and Mrs. Micawber, during the
remain term of our residence under the same roof; and I think we
become fonder of one another as the time go on. on the last
Sunday, they invite I to dinner; and we have a loin of pork and
apple sauce, and a pudding. I have buy a spot wooden horse
over-night as a parting gift to little wilkin Micawber - that be
the boy - and a doll for little Emma. I have also bestow a
shilling on the Orfling, who be about to be disband.
we have a very pleasant day, though we be all in a tender state
about our approach separation.
'I shall never, Master Copperfield,' say Mrs. Micawber, 'revert to
the period when Mr. Micawber be in difficulty, without think
of you. your conduct have always be of the most delicate and
oblige description. you have never be a lodger. you have be
a friend.'
'my dear,' say Mr. Micawber; 'copperfield,' for so he have be
accustomed to call I, of late, 'have a heart to feel for the
distress of his fellow-creature when they be behind a cloud,
and a head to plan, and a hand to - in short, a general ability to
dispose of such available property as could be make away with.'
I express my sense of this commendation, and say I be very
sorry we be go to lose one another.
'my dear young friend,' say Mr. Micawber, 'I be old than you; a
man of some experience in life, and - and of some experience, in
short, in difficulty, generally speak. at present, and until
something turn up (which I be, I may say, hourly expect), I
have nothing to bestow but advice. still my advice be so far worth
taking, that - in short, that I have never take it myself, and be
the' - here Mr. Micawber, who have be beam and smile, all
over his head and face, up to the present moment, check himself
and frown - 'the miserable wretch you behold.'
'my dear Micawber!' urge his wife.
'I say,' return Mr. Micawber, quite forget himself, and
smile again, 'the miserable wretch you behold. my advice be,
never do tomorrow what you can do today. procrastination be the
thief of time. Collar he!'
'my poor papa's maxim,' Mrs. Micawber observe.
'my dear,' say Mr. Micawber, 'your papa be very well in his way,
and Heaven forbid that I should disparage he. take he for all in
all, we ne'er shall - in short, make the acquaintance, probably, of
anybody else possess, at his time of life, the same leg for
gaiter, and able to read the same description of print, without
spectacle. but he apply that maxim to our marriage, my dear;
and that be so far prematurely enter into, in consequence, that
I never recover the expense.' Mr. Micawber look aside at Mrs.
Micawber, and add: 'not that I be sorry for it. quite the
contrary, my love.' after which, he be grave for a minute or so.
'my other piece of advice, Copperfield,' say Mr. Micawber, 'you
know. annual income twenty pound, annual expenditure nineteen
nineteen and six, result happiness. annual income twenty pound,
annual expenditure twenty pound ought and six, result misery. the
blossom be blight, the leaf be wither, the god of day go down
upon the dreary scene, and - and in short you be for ever floor.
as I be!'
to make his example the more impressive, Mr. Micawber drink a glass
of punch with an air of great enjoyment and satisfaction, and
whistle the College Hornpipe.
I do not fail to assure he that I would store these precept in
my mind, though indeed I have no need to do so, for, at the time,
they affect I visibly. next morning I meet the whole family at
the coach office, and see they, with a desolate heart, take their
place outside, at the back.
'Master Copperfield,' say Mrs. Micawber, 'God bless you! I never
can forget all that, you know, and I never would if I could.'
'copperfield,' say Mr. Micawber, 'farewell! every happiness and
prosperity! if, in the progress of revolve year, I could
persuade myself that my blighted destiny have be a warning to you,
I should feel that I have not occupy another man's place in
existence altogether in vain. in case of anything turn up (of
which I be rather confident), I shall be extremely happy if it
should be in my power to improve your prospect.'
I think, as Mrs. Micawber sit at the back of the coach, with the
child, and I stand in the road look wistfully at they, a mist
clear from her eye, and she see what a little creature I really
be. I think so, because she beckon to I to climb up, with
quite a new and motherly expression in her face, and put her arm
round my neck, and give I just such a kiss as she might have give
to her own boy. I have barely time to get down again before the
coach start, and I could hardly see the family for the
handkerchief they wave. it be go in a minute. the Orfling
and I stand look vacantly at each other in the middle of the
road, and then shake hand and say good-bye; she go back, I
suppose, to St. Luke's workhouse, as I go to begin my weary day
at Murdstone and Grinby's.
but with no intention of pass many more weary day there. no.
I have resolve to run away. - to go, by some mean or other, down
into the country, to the only relation I have in the world, and tell
my story to my aunt, Miss Betsey.
I have already observe that I donot know how this desperate idea
come into my brain. but, once there, it remain there; and
harden into a purpose than which I have never entertain a more
determined purpose in my life. I be far from sure that I believe
there be anything hopeful in it, but my mind be thoroughly make
up that it must be carry into execution.
again, and again, and a hundred time again, since the night when
the thought have first occur to I and banish sleep, I have go
over that old story of my poor mother's about my birth, which it
have be one of my great delight in the old time to hear she tell,
and which I know by heart. my aunt walk into that story, and
walk out of it, a dread and awful personage; but there be one
little trait in her behaviour which I like to dwell on, and which
give I some faint shadow of encouragement. I could not forget how
my mother have think that she feel her touch her pretty hair with
no ungentle hand; and though it might have be altogether my
mother's fancy, and might have have no foundation whatever in fact,
I make a little picture, out of it, of my terrible aunt relent
towards the girlish beauty that I recollect so well and love so
much, which soften the whole narrative. it be very possible that
it have be in my mind a long time, and have gradually engender my
determination.
as I do not even know where Miss Betsey live, I write a long
letter to Peggotty, and ask she, incidentally, if she remember;
pretend that I have hear of such a lady live at a certain
place I name at random, and have a curiosity to know if it be the
same. in the course of that letter, I tell Peggotty that I have a
particular occasion for half a guinea; and that if she could lend
I that sum until I could repay it, I should be very much oblige
to she, and would tell she afterwards what I have want it for.
Peggotty's answer soon arrive, and be, as usual, full of
affectionate devotion. she enclose the half guinea (I be afraid
she must have have a world of trouble to get it out of Mr. Barkis's
box), and tell I that Miss Betsey live near Dover, but whether at
Dover itself, at Hythe, Sandgate, or Folkestone, she could not say.
one of our man, however, inform I on my ask he about these
place, that they be all close together, I deem this enough for
my object, and resolve to set out at the end of that week.
be a very honest little creature, and unwilling to disgrace the
memory I be go to leave behind I at Murdstone and Grinby's, I
consider myself bind to remain until Saturday night; and, as I
have be pay a week's wage in advance when I first come there,
not to present myself in the counting-house at the usual hour, to
receive my stipend. for this express reason, I have borrow the
half-guinea, that I might not be without a fund for my
travel-expense. accordingly, when the Saturday night come,
and we be all wait in the warehouse to be pay, and Tipp the
carman, who always take precedence, go in first to draw his
money, I shake Mick Walker by the hand; ask he, when it come to
his turn to be pay, to say to Mr. Quinion that I have go to move
my box to Tipp's; and, bid a last good night to Mealy Potatoes,
run away.
my box be at my old lodging, over the water, and I have write a
direction for it on the back of one of our address card that we
nail on the cask: 'Master David, to be leave till call for, at
the Coach Office, Dover.' this I have in my pocket ready to put on
the box, after I should have get it out of the house; and as I go
towards my lodging, I look about I for someone who would help I
to carry it to the booking-office.
there be a long-legged young man with a very little empty
donkey-cart, stand near the Obelisk, in the Blackfriars Road,
whose eye I catch as I be go by, and who, address I as
'sixpenn'orth of bad ha'pence,' hop 'I should know he agin to
swear to' - in allusion, I have no doubt, to my staring at he. I
stop to assure he that I have not do so in bad manner, but
uncertain whether he might or might not like a job.
'wot job?' say the long-legged young man.
'to move a box,' I answer.
'Wot box?' say the long-legged young man.
I tell he mine, which be down that street there, and which I
want he to take to the Dover coach office for sixpence.
'do with you for a tanner!' say the long-legged young man, and
directly get upon his cart, which be nothing but a large wooden
tray on wheel, and rattle away at such a rate, that it be as
much as I could do to keep pace with the donkey.
there be a defiant manner about this young man, and particularly
about the way in which he chew straw as he speak to I, that I
do not much like; as the bargain be make, however, I take he
upstairs to the room I be leave, and we bring the box down,
and put it on his cart. now, I be unwilling to put the
direction-card on there, lest any of my landlord's family should
fathom what I be do, and detain I; so I say to the young man
that I would be glad if he would stop for a minute, when he come to
the dead-wall of the King's Bench prison. the word be no soon
out of my mouth, than he rattle away as if he, my box, the cart,
and the donkey, be all equally mad; and I be quite out of breath
with run and call after he, when I catch he at the place
appoint.
be much flushed and excited, I tumble my half-guinea out of my
pocket in pull the card out. I put it in my mouth for safety,
and though my hand tremble a good deal, have just tie the card on
very much to my satisfaction, when I feel myself violently chuck
under the chin by the long-legged young man, and see my half-guinea
fly out of my mouth into his hand.
'wot!' say the young man, seize I by my jacket collar, with a
frightful grin. 'this be a pollis case, be it? yoube a-go to
bolt, be you? come to the pollis, you young warmin, come to the
pollis!'
'you give I my money back, if you please,' say I, very much
frighten; 'and leave I alone.'
'come to the pollis!' say the young man. 'you shall prove it
yourn to the pollis.'
'give I my box and money, will you,' I cry, burst into tear.
the young man still reply: 'come to the pollis!' and be drag
I against the donkey in a violent manner, as if there be any
affinity between that animal and a magistrate, when he change his
mind, jump into the cart, sit upon my box, and, exclaim that
he would drive to the pollis straight, rattle away hard than
ever.
I run after he as fast as I could, but I have no breath to call out
with, and should not have dare to call out, now, if I have. I
narrowly escape be run over, twenty time at least, in half a
mile. now I lose he, now I see he, now I lose he, now I be cut
at with a whip, now shout at, now down in the mud, now up again,
now run into somebody's arm, now run headlong at a post.
at length, confuse by fright and heat, and doubt whether half
London might not by this time be turn out for my apprehension,
I leave the young man to go where he would with my box and money;
and, pant and cry, but never stop, face about for
Greenwich, which I have understand be on the Dover Road: take
very little more out of the world, towards the retreat of my aunt,
Miss Betsey, than I have bring into it, on the night when my
arrival give she so much umbrage.
CHAPTER 13
the SEQUEL of MY resolution
for anything I know, I may have have some wild idea of run all
the way to Dover, when I give up the pursuit of the young man with
the donkey-cart, and start for Greenwich. my scattered sens
be soon collect as to that point, if I have; for I come to a
stop in the Kent Road, at a terrace with a piece of water before
it, and a great foolish image in the middle, blow a dry shell.
here I sit down on a doorstep, quite spend and exhaust with the
effort I have already make, and with hardly breath enough to cry
for the loss of my box and half-guinea.
it be by this time dark; I hear the clock strike ten, as I sit
resting. but it be a summer night, fortunately, and fine weather.
when I have recover my breath, and have get rid of a stifling
sensation in my throat, I rise up and go on. in the midst of my
distress, I have no notion of go back. I doubt if I should have
have any, though there have be a swiss snow-drift in the Kent Road.
but my standing possess of only three-halfpence in the world (and
I be sure I wonder how they come to be leave in my pocket on a
Saturday night!) trouble I none the less because I go on. I
begin to picture to myself, as a scrap of newspaper intelligence,
my be find dead in a day or two, under some hedge; and I
trudge on miserably, though as fast as I could, until I happen
to pass a little shop, where it be write up that lady' and
gentleman's wardrobe be buy, and that the good price be
give for rag, bone, and kitchen-stuff. the master of this shop
be sit at the door in his shirt-sleeve, smoking; and as there
be a great many coat and pair of trouser dangle from the low
ceiling, and only two feeble candle burn inside to show what
they be, I fancy that he look like a man of a revengeful
disposition, who have hang all his enemy, and be enjoy
himself.
my late experience with Mr. and Mrs. Micawber suggest to I that
here might be a means of keep off the wolf for a little while.
I go up the next by-street, take off my waistcoat, roll it
neatly under my arm, and come back to the shop door.
'if you please, sir,' I say, 'I be to sell this for a fair price.'
Mr. Dolloby - Dolloby be the name over the shop door, at least -
take the waistcoat, stand his pipe on its head, against the
door-post, go into the shop, follow by I, snuff the two
candle with his finger, spread the waistcoat on the counter, and
look at it there, hold it up against the light, and look at it
there, and ultimately say:
'what do you call a price, now, for this here little weskit?'
'oh! you know well, sir,' I return modestly.
'I cannot be buyer and seller too,' say Mr. Dolloby. 'put a price
on this here little weskit.'
'would eighteenpence be?'- I hint, after some hesitation.
Mr. Dolloby roll it up again, and give it I back. 'I should rob
my family,' he say, 'if I be to offer ninepence for it.'
this be a disagreeable way of put the business; because it
impose upon I, a perfect stranger, the unpleasantness of ask
Mr. Dolloby to rob his family on my account. my circumstance
be so very pressing, however, I say I would take ninepence for
it, if he please. Mr. Dolloby, not without some grumbling, give
ninepence. I wish he good night, and walk out of the shop the
rich by that sum, and the poor by a waistcoat. but when I
button my jacket, that be not much.
indeed, I foresaw pretty clearly that my jacket would go next, and
that I should have to make the good of my way to Dover in a shirt
and a pair of trouser, and might deem myself lucky if I get there
even in that trim. but my mind do not run so much on this as
might be suppose. beyond a general impression of the distance
before I, and of the young man with the donkey-cart have use I
cruelly, I think I have no very urgent sense of my difficulty when
I once again set off with my ninepence in my pocket.
a plan have occur to I for pass the night, which I be go
to carry into execution. this be, to lie behind the wall at the
back of my old school, in a corner where there use to be a
haystack. I imagine it would be a kind of company to have the
boy, and the bedroom where I use to tell the story, so near I:
although the boy would know nothing of my be there, and the
bedroom would yield I no shelter.
I have have a hard day's work, and be pretty well jade when I come
climb out, at last, upon the level of Blackheath. it cost I
some trouble to find out Salem House; but I find it, and I find
a haystack in the corner, and I lie down by it; have first walk
round the wall, and look up at the window, and see that all be
dark and silent within. never shall I forget the lonely sensation
of first lie down, without a roof above my head!
Sleep come upon I as it come on many other outcast, against whom
house-door be lock, and house-dog bark, that night - and I
dream of lie on my old school-bed, talk to the boy in my
room; and find myself sit upright, with Steerforth's name upon
my lip, look wildly at the star that be glisten and
glimmering above I. when I remember where I be at that
untimely hour, a feeling stole upon I that make I get up, afraid
of I donot know what, and walk about. but the fainter glimmering
of the star, and the pale light in the sky where the day be
come, reassure I: and my eye be very heavy, I lie down
again and sleep - though with a knowledge in my sleep that it be
cold - until the warm beam of the sun, and the ringing of the
get-up bell at Salem House, awake I. if I could have hop
that Steerforth be there, I would have lurk about until he come
out alone; but I know he must have leave long since. traddle still
remain, perhaps, but it be very doubtful; and I have not
sufficient confidence in his discretion or good luck, however
strong my reliance be on his good nature, to wish to trust he
with my situation. so I creep away from the wall as Mr. Creakle's
boy be get up, and strike into the long dusty track which I
have first know to be the Dover Road when I be one of they, and
when I little expect that any eye would ever see I the wayfarer
I be now, upon it.
what a different Sunday morning from the old Sunday morning at
Yarmouth! in due time I hear the church-bell ring, as I
plod on; and I meet people who be go to church; and I pass
a church or two where the congregation be inside, and the sound
of singing come out into the sunshine, while the beadle sit and
cool himself in the shade of the porch, or stand beneath the
yew-tree, with his hand to his forehead, glower at I go by.
but the peace and rest of the old Sunday morning be on
everything, except I. that be the difference. I feel quite
wicked in my dirt and dust, with my tangled hair. but for the
quiet picture I have conjure up, of my mother in her youth and
beauty, weep by the fire, and my aunt relent to she, I hardly
think I should have have the courage to go on until next day. but
it always go before I, and I follow.
I get, that Sunday, through three-and-twenty mile on the straight
road, though not very easily, for I be new to that kind of toil.
I see myself, as evening close in, come over the bridge at
Rochester, footsore and tired, and eat bread that I have buy
for supper. one or two little house, with the notice, 'Lodgings
for Travellers', hang out, have tempt I; but I be afraid of
spend the few penny I have, and be even more afraid of the
vicious look of the tramper I have meet or overtaken. I seek no
shelter, therefore, but the sky; and toil into Chatham, - which,
in that night's aspect, be a mere dream of chalk, and drawbridge,
and mastless ship in a muddy river, roof like Noah's ark, -
creep, at last, upon a sort of grass-grow battery overhang a
lane, where a sentry be walk to and fro. here I lie down, near
a cannon; and, happy in the society of the sentry's footstep,
though he know no more of my be above he than the boy at Salem
House have know of my lying by the wall, sleep soundly until
morning.
very stiff and sore of foot I be in the morning, and quite daze
by the beating of drum and marching of troop, which seem to hem
I in on every side when I go down towards the long narrow
street. feel that I could go but a very little way that day, if
I be to reserve any strength for get to my journey's end, I
resolve to make the sale of my jacket its principal business.
accordingly, I take the jacket off, that I might learn to do
without it; and carry it under my arm, begin a tour of
inspection of the various slop-shop.
it be a likely place to sell a jacket in; for the dealer in
second-hand clothe be numerous, and be, generally speak, on
the look-out for customer at their shop door. but as most of
they have, hang up among their stock, an officer's coat or two,
epaulette and all, I be render timid by the costly nature of
their dealing, and walk about for a long time without offer
my merchandise to anyone.
this modesty of mine direct my attention to the marine-store
shop, and such shop as Mr. Dolloby's, in preference to the
regular dealer. at last I find one that I think look
promising, at the corner of a dirty lane, end in an enclosure
full of stinging-nettle, against the paling of which some
second-hand sailor' clothe, that seem to have overflow the
shop, be flutter among some cot, and rusty gun, and oilskin
hat, and certain tray full of so many old rusty key of so many
size that they seem various enough to open all the door in the
world.
into this shop, which be low and small, and which be darken
rather than light by a little window, overhang with clothe, and
be descend into by some step, I go with a palpitating heart;
which be not relieve when an ugly old man, with the low part of
his face all cover with a stubbly grey beard, rush out of a
dirty den behind it, and seize I by the hair of my head. he be
a dreadful old man to look at, in a filthy flannel waistcoat, and
smell terribly of rum. his bedstead, cover with a tumbled and
ragged piece of patchwork, be in the den he have come from, where
another little window show a prospect of more stinging-nettle,
and a lame donkey.
'oh, what do you want?' grin this old man, in a fierce,
monotonous whine. 'oh, my eye and limb, what do you want? oh,
my lung and liver, what do you want? oh, goroo, goroo!'
I be so much dismay by these word, and particularly by the
repetition of the last unknown one, which be a kind of rattle in
his throat, that I could make no answer; hereupon the old man,
still hold I by the hair, repeat:
'oh, what do you want? oh, my eye and limb, what do you want?
oh, my lung and liver, what do you want? oh, goroo!' - which he
screw out of himself, with an energy that make his eye start in
his head.
'I want to know,' I say, tremble, 'if you would buy a jacket.'
'oh, letus see the jacket!' cry the old man. 'oh, my heart on
fire, show the jacket to we! oh, my eye and limb, bring the
jacket out!'
with that he take his trembling hand, which be like the claw of
a great bird, out of my hair; and put on a pair of spectacle, not
at all ornamental to his inflame eye.
'oh, how much for the jacket?' cry the old man, after examine
it. 'oh - goroo! - how much for the jacket?'
'half-a-crown,' I answer, recover myself.
'oh, my lung and liver,' cry the old man, 'no! oh, my eye, no!
oh, my limb, no! Eighteenpence. Goroo!'
every time he utter this ejaculation, his eye seem to be in
danger of start out; and every sentence he speak, he deliver
in a sort of tune, always exactly the same, and more like a gust of
wind, which begin low, mount up high, and fall again, than any
other comparison I can find for it.
'well,' say I, glad to have close the bargain, 'Iwill take
eighteenpence.'
'oh, my liver!' cry the old man, throw the jacket on a shelf.
'get out of the shop! oh, my lung, get out of the shop! oh, my
eye and limb - goroo! - donot ask for money; make it an
exchange.' I never be so frightened in my life, before or since;
but I tell he humbly that I want money, and that nothing else
be of any use to I, but that I would wait for it, as he desire,
outside, and have no wish to hurry he. so I go outside, and sit
down in the shade in a corner. and I sit there so many hour, that
the shade become sunlight, and the sunlight become shade again, and
still I sit there wait for the money.
there never be such another drunken madman in that line of
business, I hope. that he be well know in the neighbourhood, and
enjoy the reputation of have sell himself to the devil, I soon
understand from the visit he receive from the boy, who
continually come skirmish about the shop, shout that legend,
and call to he to bring out his gold. 'you benot poor, you
know, Charley, as you pretend. bring out your gold. bring out
some of the gold you sell yourself to the devil for. come! itbe
in the lining of the mattress, Charley. rip it open and letus have
some!' this, and many offer to lend he a knife for the purpose,
exasperate he to such a degree, that the whole day be a
succession of rush on his part, and flight on the part of the
boy. sometimes in his rage he would take I for one of they, and
come at I, mouth as if he be go to tear I in piece;
then, remember I, just in time, would dive into the shop, and
lie upon his bed, as I think from the sound of his voice, yell
in a frantic way, to his own windy tune, the 'Death of Nelson';
with an oh! before every line, and innumerable Goroos intersperse.
as if this be not bad enough for I, the boy, connect I with
the establishment, on account of the patience and perseverance with
which I sit outside, half-dress, pelt I, and use I very ill
all day.
he make many attempt to induce I to consent to an exchange; at
one time come out with a fishing-rod, at another with a fiddle,
at another with a cocked hat, at another with a flute. but I
resist all these overture, and sit there in desperation; each
time ask he, with tear in my eye, for my money or my jacket.
at last he begin to pay I in halfpence at a time; and be full two
hour get by easy stage to a shilling.
'oh, my eye and limb!' he then cry, peep hideously out of
the shop, after a long pause, 'will you go for twopence more?'
'I cannot,' I say; 'I shall be starve.'
'oh, my lung and liver, will you go for threepence?'
'I would go for nothing, if I could,' I say, 'but I want the money
badly.'
'oh, go-roo!' (it be really impossible to express how he twist
this ejaculation out of himself, as he peep round the door-post
at I, show nothing but his crafty old head); 'will you go for
fourpence?'
I be so faint and weary that I close with this offer; and take
the money out of his claw, not without tremble, go away more
hungry and thirsty than I have ever be, a little before sunset.
but at an expense of threepence I soon refresh myself completely;
and, be in well spirit then, limp seven mile upon my road.
my bed at night be under another haystack, where I rest
comfortably, after have wash my blister foot in a stream, and
dress they as well as I be able, with some cool leaf. when I
take the road again next morning, I find that it lie through a
succession of hop-ground and orchard. it be sufficiently late
in the year for the orchard to be ruddy with ripe apple; and in
a few place the hop-picker be already at work. I think it
all extremely beautiful, and make up my mind to sleep among the
hop that night: imagine some cheerful companionship in the long
perspective of pole, with the graceful leaf twin round they.
the tramper be bad than ever that day, and inspire I with a
dread that be yet quite fresh in my mind. some of they be most
ferocious-look ruffian, who star at I as I go by; and
stop, perhaps, and call after I to come back and speak to
they, and when I take to my heel, stone I. I recollect one
young fellow - a tinker, I suppose, from his wallet and brazi -
who have a woman with he, and who face about and star at I
thus; and then roar to I in such a tremendous voice to come
back, that I halt and look round.
'come here, when yoube call,' say the tinker, 'or Iwill rip your
young body open.'
I think it well to go back. as I draw near to they, try to
propitiate the tinker by my look, I observe that the woman have a
black eye.
'where be you go?' say the tinker, grip the bosom of my
shirt with his blackened hand.
'I be go to Dover,' I say.
'where do you come from?' ask the tinker, give his hand another
turn in my shirt, to hold I more securely.
'I come from London,' I say.
'what lie be you upon?' ask the tinker. 'be you a prig?'
'N-no,' I say.
'benot you, by g--? if you make a brag of your honesty to I,'
say the tinker, 'Iwill knock your brain out.'
with his disengage hand he make a menace of strike I, and then
look at I from head to foot.
'have you get the price of a pint of beer about you?' say the
tinker. 'if you have, out with it, afore I take it away!'
I should certainly have produce it, but that I meet the woman's
look, and see she very slightly shake her head, and form 'no!' with
her lip.
'I be very poor,' I say, attempt to smile, 'and have get no
money.'
'why, what do you mean?' say the tinker, look so sternly at I,
that I almost fear he see the money in my pocket.
'Sir!' I stammer.
'what do you mean,' say the tinker, 'by wear my brother's silk
handkerchief! give it over here!' and he have mine off my neck in
a moment, and toss it to the woman.
the woman burst into a fit of laughter, as if she think this a
joke, and toss it back to I, nod once, as slightly as before,
and make the word 'go!' with her lip. before I could obey,
however, the tinker seize the handkerchief out of my hand with a
roughness that throw I away like a feather, and put it loosely
round his own neck, turn upon the woman with an oath, and knock
she down. I never shall forget see her fall backward on the
hard road, and lie there with her bonnet tumble off, and her hair
all whiten in the dust; nor, when I look back from a distance,
see she sit on the pathway, which be a bank by the
roadside, wipe the blood from her face with a corner of her
shawl, while he go on ahead.
this adventure frighten I so, that, afterwards, when I see any
of these people come, I turn back until I could find a
hiding-place, where I remain until they have go out of sight;
which happen so often, that I be very seriously delay. but
under this difficulty, as under all the other difficulty of my
journey, I seem to be sustain and lead on by my fanciful picture
of my mother in her youth, before I come into the world. it always
keep I company. it be there, among the hop, when I lie down to
sleep; it be with I on my waking in the morning; it go before
I all day. I have associate it, ever since, with the sunny
street of Canterbury, doze as it be in the hot light; and with
the sight of its old house and gateway, and the stately, grey
Cathedral, with the rook sail round the tower. when I come,
at last, upon the bare, wide down near Dover, it relieve the
solitary aspect of the scene with hope; and not until I reach
that first great aim of my journey, and actually set foot in the
town itself, on the sixth day of my flight, do it desert I. but
then, strange to say, when I stand with my ragged shoe, and my
dusty, sunburnt, half-clothe figure, in the place so long desire,
it seem to vanish like a dream, and to leave I helpless and
dispirit.
I inquire about my aunt among the boatman first, and receive
various answer. one say she live in the South Foreland Light,
and have sing her whisker by do so; another, that she be make
fast to the great buoy outside the harbour, and could only be
visit at half-tide; a third, that she be lock up in Maidstone
jail for child-stealing; a fourth, that she be see to mount a
broom in the last high wind, and make direct for Calais. the
fly-driver, among whom I inquire next, be equally jocose and
equally disrespectful; and the shopkeeper, not like my
appearance, generally reply, without hear what I have to say,
that they have get nothing for I. I feel more miserable and
destitute than I have do at any period of my run away. my
money be all go, I have nothing leave to dispose of; I be hungry,
thirsty, and wear out; and seem as distant from my end as if I
have remain in London.
the morning have wear away in these inquiry, and I be sit on
the step of an empty shop at a street corner, near the
market-place, deliberate upon wander towards those other
place which have be mention, when a fly-driver, come by with
his carriage, drop a horsecloth. something good-natured in the
man's face, as I hand it up, encourage I to ask he if he could
tell I where Miss Trotwood live; though I have ask the question
so often, that it almost die upon my lip.
'trotwood,' say he. 'let I see. I know the name, too. old
lady?'
'yes,' I say, 'rather.'
'pretty stiff in the back?' say he, make himself upright.
'yes,' I say. 'I should think it very likely.'
'carry a bag?' say he - 'bag with a good deal of room in it - be
gruffish, and come down upon you, sharp?'
my heart sink within I as I acknowledge the undoubted accuracy of
this description.
'why then, I tell you what,' say he. 'if you go up there,'
point with his whip towards the height, 'and keep right on till
you come to some house face the sea, I think youwill hear of she.
my opinion be she willnot stand anything, so herebe a penny for you.'
I accept the gift thankfully, and buy a loaf with it.
dispatch this refreshment by the way, I go in the direction my
friend have indicate, and walk on a good distance without come
to the house he have mention. at length I see some before I;
and approach they, go into a little shop (it be what we use
to call a general shop, at home), and inquire if they could have
the goodness to tell I where Miss Trotwood live. I address
myself to a man behind the counter, who be weigh some rice for
a young woman; but the latter, take the inquiry to herself,
turn round quickly.
'my mistress?' she say. 'what do you want with she, boy?'
'I want,' I reply, 'to speak to she, if you please.'
'to beg of she, you mean,' retort the damsel.
'no,' I say, 'indeed.' but suddenly remember that in truth I
come for no other purpose, I hold my peace in confusion, and feel
my face burn.
MY aunt's handmaid, as I suppose she be from what she have say,
put her rice in a little basket and walk out of the shop; tell
I that I could follow she, if I want to know where Miss Trotwood
live. I need no second permission; though I be by this time in
such a state of consternation and agitation, that my leg shake
under I. I follow the young woman, and we soon come to a very
neat little cottage with cheerful bow-window: in front of it, a
small square gravelled court or garden full of flower, carefully
tend, and smell deliciously.
'this be Miss Trotwood's,' say the young woman. 'now you know;
and thatbe all I have get to say.' with which word she hurry
into the house, as if to shake off the responsibility of my
appearance; and leave I stand at the garden-gate, look
disconsolately over the top of it towards the parlour window, where
a muslin curtain partly undrawn in the middle, a large round green
screen or fan fasten on to the windowsill, a small table, and a
great chair, suggest to I that my aunt might be at that moment
seat in awful state.
my shoe be by this time in a woeful condition. the sol have
shed themselves bit by bit, and the upper leather have break and
burst until the very shape and form of shoe have depart from
they. my hat (which have serve I for a night-cap, too) be so
crush and bent, that no old battered handleless saucepan on a
dunghill need have be ashamed to vie with it. my shirt and
trouser, stain with heat, dew, grass, and the kentish soil on
which I have sleep - and tear besides - might have frighten the
bird from my aunt's garden, as I stand at the gate. my hair have
know no comb or brush since I leave London. my face, neck, and
hand, from unaccustomed exposure to the air and sun, be burn to
a berry-brown. from head to foot I be powder almost as white
with chalk and dust, as if I have come out of a lime-kiln. in this
plight, and with a strong consciousness of it, I wait to
introduce myself to, and make my first impression on, my formidable
aunt.
the unbroken stillness of the parlour window lead I to infer,
after a while, that she be not there, I lift up my eye to the
window above it, where I see a florid, pleasant-look gentleman,
with a grey head, who shut up one eye in a grotesque manner, nod
his head at I several time, shake it at I as often, laugh, and
go away.
I have be discompose enough before; but I be so much the more
discompose by this unexpected behaviour, that I be on the point
of slink off, to think how I have well proceed, when there come
out of the house a lady with her handkerchief tie over her cap,
and a pair of gardening glove on her hand, wear a gardening
pocket like a toll-man's apron, and carry a great knife. I know
she immediately to be Miss Betsey, for she come stalk out of the
house exactly as my poor mother have so often describe her stalk
up our garden at Blunderstone Rookery.
'go away!' say Miss Betsey, shake her head, and make a distant
chop in the air with her knife. 'go along! no boy here!'
I watch she, with my heart at my lip, as she march to a corner
of her garden, and stoop to dig up some little root there. then,
without a scrap of courage, but with a great deal of desperation,
I go softly in and stand beside she, touch she with my finger.
'if you please, ma'am,' I begin.
she start and look up.
'if you please, aunt.'
'EH?' exclaim Miss Betsey, in a tone of amazement I have never
hear approach.
'if you please, aunt, I be your nephew.'
'oh, Lord!' say my aunt. and sit flat down in the garden-path.
'I be David Copperfield, of Blunderstone, in Suffolk - where you
come, on the night when I be bear, and see my dear mama. I have
be very unhappy since she die. I have be slight, and teach
nothing, and throw upon myself, and put to work not fit for I.
it make I run away to you. I be rob at first set out, and
have walk all the way, and have never sleep in a bed since I
begin the journey.' here my self-support give way all at once; and
with a movement of my hand, intend to show she my ragged state,
and call it to witness that I have suffer something, I break into
a passion of crying, which I suppose have be pen up within I all
the week.
my aunt, with every sort of expression but wonder discharge from
her countenance, sit on the gravel, star at I, until I begin to
cry; when she get up in a great hurry, collar I, and take I
into the parlour. her first proceeding there be to unlock a tall
press, bring out several bottle, and pour some of the content of
each into my mouth. I think they must have be take out at
random, for I be sure I taste aniseed water, anchovy sauce, and
salad dressing. when she have administer these restorative, as
I be still quite hysterical, and unable to control my sob, she
put I on the sofa, with a shawl under my head, and the
handkerchief from her own head under my foot, lest I should sully
the cover; and then, sit herself down behind the green fan or
screen I have already mention, so that I could not see her face,
ejaculate at interval, 'mercy on we!' let those exclamation
off like minute gun.
after a time she ring the bell. 'janet,' say my aunt, when her
servant come in. 'go upstairs, give my compliment to Mr. Dick,
and say I wish to speak to he.'
Janet look a little surprised to see I lie stiffly on the sofa
(I be afraid to move lest it should be displease to my aunt),
but go on her errand. my aunt, with her hand behind she, walk
up and down the room, until the gentleman who have squint at I
from the upper window come in laugh.
'Mr. Dick,' say my aunt, 'donot be a fool, because nobody can be
more discreet than you can, when you choose. we all know that. so
donot be a fool, whatever you be.'
the gentleman be serious immediately, and look at I, I think,
as if he would entreat I to say nothing about the window.
'Mr. Dick,' say my aunt, 'you have hear I mention David
Copperfield? now donot pretend not to have a memory, because you
and I know well.'
'David Copperfield?' say Mr. Dick, who do not appear to I to
remember much about it. 'David Copperfield? oh yes, to be sure.
David, certainly.'
'well,' say my aunt, 'this be his boy - his son. he would be as
like his father as itbe possible to be, if he be not so like his
mother, too.'
'his son?' say Mr. Dick. 'David's son? indeed!'
'yes,' pursue my aunt, 'and he have do a pretty piece of
business. he have run away. ah! his sister, Betsey Trotwood,
never would have run away.' my aunt shake her head firmly,
confident in the character and behaviour of the girl who never be
bear.
'oh! you think she wouldnot have run away?' say Mr. Dick.
'bless and save the man,' exclaim my aunt, sharply, 'how he
talk! donot I know she wouldnot? she would have live with her
god-mother, and we should have be devote to one another. where,
in the name of wonder, should his sister, Betsey Trotwood, have run
from, or to?'
'nowhere,' say Mr. Dick.
'well then,' return my aunt, soften by the reply, 'how can you
pretend to be wool-gathering, Dick, when you be as sharp as a
surgeon's lancet? now, here you see young David Copperfield, and
the question I put to you be, what shall I do with he?'
'what shall you do with he?' say Mr. Dick, feebly, scratch his
head. 'oh! do with he?'
'yes,' say my aunt, with a grave look, and her forefinger hold up.
'come! I want some very sound advice.'
'why, if I be you,' say Mr. Dick, consider, and look
vacantly at I, 'I should -' the contemplation of I seem to
inspire he with a sudden idea, and he add, briskly, 'I should
wash he!'
'janet,' say my aunt, turn round with a quiet triumph, which I
do not then understand, 'Mr. Dick set we all right. heat the
bath!'
although I be deeply interested in this dialogue, I could not help
observe my aunt, Mr. Dick, and Janet, while it be in progress,
and complete a survey I have already be engage in making of the
room.
my aunt be a tall, hard-feature lady, but by no means
ill-looking. there be an inflexibility in her face, in her voice,
in her gait and carriage, amply sufficient to account for the
effect she have make upon a gentle creature like my mother; but she
feature be rather handsome than otherwise, though unbending and
austere. I particularly notice that she have a very quick, bright
eye. her hair, which be grey, be arrange in two plain
division, under what I believe would be call a mob-cap; I mean
a cap, much more common then than now, with side-piece fasten
under the chin. her dress be of a lavender colour, and perfectly
neat; but scantily make, as if she desire to be as little
encumbered as possible. I remember that I think it, in form,
more like a riding-habit with the superfluous skirt cut off, than
anything else. she wear at her side a gentleman's gold watch, if
I might judge from its size and make, with an appropriate chain and
seal; she have some linen at her throat not unlike a shirt-collar,
and thing at her wrist like little shirt-wristband.
Mr. Dick, as I have already say, be grey-head, and florid: I
should have say all about he, in say so, have not his head be
curiously bow - not by age; it remind I of one of Mr.
Creakle's boy' head after a beating - and his grey eye prominent
and large, with a strange kind of watery brightness in they that
make I, in combination with his vacant manner, his submission to
my aunt, and his childish delight when she praise he, suspect he
of be a little mad; though, if he be mad, how he come to be
there puzzle I extremely. he be dress like any other ordinary
gentleman, in a loose grey morning coat and waistcoat, and white
trouser; and have his watch in his fob, and his money in his
pocket: which he rattle as if he be very proud of it.
Janet be a pretty bloom girl, of about nineteen or twenty, and
a perfect picture of neatness. though I make no further
observation of she at the moment, I may mention here what I do not
discover until afterwards, namely, that she be one of a series of
protegee whom my aunt have take into her service expressly to
educate in a renouncement of mankind, and who have generally
complete their abjuration by marry the baker.
the room be as neat as Janet or my aunt. as I lay down my pen,
a moment since, to think of it, the air from the sea come blow
in again, mix with the perfume of the flower; and I see the
old-fashioned furniture brightly rub and polished, my aunt's
inviolable chair and table by the round green fan in the
bow-window, the drugget-cover carpet, the cat, the kettle-holder,
the two canary, the old china, the punchbowl full of dry
rose-leaf, the tall press guard all sort of bottle and pot,
and, wonderfully out of keep with the rest, my dusty self upon
the sofa, take note of everything.
Janet have go away to get the bath ready, when my aunt, to my
great alarm, become in one moment rigid with indignation, and have
hardly voice to cry out, 'Janet! donkey!'
upon which, Janet come run up the stair as if the house be
in flame, dart out on a little piece of green in front, and
warn off two saddle-donkey, lady-ride, that have presume to
set hoof upon it; while my aunt, rush out of the house, seize
the bridle of a third animal laden with a bestriding child, turn
he, lead he forth from those sacred precinct, and box the ear
of the unlucky urchin in attendance who have dare to profane that
hallowed ground.
to this hour I donot know whether my aunt have any lawful right of
way over that patch of green; but she have settle it in her own
mind that she have, and it be all the same to she. the one great
outrage of her life, demand to be constantly avenge, be the
passage of a donkey over that immaculate spot. in whatever
occupation she be engage, however interesting to her the
conversation in which she be take part, a donkey turn the
current of her idea in a moment, and she be upon he straight.
Jugs of water, and watering-pot, be keep in secret place ready
to be discharge on the offend boy; stick be lay in ambush
behind the door; sally be make at all hour; and incessant war
prevail. perhaps this be an agreeable excitement to the
donkey-boy; or perhaps the more sagacious of the donkey,
understand how the case stand, delight with constitutional
obstinacy in come that way. I only know that there be three
alarm before the bath be ready; and that on the occasion of the
last and most desperate of all, I see my aunt engage,
single-handed, with a sandy-head lad of fifteen, and bump his
sandy head against her own gate, before he seem to comprehend
what be the matter. these interruption be of the more
ridiculous to I, because she be give I broth out of a
table-spoon at the time (have firmly persuade herself that I be
actually starve, and must receive nourishment at first in very
small quantity), and, while my mouth be yet open to receive the
spoon, she would put it back into the basin, cry 'Janet! donkey!'
and go out to the assault.
the bath be a great comfort. for I begin to be sensible of acute
pain in my limb from lie out in the field, and be now so
tired and low that I could hardly keep myself awake for five
minute together. when I have bath, they (I mean my aunt and
Janet) enrobe I in a shirt and a pair of trouser belong to
Mr. Dick, and tie I up in two or three great shawl. what sort
of bundle I look like, I donot know, but I feel a very hot one.
feel also very faint and drowsy, I soon lie down on the sofa
again and fall asleep.
it might have be a dream, originate in the fancy which have
occupy my mind so long, but I awake with the impression that my
aunt have come and bent over I, and have put my hair away from my
face, and lay my head more comfortably, and have then stand look
at I. the word, 'pretty fellow,' or 'poor fellow,' seem to be
in my ear, too; but certainly there be nothing else, when I
awake, to lead I to believe that they have be utter by my aunt,
who sit in the bow-window gazing at the sea from behind the green
fan, which be mount on a kind of swivel, and turn any way.
we din soon after I awake, off a roast fowl and a pudding; I
sit at table, not unlike a truss bird myself, and move my
arm with considerable difficulty. but as my aunt have swathe I
up, I make no complaint of be inconvenience. all this time I
be deeply anxious to know what she be go to do with I; but
she take her dinner in profound silence, except when she
occasionally fix her eye on I sit opposite, and say,
'mercy upon we!' which do not by any mean relieve my anxiety.
the cloth be draw, and some sherry put upon the table (of which
I have a glass), my aunt send up for Mr. Dick again, who join we,
and look as wise as he could when she request he to attend to
my story, which she elicit from I, gradually, by a course of
question. during my recital, she keep her eye on Mr. Dick, who
I think would have go to sleep but for that, and who,
whensoever he lapse into a smile, be check by a frown from my
aunt.
'whatever possess that poor unfortunate Baby, that she must go
and be marry again,' say my aunt, when I have finish, 'I cannot
conceive.'
'perhaps she fall in love with her second husband,' Mr. Dick
suggest.
'fall in love!' repeat my aunt. 'what do you mean? what
business have she to do it?'
'perhaps,' Mr. Dick simper, after think a little, 'she do it
for pleasure.'
'pleasure, indeed!' reply my aunt. 'a mighty pleasure for the
poor Baby to fix her simple faith upon any dog of a fellow, certain
to ill-use she in some way or other. what do she propose to
herself, I should like to know! she have have one husband. she have
see David Copperfield out of the world, who be always run
after wax doll from his cradle. she have get a baby - oh, there
be a pair of baby when she give birth to this child sit
here, that Friday night! - and what more do she want?'
Mr. Dick secretly shake his head at I, as if he think there be
no getting over this.
'she couldnot even have a baby like anybody else,' say my aunt.
'where be this child's sister, Betsey Trotwood? not forthcoming.
donot tell I!'
Mr. Dick seem quite frightened.
'that little man of a doctor, with his head on one side,' say my
aunt, 'Jellips, or whatever his name be, what be he about? all
he could do, be to say to I, like a robin redbreast - as he be -
"itbe a boy." a boy! yah, the imbecility of the whole set of
them!'
the heartiness of the ejaculation startle Mr. Dick exceedingly;
and I, too, if I be to tell the truth.
'and then, as if this be not enough, and she have not stand
sufficiently in the light of this child's sister, Betsey Trotwood,'
say my aunt, 'she marry a second time - go and marry a
Murderer - or a man with a name like it - and stand in this
child's light! and the natural consequence be, as anybody but a
baby might have foresee, that he prowl and wander. hebe as like
Cain before he be grow up, as he can be.'
Mr. Dick look hard at I, as if to identify I in this character.
'and then therebe that woman with the Pagan name,' say my aunt,
'that Peggotty, she go and get marry next. because she have
not see enough of the evil attend such thing, she go and
get marry next, as the child relate. I only hope,' say my
aunt, shake her head, 'that her husband be one of those Poker
husband who abound in the newspaper, and will beat she well with
one.'
I could not bear to hear my old nurse so decry, and make the
subject of such a wish. I tell my aunt that indeed she be
mistaken. that Peggotty be the good, the true, the most
faithful, most devoted, and most self-deny friend and servant in
the world; who have ever love I dearly, who have ever love my
mother dearly; who have hold my mother's die head upon her arm, on
whose face my mother have imprint her last grateful kiss. and my
remembrance of they both, choke I, I break down as I be try
to say that her home be my home, and that all she have be mine,
and that I would have go to she for shelter, but for her humble
station, which make I fear that I might bring some trouble on her
- I break down, I say, as I be try to say so, and lay my face
in my hand upon the table.
'well, well!' say my aunt, 'the child be right to stand by those
who have stand by he - Janet! donkey!'
I thoroughly believe that but for those unfortunate donkey, we
should have come to a good understanding; for my aunt have lay she
hand on my shoulder, and the impulse be upon I, thus embolden,
to embrace she and beseech her protection. but the interruption,
and the disorder she be throw into by the struggle outside, put
an end to all soft idea for the present, and keep my aunt
indignantly declaim to Mr. Dick about her determination to
appeal for redress to the law of her country, and to bring action
for trespass against the whole donkey proprietorship of Dover,
until tea-time.
after tea, we sit at the window - on the look-out, as I imagine,
from my aunt's sharp expression of face, for more invader - until
dusk, when Janet set candle, and a backgammon-board, on the table,
and pull down the blind.
'now, Mr. Dick,' say my aunt, with her grave look, and her
forefinger up as before, 'I be go to ask you another question.
look at this child.'
'David's son?' say Mr. Dick, with an attentive, puzzled face.
'exactly so,' return my aunt. 'what would you do with he, now?'
'do with David's son?' say Mr. Dick.
'ay,' reply my aunt, 'with David's son.'
'oh!' say Mr. Dick. 'yes. do with - I should put he to bed.'
'janet!' cry my aunt, with the same complacent triumph that I have
remark before. 'Mr. Dick set we all right. if the bed be
ready, wewill take he up to it.'
Janet report it to be quite ready, I be take up to it; kindly,
but in some sort like a prisoner; my aunt go in front and janet
bring up the rear. the only circumstance which give I any new
hope, be my aunt's stopping on the stair to inquire about a smell
of fire that be prevalent there; and janet's replying that she have
be make tinder down in the kitchen, of my old shirt. but there
be no other clothe in my room than the odd heap of thing I
wear; and when I be leave there, with a little taper which my aunt
forewarn I would burn exactly five minute, I hear they lock my
door on the outside. turn these thing over in my mind I deem
it possible that my aunt, who could know nothing of I, might
suspect I have a habit of run away, and take precaution, on
that account, to have I in safe keeping.
the room be a pleasant one, at the top of the house, overlook
the sea, on which the moon be shin brilliantly. after I have
say my prayer, and the candle have burn out, I remember how I
still sit look at the moonlight on the water, as if I could hope
to read my fortune in it, as in a bright book; or to see my mother
with her child, come from Heaven, along that shin path, to
look upon I as she have look when I last see her sweet face. I
remember how the solemn feeling with which at length I turn my
eye away, yield to the sensation of gratitude and rest which the
sight of the white-curtain bed - and how much more the lying
softly down upon it, nestle in the snow-white sheet! - inspire.
I remember how I think of all the solitary place under the night
sky where I have sleep, and how I pray that I never might be
houseless any more, and never might forget the houseless. I
remember how I seem to float, then, down the melancholy glory of
that track upon the sea, away into the world of dream.
CHAPTER 14
MY AUNT make up her MIND about I
on go down in the morning, I find my aunt musing so profoundly
over the breakfast table, with her elbow on the tray, that the
content of the urn have overflow the teapot and be lay the
whole table-cloth under water, when my entrance put her meditation
to flight. I feel sure that I have be the subject of her
reflection, and be more than ever anxious to know her intention
towards I. yet I dare not express my anxiety, lest it should
give her offence.
my eye, however, not be so much under control as my tongue,
be attract towards my aunt very often during breakfast. I
never could look at she for a few moment together but I find she
look at I - in an odd thoughtful manner, as if I be an
immense way off, instead of be on the other side of the small
round table. when she have finish her breakfast, my aunt very
deliberately lean back in her chair, knit her brow, fold
her arm, and contemplate I at her leisure, with such a fixedness
of attention that I be quite overpower by embarrassment. not
have as yet finish my own breakfast, I attempt to hide my
confusion by proceed with it; but my knife tumble over my fork,
my fork trip up my knife, I chip bit of bacon a surprising
height into the air instead of cut they for my own eating, and
choke myself with my tea, which persist in go the wrong way
instead of the right one, until I give in altogether, and sit
blush under my aunt's close scrutiny.
'Hallo!' say my aunt, after a long time.
I look up, and meet her sharp bright glance respectfully.
'I have write to he,' say my aunt.
'to -?'
'to your father-in-law,' say my aunt. 'I have send he a letter
that Iwill trouble he to attend to, or he and I will fall out, I
can tell he!'
'do he know where I be, aunt?' I inquire, alarm.
'I have tell he,' say my aunt, with a nod.
'shall I - be - give up to he?' I falter.
'I donot know,' say my aunt. 'we shall see.'
'oh! I cannot think what I shall do,' I exclaim, 'if I have to go
back to Mr. Murdstone!'
'I donot know anything about it,' say my aunt, shake her head.
'I cannot say, I be sure. we shall see.'
my spirit sink under these word, and I become very downcast and
heavy of heart. my aunt, without appear to take much heed of
I, put on a coarse apron with a bib, which she take out of the
press; wash up the teacup with her own hand; and, when
everything be wash and set in the tray again, and the cloth
fold and put on the top of the whole, rang for Janet to remove
it. she next sweep up the crumb with a little broom (put on
a pair of glove first), until there do not appear to be one
microscopic speck leave on the carpet; next dust and arrange the
room, which be dust and arrange to a hair's breadth already.
when all these task be perform to her satisfaction, she take
off the glove and apron, fold they up, put they in the
particular corner of the press from which they have be take,
bring out her work-box to her own table in the open window, and
sit down, with the green fan between she and the light, to work.
'I wish youwould go upstairs,' say my aunt, as she thread she
needle, 'and give my compliment to Mr. Dick, and Iwill be glad to
know how he get on with his Memorial.'
I rise with all alacrity, to acquit myself of this commission.
'I suppose,' say my aunt, eye I as narrowly as she have eye
the needle in thread it, 'you think Mr. Dick a short name, eh?'
'I think it be rather a short name, yesterday,' I confess.
'you be not to suppose that he havenot get a long name, if he
choose to use it,' say my aunt, with a lofty air. 'Babley - Mr.
Richard Babley - thatbe the gentleman's true name.'
I be go to suggest, with a modest sense of my youth and the
familiarity I have be already guilty of, that I have well give
he the full benefit of that name, when my aunt go on to say:
'but donot you call he by it, whatever you do. he cannot bear his
name. thatbe a peculiarity of his. though I donot know that itbe
much of a peculiarity, either; for he have be ill-use enough, by
some that bear it, to have a mortal antipathy for it, Heaven know.
Mr. Dick be his name here, and everywhere else, now - if he ever
go anywhere else, which he donot. so take care, child, you donot
call he anything but Mr. Dick.'
I promise to obey, and go upstairs with my message; think, as
I go, that if Mr. Dick have be work at his Memorial long, at
the same rate as I have see he work at it, through the open
door, when I come down, he be probably get on very well
indeed. I find he still drive at it with a long pen, and his
head almost lay upon the paper. he be so intent upon it, that I
have ample leisure to observe the large paper kite in a corner, the
confusion of bundle of manuscript, the number of pen, and, above
all, the quantity of ink (which he seem to have in, in
half-gallon jar by the dozen), before he observe my being
present.
'ha! Phoebus!' say Mr. Dick, lay down his pen. 'how do the
world go? Iwill tell you what,' he add, in a low tone, 'I
shouldnot wish it to be mention, but itbe a -' here he beckon
to I, and put his lip close to my ear - 'itbe a mad world. mad
as Bedlam, boy!' say Mr. Dick, take snuff from a round box on
the table, and laugh heartily.
without presume to give my opinion on this question, I deliver
my message.
'well,' say Mr. Dick, in answer, 'my compliment to she, and I -
I believe I have make a start. I think I have make a start,' say
Mr. Dick, pass his hand among his grey hair, and cast
anything but a confident look at his manuscript. 'you have be to
school?'
'yes, sir,' I answer; 'for a short time.'
'do you recollect the date,' say Mr. Dick, look earnestly at
I, and take up his pen to note it down, 'when King Charles the
First have his head cut off?'
I say I believe it happen in the year sixteen hundred and
forty-nine.
'well,' return Mr. Dick, scratch his ear with his pen, and
look dubiously at I. 'so the book say; but I donot see how
that can be. because, if it be so long ago, how could the people
about he have make that mistake of put some of the trouble out
of his head, after it be take off, into mine?'
I be very much surprised by the inquiry; but could give no
information on this point.
'itbe very strange,' say Mr. Dick, with a despondent look upon his
paper, and with his hand among his hair again, 'that I never can
get that quite right. I never can make that perfectly clear. but
no matter, no matter!' he say cheerfully, and rouse himself,
'therebe time enough! my compliment to Miss Trotwood, I be
get on very well indeed.'
I be go away, when he direct my attention to the kite.
'what do you think of that for a kite?' he say.
I answer that it be a beautiful one. I should think it must
have be as much as seven foot high.
'I make it. wewill go and fly it, you and I,' say Mr. Dick. 'do
you see this?'
he show I that it be cover with manuscript, very closely and
laboriously write; but so plainly, that as I look along the
line, I think I see some allusion to King Charles the First's
head again, in one or two place.
'therebe plenty of string,' say Mr. Dick, 'and when it fly high,
it take the fact a long way. thatbe my manner of diffuse them.
I donot know where they may come down. itbe accord to
circumstance, and the wind, and so forth; but I take my chance of
that.'
his face be so very mild and pleasant, and have something so
reverend in it, though it be hale and hearty, that I be not sure
but that he be have a good-humour jest with I. so I laugh,
and he laugh, and we part the good friend possible.
'well, child,' say my aunt, when I go downstairs. 'and what of
Mr. Dick, this morning?'
I inform she that he send his compliment, and be get on
very well indeed.
'what do you think of he?' say my aunt.
I have some shadowy idea of endeavour to evade the question, by
reply that I think he a very nice gentleman; but my aunt be
not to be so put off, for she lay her work down in her lap, and
say, fold her hand upon it:
'come! your sister Betsey Trotwood would have tell I what she
think of anyone, directly. be as like your sister as you can,
and speak out!'
'be he - be Mr. Dick - I ask because I donot know, aunt - be he at
all out of his mind, then?' I stammer; for I feel I be on
dangerous ground.
'not a morsel,' say my aunt.
'oh, indeed!' I observe faintly.
'if there be anything in the world,' say my aunt, with great
decision and force of manner, 'that Mr. Dick be not, itbe that.'
I have nothing well to offer, than another timid, 'oh, indeed!'
'he have be call mad,' say my aunt. 'I have a selfish pleasure
in say he have be call mad, or I should not have have the
benefit of his society and advice for these last ten year and
upwards - in fact, ever since your sister, Betsey Trotwood,
disappoint I.'
'so long as that?' I say.
'and nice people they be, who have the audacity to call he mad,'
pursue my aunt. 'Mr. Dick be a sort of distant connexion of mine
- it donot matter how; I neednot enter into that. if it havenot
be for I, his own brother would have shut he up for life.
thatbe all.'
I be afraid it be hypocritical in I, but see that my aunt feel
strongly on the subject, I try to look as if I feel strongly too.
'a proud fool!' say my aunt. 'because his brother be a little
eccentric - though he be not half so eccentric as a good many
people - he donot like to have he visible about his house, and
send he away to some private asylum-place: though he have be leave
to his particular care by their deceased father, who think he
almost a natural. and a wise man he must have be to think so!
mad himself, no doubt.'
again, as my aunt look quite convinced, I endeavour to look
quite convinced also.
'so I step in,' say my aunt, 'and make he an offer. I say,
"your brother's sane - a great deal more sane than you be, or ever
will be, it be to be hop. let he have his little income, and
come and live with I. I be not afraid of he, I be not proud, I
be ready to take care of he, and shall not ill-treat he as some
people (besides the asylum-folk) have do." after a good deal of
squabbling,' say my aunt, 'I get he; and he have be here ever
since. he be the most friendly and amenable creature in existence;
and as for advice! - but nobody know what that man's mind be,
except myself.'
my aunt smooth her dress and shake her head, as if she smooth
defiance of the whole world out of the one, and shake it out of the
other.
'he have a favourite sister,' say my aunt, 'a good creature, and
very kind to he. but she do what they all do - take a husband.
and he do what they all do - make she wretched. it have such an
effect upon the mind of Mr. Dick (thatbe not madness, I hope!)
that, combine with his fear of his brother, and his sense of his
unkindness, it throw he into a fever. that be before he come to
I, but the recollection of it be oppressive to he even now. do
he say anything to you about King Charles the First, child?'
'yes, aunt.'
'ah!' say my aunt, rub her nose as if she be a little vexed.
'thatbe his allegorical way of express it. he connect his
illness with great disturbance and agitation, naturally, and thatbe
the figure, or the simile, or whatever itbe call, which he
choose to use. and why shouldnot he, if he think proper!'
I say: 'certainly, aunt.'
'itbe not a business-like way of speak,' say my aunt, 'nor a
worldly way. I be aware of that; and thatbe the reason why I
insist upon it, that there shallnot be a word about it in his
Memorial.'
'be it a Memorial about his own history that he be write, aunt?'
'yes, child,' say my aunt, rub her nose again. 'he be
memorialize the Lord Chancellor, or the Lord Somebody or other -
one of those people, at all event, who be pay to be memorialize
- about his affair. I suppose it will go in, one of these day.
he havenot be able to draw it up yet, without introduce that
mode of express himself; but it donot signify; it keep he
employ.'
in fact, I find out afterwards that Mr. Dick have be for upwards
of ten year endeavour to keep King Charles the First out of the
Memorial; but he have be constantly get into it, and be there
now.
'I say again,' say my aunt, 'nobody know what that man's mind be
except myself; and hebe the most amenable and friendly creature in
existence. if he like to fly a kite sometimes, what of that!
Franklin use to fly a kite. he be a Quaker, or something of that
sort, if I be not mistaken. and a Quaker fly a kite be a much
more ridiculous object than anybody else.'
if I could have suppose that my aunt have recount these
particular for my especial behoof, and as a piece of confidence in
I, I should have feel very much distinguish, and should have
augur favourably from such a mark of her good opinion. but I
could hardly help observe that she have launch into they,
chiefly because the question be raise in her own mind, and with
very little reference to I, though she have address herself to I
in the absence of anybody else.
at the same time, I must say that the generosity of her
championship of poor harmless Mr. Dick, not only inspire my young
breast with some selfish hope for myself, but warm it unselfishly
towards she. I believe that I begin to know that there be
something about my aunt, notwithstanding her many eccentricity
and odd humour, to be honour and trust in. though she be
just as sharp that day as on the day before, and be in and out
about the donkey just as often, and be throw into a tremendous
state of indignation, when a young man, go by, ogle Janet at a
window (which be one of the grave misdemeanour that could be
commit against my aunt's dignity), she seem to I to command
more of my respect, if not less of my fear.
the anxiety I underwent, in the interval which necessarily elapse
before a reply could be receive to her letter to Mr. Murdstone,
be extreme; but I make an endeavour to suppress it, and to be as
agreeable as I could in a quiet way, both to my aunt and Mr. Dick.
the latter and I would have go out to fly the great kite; but
that I have still no other clothe than the anything but ornamental
garment with which I have be decorate on the first day, and
which confine I to the house, except for an hour after dark, when
my aunt, for my health's sake, parade I up and down on the cliff
outside, before go to bed. at length the reply from Mr.
Murdstone come, and my aunt inform I, to my infinite terror,
that he be come to speak to she herself on the next day. on the
next day, still bundle up in my curious habiliment, I sit
count the time, flushed and heat by the conflict of sink
hope and rise fear within I; and wait to be startle by the
sight of the gloomy face, whose non-arrival startle I every
minute.
my aunt be a little more imperious and stern than usual, but I
observe no other token of she prepare herself to receive the
visitor so much dread by I. she sit at work in the window, and
I sit by, with my thought run astray on all possible and
impossible result of Mr. Murdstone's visit, until pretty late in
the afternoon. our dinner have be indefinitely postpone; but it
be grow so late, that my aunt have order it to be get ready,
when she give a sudden alarm of donkey, and to my consternation
and amazement, I behold Miss Murdstone, on a side-saddle, ride
deliberately over the sacred piece of green, and stop in front of
the house, look about she.
'go along with you!' cry my aunt, shake her head and her fist
at the window. 'you have no business there. how dare you
trespass? go along! oh! you bold-face thing!'
my aunt be so exasperate by the coolness with which Miss
Murdstone look about she, that I really believe she be
motionless, and unable for the moment to dart out accord to
custom. I seize the opportunity to inform she who it be; and
that the gentleman now come near the offender (for the way up be
very steep, and he have drop behind), be Mr. Murdstone himself.
'I donot care who it be!' cry my aunt, still shake her head and
gesticulate anything but welcome from the bow-window. 'I willnot
be trespass upon. I willnot allow it. go away! janet, turn he
round. lead he off!' and I see, from behind my aunt, a sort of
hurried battle-piece, in which the donkey stand resist
everybody, with all his four leg plant different way, while
Janet try to pull he round by the bridle, Mr. Murdstone try to
lead he on, Miss Murdstone strike at Janet with a parasol, and
several boy, who have come to see the engagement, shout
vigorously. but my aunt, suddenly descry among they the young
malefactor who be the donkey's guardian, and who be one of the
most inveterate offender against she, though hardly in his teen,
rush out to the scene of action, pounce upon he, capture he,
drag he, with his jacket over his head, and his heel grind
the ground, into the garden, and, call upon Janet to fetch the
constable and justice, that he might be take, try, and
execute on the spot, hold he at bay there. this part of the
business, however, do not last long; for the young rascal, be
expert at a variety of feint and dodge, of which my aunt have no
conception, soon go whooping away, leave some deep impression
of his nail boot in the flower-bed, and take his donkey in
triumph with he.
Miss Murdstone, during the latter portion of the contest, have
dismount, and be now wait with her brother at the bottom of
the step, until my aunt should be at leisure to receive they. my
aunt, a little ruffle by the combat, march past they into the
house, with great dignity, and take no notice of their presence,
until they be announce by Janet.
'shall I go away, aunt?' I ask, tremble.
'no, sir,' say my aunt. 'certainly not!' with which she push
I into a corner near she, and fence I in with a chair, as if it
be a prison or a bar of justice. this position I continue to
occupy during the whole interview, and from it I now see Mr. and
Miss Murdstone enter the room.
'oh!' say my aunt, 'I be not aware at first to whom I have the
pleasure of object. but I donot allow anybody to ride over that
turf. I make no exception. I donot allow anybody to do it.'
'your regulation be rather awkward to stranger,' say Miss
Murdstone.
'be it!' say my aunt.
Mr. Murdstone seem afraid of a renewal of hostility, and
interposing begin:
'Miss Trotwood!'
'I beg your pardon,' observe my aunt with a keen look. 'you be
the Mr. Murdstone who marry the widow of my late nephew, David
Copperfield, of Blunderstone Rookery! - though why Rookery, I donot
know!'
'I be,' say Mr. Murdstone.
'youwill excuse my saying, sir,' return my aunt, 'that I think it
would have be a much well and happy thing if you have leave
that poor child alone.'
'I so far agree with what Miss Trotwood have remark,' observe
Miss Murdstone, bridle, 'that I consider our lamented Clara to
have be, in all essential respect, a mere child.'
'it be a comfort to you and I, ma'am,' say my aunt, 'who be
get on in life, and be not likely to be make unhappy by our
personal attraction, that nobody can say the same of we.'
'no doubt!' return Miss Murdstone, though, I think, not with a
very ready or gracious assent. 'and it certainly might have be,
as you say, a well and happy thing for my brother if he have
never enter into such a marriage. I have always be of that
opinion.'
'I have no doubt you have,' say my aunt. 'janet,' ring the
bell, 'my compliment to Mr. Dick, and beg he to come down.'
until he come, my aunt sit perfectly upright and stiff, frown at
the wall. when he come, my aunt perform the ceremony of
introduction.
'Mr. Dick. an old and intimate friend. on whose judgement,' say
my aunt, with emphasis, as an admonition to Mr. Dick, who be
bite his forefinger and look rather foolish, 'I rely.'
Mr. Dick take his finger out of his mouth, on this hint, and stand
among the group, with a grave and attentive expression of face.
my aunt incline her head to Mr. Murdstone, who go on:
'Miss Trotwood: on the receipt of your letter, I consider it an
act of great justice to myself, and perhaps of more respect to
you-'
'thank you,' say my aunt, still eye he keenly. 'you neednot
mind I.'
'to answer it in person, however inconvenient the journey,' pursue
Mr. Murdstone, 'rather than by letter. this unhappy boy who have
run away from his friend and his occupation -'
'and whose appearance,' interpose his sister, direct general
attention to I in my indefinable costume, 'be perfectly scandalous
and disgraceful.'
'Jane Murdstone,' say her brother, 'have the goodness not to
interrupt I. this unhappy boy, Miss Trotwood, have be the
occasion of much domestic trouble and uneasiness; both during the
lifetime of my late dear wife, and since. he have a sullen,
rebellious spirit; a violent temper; and an untoward, intractable
disposition. both my sister and myself have endeavour to correct
his vice, but ineffectually. and I have feel - we both have feel,
I may say; my sister be fully in my confidence - that it be
right you should receive this grave and dispassionate assurance
from our lip.'
'it can hardly be necessary for I to confirm anything state by my
brother,' say Miss Murdstone; 'but I beg to observe, that, of all
the boy in the world, I believe this be the bad boy.'
'strong!' say my aunt, shortly.
'but not at all too strong for the fact,' return Miss Murdstone.
'ha!' say my aunt. 'well, sir?'
'I have my own opinion,' resume Mr. Murdstone, whose face
darken more and more, the more he and my aunt observe each
other, which they do very narrowly, 'as to the good mode of
bring he up; they be found, in part, on my knowledge of he,
and in part on my knowledge of my own mean and resource. I be
responsible for they to myself, I act upon they, and I say no more
about they. it be enough that I place this boy under the eye of a
friend of my own, in a respectable business; that it do not
please he; that he run away from it; make himself a common
vagabond about the country; and come here, in rag, to appeal to
you, Miss Trotwood. I wish to set before you, honourably, the
exact consequence - so far as they be within my knowledge - of
your abet he in this appeal.'
'but about the respectable business first,' say my aunt. 'if he
have be your own boy, you would have put he to it, just the same,
I suppose?'
'if he have be my brother's own boy,' return Miss Murdstone,
strike in, 'his character, I trust, would have be altogether
different.'
'or if the poor child, his mother, have be alive, he would still
have go into the respectable business, would he?' say my aunt.
'I believe,' say Mr. Murdstone, with an inclination of his head,
'that Clara would have dispute nothing which myself and my sister
Jane Murdstone be agree be for the good.'
Miss Murdstone confirm this with an audible murmur.
'Humph!' say my aunt. 'unfortunate baby!'
Mr. Dick, who have be rattle his money all this time, be
rattle it so loudly now, that my aunt feel it necessary to check
he with a look, before say:
'the poor child's annuity die with she?'
'die with she,' reply Mr. Murdstone.
'and there be no settlement of the little property - the house and
garden - the what's-its-name rookery without any rook in it - upon
her boy?'
'it have be leave to she, unconditionally, by her first husband,'
Mr. Murdstone begin, when my aunt catch he up with the great
irascibility and impatience.
'Good Lord, man, therebe no occasion to say that. leave to she
unconditionally! I think I see David Copperfield look forward
to any condition of any sort or kind, though it star he
point-blank in the face! of course it be leave to she
unconditionally. but when she marry again - when she take that
most disastrous step of marry you, in short,' say my aunt, 'to
be plain - do no one put in a word for the boy at that time?'
'my late wife love her second husband, ma'am,' say Mr. Murdstone,
'and trust implicitly in he.'
'your late wife, sir, be a most unworldly, most unhappy, most
unfortunate baby,' return my aunt, shake her head at he.
'thatbe what she be. and now, what have you get to say next?'
'merely this, Miss Trotwood,' he return. 'I be here to take
David back - to take he back unconditionally, to dispose of he as
I think proper, and to deal with he as I think right. I be not
here to make any promise, or give any pledge to anybody. you may
possibly have some idea, Miss Trotwood, of abet he in his
run away, and in his complaint to you. your manner, which I
must say do not seem intend to propitiate, induce I to think
it possible. now I must caution you that if you abet he once, you
abet he for good and all; if you step in between he and I, now,
you must step in, Miss Trotwood, for ever. I cannot trifle, or be
trifle with. I be here, for the first and last time, to take he
away. be he ready to go? if he be not - and you tell I he be
not; on any pretence; it be indifferent to I what - my door be
shut against he henceforth, and your, I take it for grant, be
open to he.'
to this address, my aunt have listen with the close attention,
sit perfectly upright, with her hand fold on one knee, and
look grimly on the speaker. when he have finish, she turn
her eye so as to command Miss Murdstone, without otherwise
disturb her attitude, and say:
'well, ma'am, have you get anything to remark?'
'indeed, Miss Trotwood,' say Miss Murdstone, 'all that I could say
have be so well say by my brother, and all that I know to be the
fact have be so plainly state by he, that I have nothing to add
except my thank for your politeness. for your very great
politeness, I be sure,' say Miss Murdstone; with an irony which no
more affected my aunt, than it discompose the cannon I have sleep
by at Chatham.
'and what do the boy say?' say my aunt. 'be you ready to go,
David?'
I answer no, and entreat she not to let I go. I say that
neither Mr. nor Miss Murdstone have ever like I, or have ever be
kind to I. that they have make my mama, who always love I
dearly, unhappy about I, and that I know it well, and that
Peggotty know it. I say that I have be more miserable than I
think anybody could believe, who only know how young I be. and
I beg and pray my aunt - I forget in what term now, but I
remember that they affect I very much then - to befriend and
protect I, for my father's sake.
'Mr. Dick,' say my aunt, 'what shall I do with this child?'
Mr. Dick consider, hesitate, brighten, and rejoin, 'have he
measure for a suit of clothe directly.'
'Mr. Dick,' say my aunt triumphantly, 'give I your hand, for your
common sense be invaluable.' have shake it with great
cordiality, she pull I towards she and say to Mr. Murdstone:
'you can go when you like; Iwill take my chance with the boy. if
hebe all you say he be, at least I can do as much for he then, as
you have do. but I donot believe a word of it.'
'Miss Trotwood,' rejoin Mr. Murdstone, shrug his shoulder,
as he rise, 'if you be a gentleman -'
'bah! stuff and nonsense!' say my aunt. 'donot talk to I!'
'how exquisitely polite!' exclaim Miss Murdstone, rise.
'overpowering, really!'
'do you think I donot know,' say my aunt, turn a deaf ear to
the sister, and continue to address the brother, and to shake she
head at he with infinite expression, 'what kind of life you must
have lead that poor, unhappy, misdirect baby? do you think I
donot know what a woeful day it be for the soft little creature
when you first come in her way - smirk and make great eye at
she, Iwill be bind, as if you couldnot say boh! to a goose!'
'I never hear anything so elegant!' say Miss Murdstone.
'do you think I cannot understand you as well as if I have see you,'
pursue my aunt, 'now that I do see and hear you - which, I tell
you candidly, be anything but a pleasure to I? oh yes, bless we!
who so smooth and silky as Mr. Murdstone at first! the poor,
benighted innocent have never see such a man. he be make of
sweetness. he worship she. he dot on her boy - tenderly
dot on he! he be to be another father to he, and they be
all to live together in a garden of rose, benot they? ugh! get
along with you, do!' say my aunt.
'I never hear anything like this person in my life!' exclaim
Miss Murdstone.
'and when you have make sure of the poor little fool,' say my aunt
- 'God forgive I that I should call she so, and she go where you
willnot go in a hurry - because you have not do wrong enough to she
and her, you must begin to train she, must you? begin to break
she, like a poor cage bird, and wear her delude life away, in
teach she to sing your note?'
'this be either insanity or intoxication,' say Miss Murdstone, in
a perfect agony at not be able to turn the current of my aunt's
address towards herself; 'and my suspicion be that itbe
intoxication.'
Miss Betsey, without take the least notice of the interruption,
continue to address herself to Mr. Murdstone as if there have be
no such thing.
'Mr. Murdstone,' she say, shake her finger at he, 'you be a
tyrant to the simple baby, and you break her heart. she be a
love baby - I know that; I know it, year before you ever see she
- and through the good part of her weakness you give she the wound
she die of. there be the truth for your comfort, however you like
it. and you and your instrument may make the most of it.'
'allow I to inquire, Miss Trotwood,' interpose Miss Murdstone,
'whom you be pleased to call, in a choice of word in which I be
not experienced, my brother's instrument?'
'it be clear enough, as I have tell you, year before you ever see
she - and why, in the mysterious dispensation of Providence, you
ever do see she, be more than humanity can comprehend - it be
clear enough that the poor soft little thing would marry somebody,
at some time or other; but I do hope it wouldnot have be as bad
as it have turn out. that be the time, Mr. Murdstone, when she
give birth to her boy here,' say my aunt; 'to the poor child you
sometimes torment she through afterwards, which be a disagreeable
remembrance and make the sight of he odious now. aye, aye! you
neednot wince!' say my aunt. 'I know itbe true without that.'
he have stand by the door, all this while, observant of she with a
smile upon his face, though his black eyebrow be heavily
contract. I remark now, that, though the smile be on his face
still, his colour have go in a moment, and he seem to breathe as
if he have be run.
'good day, sir,' say my aunt, 'and good-bye! good day to you,
too, ma'am,' say my aunt, turn suddenly upon his sister. 'let
I see you ride a donkey over my green again, and as sure as you
have a head upon your shoulder, Iwill knock your bonnet off, and
tread upon it!'
it would require a painter, and no common painter too, to depict my
aunt's face as she deliver herself of this very unexpected
sentiment, and Miss Murdstone's face as she hear it. but the
manner of the speech, no less than the matter, be so fiery, that
Miss Murdstone, without a word in answer, discreetly put her arm
through her brother's, and walk haughtily out of the cottage; my
aunt remain in the window look after they; prepare, I have
no doubt, in case of the donkey's reappearance, to carry her threat
into instant execution.
no attempt at defiance be make, however, her face gradually
relax, and become so pleasant, that I be embolden to kiss and
thank she; which I do with great heartiness, and with both my arm
clasp round her neck. I then shake hand with Mr. Dick, who
shake hand with I a great many time, and hail this happy close
of the proceeding with repeat burst of laughter.
'youwill consider yourself guardian, jointly with I, of this child,
Mr. Dick,' say my aunt.
'I shall be delighted,' say Mr. Dick, 'to be the guardian of
David's son.'
'very good,' return my aunt, 'thatbe settle. I have be
think, do you know, Mr. Dick, that I might call he trotwood?'
'certainly, certainly. call he Trotwood, certainly,' say Mr.
Dick. 'David's son's Trotwood.'
'Trotwood Copperfield, you mean,' return my aunt.
'yes, to be sure. yes. Trotwood Copperfield,' say Mr. Dick, a
little abash.
my aunt take so kindly to the notion, that some ready-make clothe,
which be purchase for I that afternoon, be mark 'trotwood
Copperfield', in her own handwriting, and in indelible marking-ink,
before I put they on; and it be settle that all the other clothe
which be order to be make for I (a complete outfit be bespoke
that afternoon) should be mark in the same way.
thus I begin my new life, in a new name, and with everything new
about I. now that the state of doubt be over, I feel, for many
day, like one in a dream. I never think that I have a curious
couple of guardian, in my aunt and Mr. Dick. I never think of
anything about myself, distinctly. the two thing clear in my
mind be, that a remoteness have come upon the old Blunderstone
life - which seem to lie in the haze of an immeasurable distance;
and that a curtain have for ever fall on my life at Murdstone and
Grinby's. no one have ever raise that curtain since. I have
lift it for a moment, even in this narrative, with a reluctant
hand, and drop it gladly. the remembrance of that life be
fraught with so much pain to I, with so much mental suffering and
want of hope, that I have never have the courage even to examine how
long I be doom to lead it. whether it last for a year, or
more, or less, I do not know. I only know that it be, and cease
to be; and that I have write, and there I leave it.
CHAPTER 15
I make another beginning
Mr. Dick and I soon become the good of friend, and very often,
when his day's work be do, go out together to fly the great
kite. every day of his life he have a long sitting at the Memorial,
which never make the least progress, however hard he labour, for
King Charles the First always stray into it, soon or later, and
then it be throw aside, and another one begin. the patience and
hope with which he bear these perpetual disappointment, the mild
perception he have that there be something wrong about King Charles
the First, the feeble effort he make to keep he out, and the
certainty with which he come in, and tumble the Memorial out of
all shape, make a deep impression on I. what Mr. Dick suppose
would come of the Memorial, if it be complete; where he think
it be to go, or what he think it be to do; he know no more than
anybody else, I believe. nor be it at all necessary that he
should trouble himself with such question, for if anything be
certain under the sun, it be certain that the Memorial never would
be finish. it be quite an affect sight, I use to think, to
see he with the kite when it be up a great height in the air.
what he have tell I, in his room, about his belief in its
disseminate the statement paste on it, which be nothing but
old leaf of abortive Memorials, might have be a fancy with he
sometimes; but not when he be out, look up at the kite in the
sky, and feel it pull and tug at his hand. he never look so
serene as he do then. I use to fancy, as I sit by he of an
evening, on a green slope, and see he watch the kite high in the
quiet air, that it lift his mind out of its confusion, and bore
it (such be my boyish thought) into the sky. as he wound the
string in and it come low and low down out of the beautiful
light, until it flutter to the ground, and lie there like a dead
thing, he seem to wake gradually out of a dream; and I remember
to have see he take it up, and look about he in a lost way, as
if they have both come down together, so that I pity he with all
my heart.
while I advance in friendship and intimacy with Mr. Dick, I do
not go backward in the favour of his staunch friend, my aunt. she
take so kindly to I, that, in the course of a few week, she
shorten my adopt name of trotwood into Trot; and even
encourage I to hope, that if I go on as I have begin, I might
take equal rank in her affection with my sister Betsey Trotwood.
'trot,' say my aunt one evening, when the backgammon-board be
place as usual for herself and Mr. Dick, 'we must not forget your
education.'
this be my only subject of anxiety, and I feel quite delighted by
she refer to it.
'should you like to go to school at Canterbury?' say my aunt.
I reply that I should like it very much, as it be so near she.
'good,' say my aunt. 'should you like to go tomorrow?'
be already no stranger to the general rapidity of my aunt's
evolution, I be not surprise by the suddenness of the proposal,
and say: 'yes.'
'good,' say my aunt again. 'janet, hire the grey pony and chaise
tomorrow morning at ten o'clock, and pack up Master Trotwood's
clothe tonight.'
I be greatly elate by these order; but my heart smite I for my
selfishness, when I witness their effect on Mr. Dick, who be so
low-spirited at the prospect of our separation, and play so ill
in consequence, that my aunt, after give he several admonitory
rap on the knuckle with her dice-box, shut up the board, and
decline to play with he any more. but, on hear from my aunt
that I should sometimes come over on a Saturday, and that he could
sometimes come and see I on a Wednesday, he revive; and vow to
make another kite for those occasion, of proportion greatly
surpass the present one. in the morning he be downhearte
again, and would have sustain himself by give I all the money
he have in his possession, gold and silver too, if my aunt have not
interpose, and limit the gift to five shilling, which, at his
earnest petition, be afterwards increase to ten. we part at
the garden-gate in a most affectionate manner, and Mr. Dick do not
go into the house until my aunt have drive I out of sight of it.
my aunt, who be perfectly indifferent to public opinion, drive the
grey pony through Dover in a masterly manner; sit high and
stiff like a state coachman, keep a steady eye upon he wherever
he go, and make a point of not let he have his own way in
any respect. when we come into the country road, she permit he
to relax a little, however; and look at I down in a valley of
cushion by her side, ask I whether I be happy?
'very happy indeed, thank you, aunt,' I say.
she be much gratify; and both her hand be occupy, pat
I on the head with her whip.
'be it a large school, aunt?' I ask.
'why, I donot know,' say my aunt. 'we be go to Mr.
Wickfield's first.'
'do he keep a school?' I ask.
'no, Trot,' say my aunt. 'he keep an office.'
I ask for no more information about Mr. Wickfield, as she offer
none, and we converse on other subject until we come to
Canterbury, where, as it be market-day, my aunt have a great
opportunity of insinuate the grey pony among cart, basket,
vegetable, and huckster's good. the hair-breadth turn and
twist we make, draw down upon we a variety of speech from the
people stand about, which be not always complimentary; but my
aunt drive on with perfect indifference, and I dare say would have
take her own way with as much coolness through an enemy's country.
at length we stop before a very old house bulge out over the
road; a house with long low lattice-window bulge out still
far, and beam with carve head on the end bulge out too,
so that I fancy the whole house be lean forward, try to
see who be pass on the narrow pavement below. it be quite
spotless in its cleanliness. the old-fashioned brass knocker on
the low arched door, ornament with carve garland of fruit and
flower, twinkle like a star; the two stone step descend to
the door be as white as if they have be cover with fair linen;
and all the angle and corner, and carving and moulding, and
quaint little pane of glass, and quainter little window, though
as old as the hill, be as pure as any snow that ever fall upon
the hill.
when the pony-chaise stop at the door, and my eye be intent
upon the house, I see a cadaverous face appear at a small window on
the ground floor (in a little round tower that form one side of
the house), and quickly disappear. the low arched door then
open, and the face come out. it be quite as cadaverous as it
have look in the window, though in the grain of it there be that
tinge of red which be sometimes to be observe in the skin of
red-haired people. it belong to a red-haired person - a youth of
fifteen, as I take it now, but look much old - whose hair be
crop as close as the close stubble; who have hardly any
eyebrow, and no eyelash, and eye of a red-brown, so unsheltered
and unshade, that I remember wonder how he go to sleep. he
be high-shoulder and bony; dress in decent black, with a white
wisp of a neckcloth; button up to the throat; and have a long,
lank, skeleton hand, which particularly attract my attention, as
he stand at the pony's head, rub his chin with it, and look
up at we in the chaise.
'be Mr. Wickfield at home, Uriah Heep?' say my aunt.
'Mr. Wickfield's at home, ma'am,' say Uriah Heep, 'if youwill
please to walk in there' - point with his long hand to the room
he mean.
we get out; and leave he to hold the pony, go into a long low
parlour look towards the street, from the window of which I
catch a glimpse, as I go in, of Uriah Heep breathing into the
pony's nostril, and immediately cover they with his hand, as if
he be put some spell upon he. opposite to the tall old
chimney-piece be two portrait: one of a gentleman with grey hair
(though not by any mean an old man) and black eyebrow, who be
look over some paper tie together with red tape; the other, of
a lady, with a very placid and sweet expression of face, who be
look at I.
I believe I be turn about in search of Uriah's picture, when,
a door at the farth end of the room opening, a gentleman enter,
at sight of whom I turn to the first-mention portrait again, to
make quite sure that it have not come out of its frame. but it be
stationary; and as the gentleman advance into the light, I see
that he be some year old than when he have have his picture
paint.
'Miss Betsey Trotwood,' say the gentleman, 'pray walk in. I be
engage for a moment, but youwill excuse my be busy. you know my
motive. I have but one in life.'
Miss Betsey thank he, and we go into his room, which be
furnish as an office, with book, paper, tin box, and so
forth. it look into a garden, and have an iron safe let into the
wall; so immediately over the mantelshelf, that I wonder, as I
sit down, how the sweep get round it when they sweep the chimney.
'well, Miss Trotwood,' say Mr. Wickfield; for I soon find that it
be he, and that he be a lawyer, and steward of the estate of a
rich gentleman of the county; 'what wind blow you here? not an
ill wind, I hope?'
'no,' reply my aunt. 'I have not come for any law.'
'thatbe right, ma'am,' say Mr. Wickfield. 'you have well come
for anything else.'
his hair be quite white now, though his eyebrow be still black.
he have a very agreeable face, and, I think, be handsome. there
be a certain richness in his complexion, which I have be long
accustom, under Peggotty's tuition, to connect with port wine;
and I fancy it be in his voice too, and refer his grow
corpulency to the same cause. he be very cleanly dress, in a
blue coat, strip waistcoat, and nankeen trouser; and his fine
frille shirt and cambric neckcloth look unusually soft and
white, remind my stroll fancy (I call to mind) of the plumage
on the breast of a swan.
'this be my nephew,' say my aunt.
'benot aware you have one, Miss Trotwood,' say Mr. Wickfield.
'my grand-nephew, that be to say,' observe my aunt.
'benot aware you have a grand-nephew, I give you my word,' say Mr.
Wickfield.
'I have adopt he,' say my aunt, with a wave of her hand,
import that his knowledge and his ignorance be all one to she,
'and I have bring he here, to put to a school where he may be
thoroughly well teach, and well treat. now tell I where that
school be, and what it be, and all about it.'
'before I can advise you properly,' say Mr. Wickfield - 'the old
question, you know. whatbe your motive in this?'
'deuce take the man!' exclaim my aunt. 'always fish for
motif, when theybe on the surface! why, to make the child happy
and useful.'
'it must be a mixed motive, I think,' say Mr. Wickfield, shake
his head and smile incredulously.
'a mixed fiddlestick,' return my aunt. 'you claim to have one
plain motive in all you do yourself. you donot suppose, I hope,
that you be the only plain dealer in the world?'
'ay, but I have only one motive in life, Miss Trotwood,' he
rejoin, smile. 'other people have dozen, score, hundred.
I have only one. therebe the difference. however, thatbe beside
the question. the good school? whatever the motive, you want the
good?'
my aunt nod assent.
'at the good we have,' say Mr. Wickfield, consider, 'your
nephew couldnot board just now.'
'but he could board somewhere else, I suppose?' suggest my aunt.
Mr. Wickfield think I could. after a little discussion, he
propose to take my aunt to the school, that she might see it and
judge for herself; also, to take she, with the same object, to two
or three house where he think I could be board. my aunt
embrace the proposal, we be all three go out together, when
he stop and say:
'our little friend here might have some motive, perhaps, for
object to the arrangement. I think we have well leave he
behind?'
my aunt seem disposed to contest the point; but to facilitate
matter I say I would gladly remain behind, if they please; and
return into Mr. Wickfield's office, where I sit down again, in
the chair I have first occupy, to await their return.
it so happen that this chair be opposite a narrow passage, which
end in the little circular room where I have see Uriah Heep's
pale face look out of the window. Uriah, have take the pony
to a neighbouring stable, be at work at a desk in this room, which
have a brass frame on the top to hang paper upon, and on which the
writing he be make a copy of be then hang. though his face
be towards I, I think, for some time, the writing be between
we, that he could not see I; but look that way more
attentively, it make I uncomfortable to observe that, every now
and then, his sleepless eye would come below the writing, like two
red sun, and stealthily stare at I for I dare say a whole minute
at a time, during which his pen go, or pretend to go, as
cleverly as ever. I make several attempt to get out of their way
- such as stand on a chair to look at a map on the other side of
the room, and pore over the column of a kentish newspaper - but
they always attract I back again; and whenever I look towards
those two red sun, I be sure to find they, either just rise or
just set.
at length, much to my relief, my aunt and Mr. Wickfield come back,
after a pretty long absence. they be not so successful as I
could have wish; for though the advantage of the school be
undeniable, my aunt have not approve of any of the boarding-house
propose for I.
'itbe very unfortunate,' say my aunt. 'I donot know what to do,
Trot.'
'it do happen unfortunately,' say Mr. Wickfield. 'but Iwill tell
you what you can do, Miss Trotwood.'
'whatbe that?' inquire my aunt.
'leave your nephew here, for the present. hebe a quiet fellow. he
willnot disturb I at all. itbe a capital house for study. as quiet
as a monastery, and almost as roomy. leave he here.'
my aunt evidently like the offer, though she be delicate of
accept it. so do I.
'come, Miss Trotwood,' say Mr. Wickfield. 'this be the way out of
the difficulty. itbe only a temporary arrangement, you know. if
it donot act well, or donot quite accord with our mutual
convenience, he can easily go to the right-about. there will be
time to find some well place for he in the meanwhile. you have
well determine to leave he here for the present!'
'I be very much oblige to you,' say my aunt; 'and so be he, I
see; but -'
'come! I know what you mean,' cry Mr. Wickfield. 'you shall not
be oppress by the receipt of favour, Miss Trotwood. you may pay
for he, if you like. we willnot be hard about term, but you shall
pay if you will.'
'on that understanding,' say my aunt, 'though it donot lessen
the real obligation, I shall be very glad to leave he.'
'then come and see my little housekeeper,' say Mr. Wickfield.
we accordingly go up a wonderful old staircase; with a balustrade
so broad that we might have go up that, almost as easily; and
into a shady old drawing-room, light by some three or four of the
quaint window I have look up at from the street: which have old
oak seat in they, that seem to have come of the same tree as
the shin oak floor, and the great beam in the ceiling. it be
a prettily furnish room, with a piano and some lively furniture
in red and green, and some flower. it seem to be all old nook
and corner; and in every nook and corner there be some queer
little table, or cupboard, or bookcase, or seat, or something or
other, that make I think there be not such another good corner in
the room; until I look at the next one, and find it equal to it,
if not well. on everything there be the same air of retirement
and cleanliness that mark the house outside.
Mr. Wickfield tap at a door in a corner of the panel wall,
and a girl of about my own age come quickly out and kiss he. on
her face, I see immediately the placid and sweet expression of the
lady whose picture have look at I downstairs. it seem to my
imagination as if the portrait have grow womanly, and the original
remain a child. although her face be quite bright and happy,
there be a tranquillity about it, and about she - a quiet, good,
calm spirit - that I never have forget; that I shall never
forget. this be his little housekeeper, his daughter Agnes, Mr.
Wickfield say. when I hear how he say it, and see how he hold
her hand, I guess what the one motive of his life be.
she have a little basket-trifle hang at her side, with key in
it; and she look as staid and as discreet a housekeeper as the
old house could have. she listen to her father as he tell she
about I, with a pleasant face; and when he have conclude, propose
to my aunt that we should go upstairs and see my room. we all go
together, she before we: and a glorious old room it be, with more
oak beam, and diamond pane; and the broad balustrade go all
the way up to it.
I cannot call to mind where or when, in my childhood, I have see a
stain glass window in a church. nor do I recollect its subject.
but I know that when I see her turn round, in the grave light of
the old staircase, and wait for we, above, I think of that
window; and I associate something of its tranquil brightness with
Agnes Wickfield ever afterwards.
my aunt be as happy as I be, in the arrangement make for I; and
we go down to the drawing-room again, well pleased and gratify.
as she would not hear of stay to dinner, lest she should by any
chance fail to arrive at home with the grey pony before dark; and
as I apprehend Mr. Wickfield know she too well to argue any point
with she; some lunch be provide for she there, and Agnes go
back to her governess, and Mr. Wickfield to his office. so we be
leave to take leave of one another without any restraint.
she tell I that everything would be arrange for I by Mr.
Wickfield, and that I should want for nothing, and give I the
kind word and the good advice.
'trot,' say my aunt in conclusion, 'be a credit to yourself, to
I, and Mr. Dick, and Heaven be with you!'
I be greatly overcome, and could only thank she, again and again,
and send my love to Mr. Dick.
'never,' say my aunt, 'be mean in anything; never be false; never
be cruel. avoid those three vice, Trot, and I can always be
hopeful of you.'
I promise, as well as I could, that I would not abuse her kindness
or forget her admonition.
'the pony's at the door,' say my aunt, 'and I be off! stay here.'
with these word she embrace I hastily, and go out of the room,
shut the door after she. at first I be startle by so abrupt
a departure, and almost fear I have displease she; but when I
look into the street, and see how dejectedly she get into the
chaise, and drive away without look up, I understand she well
and do not do she that injustice.
by five o'clock, which be Mr. Wickfield's dinner-hour, I have
muster up my spirit again, and be ready for my knife and fork.
the cloth be only lay for we two; but Agnes be wait in the
drawing-room before dinner, go down with her father, and sit
opposite to he at table. I doubt whether he could have din
without she.
we do not stay there, after dinner, but come upstairs into the
drawing-room again: in one snug corner of which, Agnes set glass
for her father, and a decanter of port wine. I think he would
have miss its usual flavour, if it have be put there for he by
any other hand.
there he sit, take his wine, and take a good deal of it, for
two hour; while Agnes play on the piano, work, and talk to
he and I. he be, for the most part, gay and cheerful with we;
but sometimes his eye rest on she, and he fall into a brooding
state, and be silent. she always observe this quickly, I
think, and always rouse he with a question or caress. then he
come out of his meditation, and drank more wine.
Agnes make the tea, and preside over it; and the time pass away
after it, as after dinner, until she go to bed; when her father
take she in his arm and kiss she, and, she be go, order
candle in his office. then I go to bed too.
but in the course of the evening I have ramble down to the door,
and a little way along the street, that I might have another peep
at the old house, and the grey Cathedral; and might think of my
come through that old city on my journey, and of my pass the
very house I live in, without know it. as I come back, I see
Uriah Heep shut up the office; and feel friendly towards
everybody, go in and speak to he, and at parting, give he my
hand. but oh, what a clammy hand his be! as ghostly to the touch
as to the sight! I rub mine afterwards, to warm it, and to RUB
his OFF.
it be such an uncomfortable hand, that, when I go to my room, it
be still cold and wet upon my memory. lean out of the window,
and see one of the face on the beam-end look at I
sideways, I fancy it be Uriah Heep get up there somehow, and
shut he out in a hurry.
CHAPTER 16
I be a new boy in MORE sens than one
next morning, after breakfast, I enter on school life again. I
go, accompany by Mr. Wickfield, to the scene of my future
study - a grave building in a courtyard, with a learn air about
it that seem very well suited to the stray rook and jackdaw who
come down from the cathedral tower to walk with a clerkly bearing
on the grass-plot - and be introduce to my new master, Doctor
Strong.
Doctor Strong look almost as rusty, to my thinking, as the tall
iron rail and gate outside the house; and almost as stiff and
heavy as the great stone urn that flank they, and be set up,
on the top of the red-brick wall, at regular distance all round
the court, like sublimated skittle, for Time to play at. he be
in his library (I mean Doctor Strong be), with his clothe not
particularly well brush, and his hair not particularly well
comb; his knee-small unbrace; his long black gaiter
unbutton; and his shoe yawn like two cavern on the
hearth-rug. turn upon I a lustreless eye, that remind I of
a long-forget blind old horse who once use to crop the grass,
and tumble over the graf, in Blunderstone churchyard, he say he
be glad to see I: and then he give I his hand; which I donot
know what to do with, as it do nothing for itself.
but, sit at work, not far from Doctor Strong, be a very pretty
young lady - whom he call Annie, and who be his daughter, I
suppose - who get I out of my difficulty by kneel down to put
Doctor Strong's shoe on, and button his gaiter, which she do
with great cheerfulness and quickness. when she have finish, and
we be go out to the schoolroom, I be much surprised to hear
Mr. Wickfield, in bid her good morning, address she as 'Mrs.
Strong'; and I be wonder could she be Doctor Strong's son's
wife, or could she be Mrs. Doctor Strong, when Doctor Strong
himself unconsciously enlighten I.
'by the by, Wickfield,' he say, stop in a passage with his
hand on my shoulder; 'you have not find any suitable provision for
my wife's cousin yet?'
'no,' say Mr. Wickfield. 'no. not yet.'
'I could wish it do as soon as it can be do, Wickfield,' say
Doctor Strong, 'for Jack Maldon be needy, and idle; and of those
two bad thing, bad thing sometimes come. what do Doctor
watt say,' he add, look at I, and move his head to the
time of his quotation, '"Satan find some mischief still, for idle
hand to do."'
'Egad, doctor,' return Mr. Wickfield, 'if Doctor Watts know
mankind, he might have write, with as much truth, "Satan find
some mischief still, for busy hand to do." the busy people achieve
their full share of mischief in the world, you may rely upon it.
what have the people be about, who have be the busy in
get money, and in get power, this century or two? no
mischief?'
'Jack Maldon will never be very busy in get either, I expect,'
say Doctor Strong, rub his chin thoughtfully.
'perhaps not,' say Mr. Wickfield; 'and you bring I back to the
question, with an apology for digress. no, I have not be able
to dispose of Mr. Jack Maldon yet. I believe,' he say this with
some hesitation, 'I penetrate your motive, and it make the thing
more difficult.'
'my motive,' return Doctor Strong, 'be to make some suitable
provision for a cousin, and an old playfellow, of Annie's.'
'yes, I know,' say Mr. Wickfield; 'at home or abroad.'
'aye!' reply the Doctor, apparently wonder why he emphasize
those word so much. 'at home or abroad.'
'your own expression, you know,' say Mr. Wickfield. 'or abroad.'
'surely,' the Doctor answer. 'surely. one or other.'
'one or other? have you no choice?' ask Mr. Wickfield.
'no,' return the Doctor.
'no?' with astonishment.
'not the least.'
'no motive,' say Mr. Wickfield, 'for meaning abroad, and not at
home?'
'no,' return the Doctor.
'I be bind to believe you, and of course I do believe you,' say
Mr. Wickfield. 'it might have simplify my office very much, if
I have know it before. but I confess I entertain another
impression.'
Doctor Strong regard he with a puzzled and doubt look, which
almost immediately subside into a smile that give I great
encouragement; for it be full of amiability and sweetness, and
there be a simplicity in it, and indeed in his whole manner, when
the studious, ponder frost upon it be get through, very
attractive and hopeful to a young scholar like I. repeat 'no',
and 'not the least', and other short assurance to the same
purport, Doctor Strong jog on before we, at a queer, uneven
pace; and we follow: Mr. Wickfield, look grave, I observe,
and shake his head to himself, without know that I see he.
the schoolroom be a pretty large hall, on the quiet side of the
house, confront by the stately stare of some half-dozen of the
great urn, and command a peep of an old seclude garden
belong to the Doctor, where the peach be ripen on the
sunny south wall. there be two great aloe, in tub, on the turf
outside the window; the broad hard leaf of which plant (look
as if they be make of paint tin) have ever since, by
association, be symbolical to I of silence and retirement.
about five-and-twenty boy be studiously engage at their book
when we go in, but they rise to give the doctor good morning, and
remain stand when they see Mr. Wickfield and I.
'a new boy, young gentleman,' say the doctor; 'trotwood
Copperfield.'
one Adams, who be the head-boy, then step out of his place and
welcome I. he look like a young clergyman, in his white
cravat, but he be very affable and good-humour; and he show I
my place, and present I to the master, in a gentlemanly way
that would have put I at my ease, if anything could.
it seem to I so long, however, since I have be among such boy,
or among any companion of my own age, except Mick Walker and Mealy
Potatoes, that I feel as strange as ever I have do in my life.
I be so conscious of have pass through scene of which they
could have no knowledge, and of have acquire experience foreign
to my age, appearance, and condition as one of they, that I half
believe it be an imposture to come there as an ordinary little
schoolboy. I have become, in the Murdstone and Grinby time, however
short or long it may have be, so unused to the sport and game
of boy, that I know I be awkward and inexperienced in the
commonest thing belong to they. whatever I have learn, have so
slip away from I in the sordid care of my life from day to
night, that now, when I be examine about what I know, I know
nothing, and be put into the low form of the school. but,
trouble as I be, by my want of boyish skill, and of book-learning
too, I be make infinitely more uncomfortable by the consideration,
that, in what I do know, I be much far removed from my
companion than in what I do not. my mind run upon what they
would think, if they know of my familiar acquaintance with the
King's Bench Prison? be there anything about I which would
reveal my proceeding in connexion with the Micawber family - all
those pawning, and selling, and suppers - in spite of myself?
suppose some of the boy have see I come through Canterbury,
wayworn and ragged, and should find I out? what would they say,
who make so light of money, if they could know how I have scrap my
halfpence together, for the purchase of my daily saveloy and beer,
or my slice of pudding? how would it affect they, who be so
innocent of London life, and London street, to discover how
know I be (and be ashamed to be) in some of the mean phase
of both? all this run in my head so much, on that first day at
Doctor Strong's, that I feel distrustful of my slight look and
gesture; shrunk within myself whensoever I be approach by one of
my new schoolfellow; and hurry off the minute school be over,
afraid of commit myself in my response to any friendly notice
or advance.
but there be such an influence in Mr. Wickfield's old house, that
when I knock at it, with my new school-book under my arm, I
begin to feel my uneasiness soften away. as I go up to my
airy old room, the grave shadow of the staircase seem to fall
upon my doubt and fear, and to make the past more indistinct. I
sit there, sturdily con my book, until dinner-time (we be
out of school for good at three); and go down, hopeful of
become a passable sort of boy yet.
Agnes be in the drawing-room, wait for her father, who be
detain by someone in his office. she meet I with her pleasant
smile, and ask I how I like the school. I tell she I should
like it very much, I hop; but I be a little strange to it at
first.
'you have never be to school,' I say, 'have you?'
'oh yes! every day.'
'ah, but you mean here, at your own home?'
'Papa couldnot spare I to go anywhere else,' she answer, smile
and shake her head. 'his housekeeper must be in his house, you
know.'
'he be very fond of you, I be sure,' I say.
she nod 'yes,' and go to the door to listen for his come up,
that she might meet he on the stair. but, as he be not there,
she come back again.
'Mama have be dead ever since I be bear,' she say, in her quiet
way. 'I only know her picture, downstairs. I see you look at
it yesterday. do you think whose it be?'
I tell she yes, because it be so like herself.
'Papa say so, too,' say Agnes, please. 'Hark! thatbe papa
now!'
her bright calm face light up with pleasure as she go to meet
he, and as they come in, hand in hand. he greet I cordially;
and tell I I should certainly be happy under Doctor Strong, who
be one of the gentle of man.
'there may be some, perhaps - I donot know that there be - who
abuse his kindness,' say Mr. Wickfield. 'never be one of those,
Trotwood, in anything. he be the least suspicious of mankind; and
whether thatbe a merit, or whether itbe a blemish, it deserve
consideration in all dealing with the Doctor, great or small.'
he speak, I think, as if he be weary, or dissatisfy with
something; but I do not pursue the question in my mind, for dinner
be just then announce, and we go down and take the same seat
as before.
we have scarcely do so, when Uriah Heep put in his red head and
his lank hand at the door, and say:
'here's Mr. Maldon beg the favour of a word, sir.'
'I be but this moment quit of Mr. Maldon,' say his master.
'yes, sir,' return Uriah; 'but Mr. Maldon have come back, and he
beg the favour of a word.'
as he hold the door open with his hand, Uriah look at I, and
look at Agnes, and look at the dish, and look at the
plate, and look at every object in the room, I think, - yet
seem to look at nothing; he make such an appearance all the while
of keep his red eye dutifully on his master.
'I beg your pardon. itbe only to say, on reflection,' observe a
voice behind Uriah, as Uriah's head be push away, and the
speaker's substitute - 'pray excuse I for this intrusion - that
as it seem I have no choice in the matter, the soon I go abroad
the well. my cousin Annie do say, when we talk of it, that
she like to have her friend within reach rather than to have they
banish, and the old Doctor -'
'Doctor Strong, be that?' Mr. Wickfield interpose, gravely.
'Doctor Strong, of course,' return the other; 'I call he the old
Doctor; itbe all the same, you know.'
'I donot know,' return Mr. Wickfield.
'well, Doctor Strong,' say the other - 'Doctor Strong be of the
same mind, I believe. but as it appear from the course you take
with I he have change his mind, why therebe no more to be say,
except that the soon I be off, the well. therefore, I think
Iwould come back and say, that the soon I be off the well. when
a plunge be to be make into the water, itbe of no use linger on
the bank.'
'there shall be as little linger as possible, in your case, Mr.
Maldon, you may depend upon it,' say Mr. Wickfield.
'thank'ee,' say the other. 'much oblige. I donot want to look
a gift-horse in the mouth, which be not a gracious thing to do;
otherwise, I dare say, my cousin Annie could easily arrange it in
her own way. I suppose Annie would only have to say to the old
Doctor -'
'mean that Mrs. Strong would only have to say to her husband -
do I follow you?' say Mr. Wickfield.
'quite so,' return the other, '- would only have to say, that she
want such and such a thing to be so and so; and it would be so
and so, as a matter of course.'
'and why as a matter of course, Mr. Maldon?' ask Mr. Wickfield,
sedately eat his dinner.
'why, because Annie's a charming young girl, and the old Doctor -
Doctor Strong, I mean - be not quite a charming young boy,' say
Mr. Jack Maldon, laugh. 'no offence to anybody, Mr. Wickfield.
I only mean that I suppose some compensation be fair and reasonable
in that sort of marriage.'
'compensation to the lady, sir?' ask Mr. Wickfield gravely.
'to the lady, sir,' Mr. Jack Maldon answer, laugh. but
appear to remark that Mr. Wickfield go on with his dinner in
the same sedate, immovable manner, and that there be no hope of
make he relax a muscle of his face, he add:
'however, I have say what I come to say, and, with another apology
for this intrusion, I may take myself off. of course I shall
observe your direction, in consider the matter as one to be
arrange between you and I solely, and not to be refer to, up
at the Doctor's.'
'have you din?' ask Mr. Wickfield, with a motion of his hand
towards the table.
'Thank'ee. I be go to dine,' say Mr. Maldon, 'with my cousin
Annie. good-bye!'
Mr. Wickfield, without rise, look after he thoughtfully as he
go out. he be rather a shallow sort of young gentleman, I
think, with a handsome face, a rapid utterance, and a confident,
bold air. and this be the first I ever see of Mr. Jack Maldon;
whom I have not expect to see so soon, when I hear the doctor
speak of he that morning.
when we have din, we go upstairs again, where everything go on
exactly as on the previous day. Agnes set the glass and
decanter in the same corner, and Mr. Wickfield sit down to drink,
and drink a good deal. Agnes play the piano to he, sit by he,
and work and talk, and play some game at domino with I.
in good time she make tea; and afterwards, when I bring down my
book, look into they, and show I what she know of they (which
be no slight matter, though she say it be), and what be the
good way to learn and understand they. I see she, with her modest,
orderly, placid manner, and I hear her beautiful calm voice, as I
write these word. the influence for all good, which she come to
exercise over I at a later time, begin already to descend upon my
breast. I love little Em'ly, and I donot love Agnes - no, not at
all in that way - but I feel that there be goodness, peace, and
truth, wherever Agnes be; and that the soft light of the colour
window in the church, see long ago, fall on she always, and on I
when I be near she, and on everything around.
the time have come for her withdrawal for the night, and she
have leave we, I give Mr. Wickfield my hand, preparatory to go
away myself. but he check I and say: 'should you like to stay
with we, Trotwood, or to go elsewhere?'
'to stay,' I answer, quickly.
'you be sure?'
'if you please. if I may!'
'why, itbe but a dull life that we lead here, boy, I be afraid,' he
say.
'not more dull for I than Agnes, sir. not dull at all!'
'Than Agnes,' he repeat, walk slowly to the great
chimney-piece, and lean against it. 'than Agnes!'
he have drink wine that evening (or I fancy it), until his eye
be bloodshot. not that I could see they now, for they be cast
down, and shade by his hand; but I have notice they a little while
before.
'now I wonder,' he mutter, 'whether my Agnes tire of I. when
should I ever tire of she! but thatbe different, thatbe quite
different.'
he be musing, not speak to I; so I remain quiet.
'a dull old house,' he say, 'and a monotonous life; but I must
have she near I. I must keep she near I. if the thought that I
may die and leave my darling, or that my darling may die and leave
I, come like a spectre, to distress my happy hour, and be
only to be drown in -'
he do not supply the word; but pace slowly to the place where he
have sit, and mechanically go through the action of pour wine
from the empty decanter, set it down and pace back again.
'if it be miserable to bear, when she be here,' he say, 'what
would it be, and she away? no, no, no. I cannot try that.'
he lean against the chimney-piece, brood so long that I could
not decide whether to run the risk of disturb he by go, or
to remain quietly where I be, until he should come out of his
reverie. at length he arouse himself, and look about the room
until his eye encounter mine.
'stay with we, Trotwood, eh?' he say in his usual manner, and as
if he be answer something I have just say. 'I be glad of it.
you be company to we both. it be wholesome to have you here.
Wholesome for I, wholesome for Agnes, wholesome perhaps for all of
we.'
'I be sure it be for I, sir,' I say. 'I be so glad to be here.'
'thatbe a fine fellow!' say Mr. Wickfield. 'as long as you be
glad to be here, you shall stay here.' he shake hand with I upon
it, and clap I on the back; and tell I that when I have
anything to do at night after Agnes have leave we, or when I wish
to read for my own pleasure, I be free to come down to his room,
if he be there and if I desire it for company's sake, and to sit
with he. I thank he for his consideration; and, as he go
down soon afterwards, and I be not tired, go down too, with a
book in my hand, to avail myself, for half-an-hour, of his
permission.
but, see a light in the little round office, and immediately
feel myself attract towards Uriah Heep, who have a sort of
fascination for I, I go in there instead. I find Uriah read
a great fat book, with such demonstrative attention, that his lank
forefinger follow up every line as he read, and make clammy
track along the page (or so I fully believe) like a snail.
'you be work late tonight, Uriah,' say I.
'yes, Master Copperfield,' say Uriah.
as I be get on the stool opposite, to talk to he more
conveniently, I observe that he have not such a thing as a smile
about he, and that he could only widen his mouth and make two hard
crease down his cheek, one on each side, to stand for one.
'I be not do office-work, Master Copperfield,' say Uriah.
'what work, then?' I ask.
'I be improve my legal knowledge, Master Copperfield,' say
Uriah. 'I be go through Tidd's Practice. oh, what a writer Mr.
Tidd be, Master Copperfield!'
my stool be such a tower of observation, that as I watch he
read on again, after this rapturous exclamation, and follow
up the line with his forefinger, I observe that his nostril,
which be thin and pointed, with sharp dint in they, have a
singular and most uncomfortable way of expand and contract
themselves - that they seem to twinkle instead of his eye, which
hardly ever twinkle at all.
'I suppose you be quite a great lawyer?' I say, after look at
he for some time.
'Me, Master Copperfield?' say Uriah. 'oh, no! Ibe a very umble
person.'
it be no fancy of mine about his hand, I observe; for he
frequently grind the palm against each other as if to squeeze
they dry and warm, besides often wipe they, in a stealthy way, on
his pocket-handkerchief.
'I be well aware that I be the umblest person go,' say Uriah
Heep, modestly; 'let the other be where he may. my mother be
likewise a very umble person. we live in a numble abode, Master
Copperfield, but have much to be thankful for. my father's former
calling be umble. he be a sexton.'
'what be he now?' I ask.
'he be a partaker of glory at present, Master Copperfield,' say
Uriah Heep. 'but we have much to be thankful for. how much have
I to be thankful for in live with Mr. Wickfield!'
I ask Uriah if he have be with Mr. Wickfield long?
'I have be with he, go on four year, Master Copperfield,'
say Uriah; shut up his book, after carefully mark the place
where he have leave off. 'since a year after my father's death. how
much have I to be thankful for, in that! how much have I to be
thankful for, in Mr. Wickfield's kind intention to give I my
article, which would otherwise not lay within the umble mean of
mother and self!'
'then, when your article time be over, youwill be a regular lawyer,
I suppose?' say I.
'with the blessing of Providence, Master Copperfield,' return
Uriah.
'perhaps youwill be a partner in Mr. Wickfield's business, one of
these day,' I say, to make myself agreeable; 'and it will be
Wickfield and Heep, or heep late Wickfield.'
'oh no, Master Copperfield,' return Uriah, shake his head, 'I
be much too umble for that!'
he certainly do look uncommonly like the carve face on the beam
outside my window, as he sit, in his humility, eye I sideways,
with his mouth widen, and the crease in his cheek.
'Mr. Wickfield be a most excellent man, Master Copperfield,' say
Uriah. 'if you have know he long, you know it, I be sure, much
well than I can inform you.'
I reply that I be certain he be; but that I have not know he
long myself, though he be a friend of my aunt's.
'oh, indeed, Master Copperfield,' say Uriah. 'your aunt be a
sweet lady, Master Copperfield!'
he have a way of writhing when he want to express enthusiasm,
which be very ugly; and which divert my attention from the
compliment he have pay my relation, to the snaky twisting of his
throat and body.
'a sweet lady, Master Copperfield!' say Uriah Heep. 'she have a
great admiration for Miss Agnes, Master Copperfield, I believe?'
I say, 'yes,' boldly; not that I know anything about it, Heaven
forgive I!
'I hope you have, too, Master Copperfield,' say Uriah. 'but I be
sure you must have.'
'everybody must have,' I return.
'oh, thank you, Master Copperfield,' say Uriah Heep, 'for that
remark! it be so true! umble as I be, I know it be so true! oh,
thank you, Master Copperfield!'
he writhe himself quite off his stool in the excitement of his
feeling, and, be off, begin to make arrangement for go
home.
'Mother will be expect I,' he say, refer to a pale,
inexpressive-faced watch in his pocket, 'and get uneasy; for
though we be very umble, Master Copperfield, we be much attach
to one another. if you would come and see we, any afternoon, and
take a cup of tea at our lowly dwelling, mother would be as proud
of your company as I should be.'
I say I should be glad to come.
'thank you, Master Copperfield,' return Uriah, put his book
away upon the shelf - 'I suppose you stop here, some time, Master
Copperfield?'
I say I be go to be bring up there, I believe, as long as
I remain at school.
'oh, indeed!' exclaim Uriah. 'I should think you would come into
the business at last, Master Copperfield!'
I protest that I have no view of that sort, and that no such
scheme be entertain in my behalf by anybody; but Uriah insist
on blandly reply to all my assurance, 'oh, yes, Master
Copperfield, I should think you would, indeed!' and, 'oh, indeed,
Master Copperfield, I should think you would, certainly!' over and
over again. be, at last, ready to leave the office for the
night, he ask I if it would suit my convenience to have the
light put out; and on my answering 'yes,' instantly extinguish
it. after shake hand with I - his hand feel like a fish, in
the dark - he open the door into the street a very little, and
creep out, and shut it, leave I to grope my way back into the
house: which cost I some trouble and a fall over his stool. this
be the proximate cause, I suppose, of my dream about he, for
what appear to I to be half the night; and dream, among other
thing, that he have launch Mr. Peggotty's house on a piratical
expedition, with a black flag at the masthead, bear the
inscription 'Tidd's Practice', under which diabolical ensign he be
carry I and little Em'ly to the spanish Main, to be drown.
I get a little the well of my uneasiness when I go to school
next day, and a good deal the well next day, and so shake it off
by degree, that in less than a fortnight I be quite at home, and
happy, among my new companion. I be awkward enough in their
game, and backward enough in their study; but custom would
improve I in the first respect, I hop, and hard work in the
second. accordingly, I go to work very hard, both in play and in
earnest, and gain great commendation. and, in a very little
while, the Murdstone and Grinby life become so strange to I that
I hardly believe in it, while my present life grow so familiar,
that I seem to have be lead it a long time.
Doctor Strong's be an excellent school; as different from Mr.
Creakle's as good be from evil. it be very gravely and decorously
order, and on a sound system; with an appeal, in everything, to
the honour and good faith of the boy, and an avow intention to
rely on their possession of those quality unless they prove
themselves unworthy of it, which work wonder. we all feel that
we have a part in the management of the place, and in sustain its
character and dignity. hence, we soon become warmly attach to it
- I be sure I do for one, and I never know, in all my time, of any
other boy be otherwise - and learn with a good will, desire
to do it credit. we have noble game out of hour, and plenty of
liberty; but even then, as I remember, we be well speak of in
the town, and rarely do any disgrace, by our appearance or manner,
to the reputation of Doctor Strong and Doctor Strong's boy.
some of the high scholar board in the Doctor's house, and
through they I learn, at second hand, some particular of the
Doctor's history - as, how he have not yet be marry twelve
month to the beautiful young lady I have see in the study, whom he
have marry for love; for she have not a sixpence, and have a world
of poor relation (so our fellow say) ready to swarm the doctor
out of house and home. also, how the Doctor's cogitate manner
be attributable to his being always engage in look out for
greek root; which, in my innocence and ignorance, I suppose to be
a botanical furor on the doctor's part, especially as he always
look at the ground when he walk about, until I understand that
they be root of word, with a view to a new Dictionary which he
have in contemplation. Adams, our head-boy, who have a turn for
mathematic, have make a calculation, I be inform, of the time
this Dictionary would take in completing, on the Doctor's plan, and
at the Doctor's rate of go. he consider that it might be do
in one thousand six hundred and forty-nine year, count from the
Doctor's last, or sixty-second, birthday.
but the doctor himself be the idol of the whole school: and it
must have be a badly compose school if he have be anything
else, for he be the kind of man; with a simple faith in he
that might have touch the stone heart of the very urn upon the
wall. as he walk up and down that part of the courtyard which
be at the side of the house, with the stray rook and jackdaw
look after he with their head cock slyly, as if they know
how much more know they be in worldly affair than he, if any
sort of vagabond could only get near enough to his creak shoe
to attract his attention to one sentence of a tale of distress,
that vagabond be make for the next two day. it be so notorious
in the house, that the master and head-boy take pain to cut
these marauder off at angle, and to get out of window, and turn
they out of the courtyard, before they could make the Doctor aware
of their presence; which be sometimes happily effect within a
few yard of he, without his know anything of the matter, as he
jog to and fro. outside his own domain, and unprotected, he be
a very sheep for the shearer. he would have take his gaiter off
his leg, to give away. in fact, there be a story current among
we (I have no idea, and never have, on what authority, but I have
believe it for so many year that I feel quite certain it be
true), that on a frosty day, one winter-time, he actually do
bestow his gaiter on a beggar-woman, who occasion some scandal
in the neighbourhood by exhibit a fine infant from door to door,
wrap in those garment, which be universally recognize, be
as well know in the vicinity as the Cathedral. the legend add
that the only person who do not identify they be the Doctor
himself, who, when they be shortly afterwards display at the
door of a little second-hand shop of no very good repute, where
such thing be take in exchange for gin, be more than once
observe to handle they approvingly, as if admire some curious
novelty in the pattern, and consider they an improvement on his
own.
it be very pleasant to see the Doctor with his pretty young wife.
he have a fatherly, benignant way of show his fondness for she,
which seem in itself to express a good man. I often see they
walk in the garden where the peach be, and I sometimes have
a near observation of they in the study or the parlour. she
appear to I to take great care of the Doctor, and to like he
very much, though I never think she vitally interested in the
Dictionary: some cumbrous fragment of which work the Doctor always
carry in his pocket, and in the lining of his hat, and generally
seem to be expound to she as they walk about.
I see a good deal of Mrs. Strong, both because she have take a
liking for I on the morning of my introduction to the Doctor, and
be always afterwards kind to I, and interested in I; and because
she be very fond of Agnes, and be often backwards and forwards at
our house. there be a curious constraint between she and Mr.
Wickfield, I think (of whom she seem to be afraid), that never
wear off. when she come there of an evening, she always shrunk
from accept his escort home, and run away with I instead. and
sometimes, as we be run gaily across the Cathedral yard
together, expect to meet nobody, we would meet Mr. Jack Maldon,
who be always surprised to see we.
Mrs. Strong's mama be a lady I take great delight in. her name
be Mrs. Markleham; but our boy use to call she the Old Soldier,
on account of her generalship, and the skill with which she
marshal great force of relation against the Doctor. she be
a little, sharp-eyed woman, who use to wear, when she be dress,
one unchangeable cap, ornament with some artificial flower, and
two artificial butterfly suppose to be hover above the
flower. there be a superstition among we that this cap have come
from France, and could only originate in the workmanship of that
ingenious nation: but all I certainly know about it, be, that it
always make its appearance of an evening, wheresoever Mrs.
Markleham make she appearance; that it be carry about to
friendly meeting in a Hindoo basket; that the butterfly have the
gift of tremble constantly; and that they improve the shin
hour at Doctor Strong's expense, like busy bee.
I observe the Old Soldier - not to adopt the name disrespectfully
- to pretty good advantage, on a night which be make memorable to
I by something else I shall relate. it be the night of a little
party at the Doctor's, which be give on the occasion of Mr. Jack
Maldon's departure for India, whither he be go as a cadet, or
something of that kind: Mr. Wickfield have at length arrange the
business. it happen to be the Doctor's birthday, too. we have
have a holiday, have make present to he in the morning, have make a
speech to he through the head-boy, and have cheer he until we
be hoarse, and until he have shed tear. and now, in the evening,
Mr. Wickfield, Agnes, and I, go to have tea with he in his
private capacity.
Mr. Jack Maldon be there, before we. Mrs. Strong, dress in
white, with cherry-colour ribbon, be play the piano, when we
go in; and he be lean over she to turn the leaf. the clear
red and white of her complexion be not so bloom and flower-like
as usual, I think, when she turn round; but she look very
pretty, wonderfully pretty.
'I have forget, Doctor,' say Mrs. Strong's mama, when we be
seat, 'to pay you the compliment of the day - though they be,
as you may suppose, very far from be mere compliment in my
case. allow I to wish you many happy return.'
'I thank you, ma'am,' reply the Doctor.
'many, many, many, happy return,' say the Old Soldier. 'not only
for your own sake, but for Annie's, and John Maldon's, and many
other people's. it seem but yesterday to I, John, when you be
a little creature, a head short than Master Copperfield, make
baby love to Annie behind the gooseberry bush in the
back-garden.'
'my dear mama,' say Mrs. Strong, 'never mind that now.'
'Annie, donot be absurd,' return her mother. 'if you be to
blush to hear of such thing now you be an old married woman, when
be you not to blush to hear of they?'
'old?' exclaim Mr. Jack Maldon. 'Annie? come!'
'yes, John,' return the soldier. 'virtually, an old married
woman. although not old by year - for when do you ever hear I
say, or who have ever hear I say, that a girl of twenty be old by
year! - your cousin be the wife of the Doctor, and, as such, what
I have describe she. it be well for you, John, that your cousin
be the wife of the Doctor. you have find in he an influential
and kind friend, who will be kind yet, I venture to predict, if
you deserve it. I have no false pride. I never hesitate to admit,
frankly, that there be some member of our family who want a
friend. you be one yourself, before your cousin's influence
raise up one for you.'
the Doctor, in the goodness of his heart, wave his hand as if to
make light of it, and save Mr. Jack Maldon from any further
reminder. but Mrs. Markleham change her chair for one next the
Doctor's, and put her fan on his coat-sleeve, say:
'no, really, my dear doctor, you must excuse I if I appear to
dwell on this rather, because I feel so very strongly. I call it
quite my monomania, it be such a subject of mine. you be a
blessing to we. you really be a Boon, you know.'
'nonsense, nonsense,' say the Doctor.
'no, no, I beg your pardon,' retort the Old Soldier. 'with
nobody present, but our dear and confidential friend Mr. Wickfield,
I cannot consent to be put down. I shall begin to assert the
privilege of a mother-in-law, if you go on like that, and scold
you. I be perfectly honest and outspoken. what I be say, be
what I say when you first overpower I with surprise - you
remember how surprised I be? - by propose for Annie. not that
there be anything so very much out of the way, in the mere fact of
the proposal - it would be ridiculous to say that! - but because,
you have know her poor father, and have know she from a baby
six month old, I havenot think of you in such a light at all, or
indeed as a marry man in any way, - simply that, you know.'
'aye, aye,' return the Doctor, good-humouredly. 'never mind.'
'but I do mind,' say the Old Soldier, lay her fan upon his
lip. 'I mind very much. I recall these thing that I may be
contradict if I be wrong. well! then I speak to Annie, and I
tell she what have happen. I say, "my dear, herebe Doctor Strong
have positively be and make you the subject of a handsome
declaration and an offer." do I press it in the least? no. I
say, "now, Annie, tell I the truth this moment; be your heart
free?" "Mama," she say cry, "I be extremely young" - which be
perfectly true - "and I hardly know if I have a heart at all."
"then, my dear," I say, "you may rely upon it, itbe free. at all
event, my love," say I, "Doctor Strong be in an agitated state of
mind, and must be answer. he cannot be keep in his present state
of suspense." "Mama," say Annie, still cry, "would he be
unhappy without I? if he would, I honour and respect he so much,
that I think I will have he." so it be settle. and then, and
not till then, I say to Annie, "Annie, Doctor Strong will not only
be your husband, but he will represent your late father: he will
represent the head of our family, he will represent the wisdom and
station, and I may say the mean, of our family; and will be, in
short, a Boon to it." I use the word at the time, and I have use
it again, today. if I have any merit it be consistency.'
the daughter have sit quite silent and still during this speech,
with her eye fix on the ground; her cousin stand near she,
and look on the ground too. she now say very softly, in a
trembling voice:
'Mama, I hope you have finish?'
'no, my dear Annie,' return the Old Soldier, 'I have not quite
finish. since you ask I, my love, I reply that I have not. I
complain that you really be a little unnatural towards your own
family; and, as it be of no use complain to you. I mean to
complain to your husband. now, my dear doctor, do look at that
silly wife of your.'
as the doctor turn his kind face, with its smile of simplicity
and gentleness, towards she, she droop her head more. I notice
that Mr. Wickfield look at she steadily.
'when I happen to say to that naughty thing, the other day,'
pursue her mother, shake her head and her fan at she, playfully,
'that there be a family circumstance she might mention to you -
indeed, I think, be bind to mention - she say, that to mention
it be to ask a favour; and that, as you be too generous, and as
for she to ask be always to have, she wouldnot.'
'Annie, my dear,' say the Doctor. 'that be wrong. it rob I
of a pleasure.'
'almost the very word I say to she!' exclaim her mother. 'now
really, another time, when I know what she would tell you but for
this reason, and willnot, I have a great mind, my dear Doctor, to
tell you myself.'
'I shall be glad if you will,' return the Doctor.
'shall I?'
'certainly.'
'well, then, I will!' say the Old Soldier. 'thatbe a bargain.'
and have, I suppose, carry her point, she tap the Doctor's
hand several time with her fan (which she kiss first), and
return triumphantly to her former station.
some more company come in, among whom be the two master and
Adams, the talk become general; and it naturally turn on Mr. Jack
Maldon, and his voyage, and the country he be go to, and his
various plan and prospect. he be to leave that night, after
supper, in a post-chaise, for Gravesend; where the ship, in which
he be to make the voyage, lay; and be to be go - unless he come
home on leave, or for his health - I donot know how many year. I
recollect it be settle by general consent that India be quite a
misrepresented country, and have nothing objectionable in it, but a
tiger or two, and a little heat in the warm part of the day. for
my own part, I look on Mr. Jack Maldon as a modern Sindbad, and
picture he the bosom friend of all the Rajahs in the East,
sit under canopy, smoke curly golden pipe - a mile long,
if they could be straighten out.
Mrs. Strong be a very pretty singer: as I know, who often hear
her singing by herself. but, whether she be afraid of sing
before people, or be out of voice that evening, it be certain
that she couldnot sing at all. she try a duet, once, with her
cousin Maldon, but could not so much as begin; and afterwards, when
she try to sing by herself, although she begin sweetly, her voice
die away on a sudden, and leave she quite distressed, with her head
hang down over the key. the good doctor say she be nervous,
and, to relieve she, propose a round game at card; of which he
know as much as of the art of play the trombone. but I remark
that the Old Soldier take he into custody directly, for her
partner; and instruct he, as the first preliminary of
initiation, to give she all the silver he have in his pocket.
we have a merry game, not make the less merry by the Doctor's
mistake, of which he commit an innumerable quantity, in spite
of the watchfulness of the butterfly, and to their great
aggravation. Mrs. Strong have decline to play, on the ground of
not feel very well; and her cousin Maldon have excuse himself
because he have some packing to do. when he have do it, however,
he return, and they sit together, talk, on the sofa. from
time to time she come and look over the Doctor's hand, and tell
he what to play. she be very pale, as she bend over he, and I
think her finger tremble as she point out the card; but the
Doctor be quite happy in her attention, and take no notice of
this, if it be so.
at supper, we be hardly so gay. everyone appear to feel that
a parting of that sort be an awkward thing, and that the nearer it
approach, the more awkward it be. Mr. Jack Maldon try to be
very talkative, but be not at his ease, and make matter bad.
and they be not improve, as it appear to I, by the Old
soldier: who continually recall passage of Mr. Jack Maldon's
youth.
the Doctor, however, who feel, I be sure, that he be make
everybody happy, be well pleased, and have no suspicion but that we
be all at the utmost height of enjoyment.
'Annie, my dear,' say he, look at his watch, and fill his
glass, 'it be past your cousin jack's time, and we must not detain
he, since time and tide - both concerned in this case - wait for
no man. Mr. Jack Maldon, you have a long voyage, and a strange
country, before you; but many man have have both, and many man will
have both, to the end of time. the wind you be go to tempt,
have waft thousand upon thousand to fortune, and bring
thousand upon thousand happily back.'
'itbe an affect thing,' say Mrs. Markleham - 'however itbe
view, itbe affect, to see a fine young man one have know from
an infant, go away to the other end of the world, leave all he
know behind, and not know whatbe before he. a young man
really well deserve constant support and patronage,' look at
the doctor, 'who make such sacrifice.'
'time will go fast with you, Mr. Jack Maldon,' pursue the Doctor,
'and fast with all of we. some of we can hardly expect, perhaps,
in the natural course of thing, to greet you on your return. the
next good thing be to hope to do it, and thatbe my case. I shall
not weary you with good advice. you have long have a good model
before you, in your cousin Annie. imitate her virtue as nearly as
you can.'
Mrs. Markleham fan herself, and shake her head.
'Farewell, Mr. Jack,' say the Doctor, stand up; on which we all
stand up. 'a prosperous voyage out, a thriving career abroad, and
a happy return home!'
we all drink the toast, and all shake hand with Mr. Jack Maldon;
after which he hastily take leave of the lady who be there, and
hurry to the door, where he be receive, as he get into the
chaise, with a tremendous broadside of cheer discharge by our
boy, who have assemble on the lawn for the purpose. run in
among they to swell the rank, I be very near the chaise when it
roll away; and I have a lively impression make upon I, in the
midst of the noise and dust, of have see Mr. Jack Maldon rattle
past with an agitated face, and something cherry-colour in his
hand.
after another broadside for the Doctor, and another for the
Doctor's wife, the boy disperse, and I go back into the house,
where I find the guest all stand in a group about the Doctor,
discuss how Mr. Jack Maldon have go away, and how he have bear
it, and how he have feel it, and all the rest of it. in the midst
of these remark, Mrs. Markleham cry: 'wherebe Annie?'
no Annie be there; and when they call to she, no Annie reply.
but all press out of the room, in a crowd, to see what be the
matter, we find she lie on the hall floor. there be great
alarm at first, until it be find that she be in a swoon, and
that the swoon be yield to the usual mean of recovery; when
the Doctor, who have lift her head upon his knee, put her curl
aside with his hand, and say, look around:
'Poor Annie! shebe so faithful and tender-hearted! itbe the
parting from her old playfellow and friend - her favourite cousin
- that have do this. ah! itbe a pity! I be very sorry!'
when she open her eye, and see where she be, and that we be
all stand about she, she arise with assistance: turn she
head, as she do so, to lay it on the Doctor's shoulder - or to
hide it, I donot know which. we go into the drawing-room, to
leave she with the Doctor and her mother; but she say, it seem,
that she be well than she have be since morning, and that she
would rather be bring among we; so they bring she in, look
very white and weak, I think, and sit she on a sofa.
'Annie, my dear,' say her mother, do something to her dress.
'see here! you have lose a bow. will anybody be so good as find
a ribbon; a cherry-colour ribbon?'
it be the one she have wear at her bosom. we all look for it; I
myself look everywhere, I be certain - but nobody could find it.
'do you recollect where you have it last, Annie?' say her mother.
I wonder how I could have think she look white, or anything
but burn red, when she answer that she have have it safe, a
little while ago, she think, but it be not worth look for.
nevertheless, it be look for again, and still not find. she
entreat that there might be no more searching; but it be still
seek for, in a desultory way, until she be quite well, and the
company take their departure.
we walk very slowly home, Mr. Wickfield, Agnes, and I - Agnes and
I admire the moonlight, and Mr. Wickfield scarcely raise his
eye from the ground. when we, at last, reach our own door,
Agnes discover that she have leave she little reticule behind.
delighted to be of any service to she, I run back to fetch it.
I go into the supper-room where it have be leave, which be
deserted and dark. but a door of communication between that and
the Doctor's study, where there be a light, be open, I pass
on there, to say what I want, and to get a candle.
the Doctor be sit in his easy-chair by the fireside, and his
young wife be on a stool at his foot. the Doctor, with a
complacent smile, be read aloud some manuscript explanation or
statement of a theory out of that interminable Dictionary, and she
be look up at he. but with such a face as I never see. it
be so beautiful in its form, it be so ashy pale, it be so fix
in its abstraction, it be so full of a wild, sleep-walk, dreamy
horror of I donot know what. the eye be wide open, and her
brown hair fall in two rich cluster on her shoulder, and on her
white dress, disorder by the want of the lose ribbon. distinctly
as I recollect her look, I cannot say of what it be expressive, I
cannot even say of what it be expressive to I now, rise again
before my old judgement. Penitence, humiliation, shame, pride,
love, and trustfulness - I see they all; and in they all, I see
that horror of I donot know what.
my entrance, and my say what I want, rouse she. it disturb
the Doctor too, for when I go back to replace the candle I have
take from the table, he be pat her head, in his fatherly way,
and say he be a merciless drone to let she tempt he into
reading on; and he would have she go to bed.
but she ask he, in a rapid, urgent manner, to let she stay - to
let she feel assured (I hear she murmur some break word to this
effect) that she be in his confidence that night. and, as she
turn again towards he, after glance at I as I leave the room
and go out at the door, I see she cross her hand upon his knee,
and look up at he with the same face, something quiet, as he
resume his reading.
it make a great impression on I, and I remember it a long time
afterwards; as I shall have occasion to narrate when the time
come.
CHAPTER 17
SOMEBODY turn up
it have not occur to I to mention Peggotty since I run away;
but, of course, I write she a letter almost as soon as I be house
at Dover, and another, and a long letter, contain all
particular fully related, when my aunt take I formally under her
protection. on my being settle at Doctor Strong's I write to she
again, detail my happy condition and prospect. I never could
have derive anything like the pleasure from spend the money Mr.
Dick have give I, that I feel in send a gold half-guinea to
Peggotty, per post, enclose in this last letter, to discharge the
sum I have borrow of she: in which epistle, not before, I
mention about the young man with the donkey-cart.
to these communication Peggotty reply as promptly, if not as
concisely, as a merchant's clerk. her utmost power of expression
(which be certainly not great in ink) be exhaust in the
attempt to write what she feel on the subject of my journey. four
side of incoherent and interjectional beginning of sentence,
that have no end, except blot, be inadequate to afford she any
relief. but the blot be more expressive to I than the good
composition; for they show I that Peggotty have be cry all
over the paper, and what could I have desire more?
I make out, without much difficulty, that she could not take quite
kindly to my aunt yet. the notice be too short after so long a
prepossession the other way. we never know a person, she write;
but to think that Miss Betsey should seem to be so different from
what she have be think to be, be a Moral! - that be her word.
she be evidently still afraid of Miss Betsey, for she send she
grateful duty to she but timidly; and she be evidently afraid of
I, too, and entertain the probability of my run away again
soon: if I might judge from the repeat hint she throw out, that
the coach-fare to Yarmouth be always to be have of she for the
asking.
she give I one piece of intelligence which affect I very much,
namely, that there have be a sale of the furniture at our old
home, and that Mr. and Miss Murdstone be go away, and the house
be shut up, to be let or sell. God know I have no part in it
while they remain there, but it pain I to think of the dear
old place as altogether abandon; of the weed grow tall in the
garden, and the fallen leaf lie thick and wet upon the path.
I imagine how the wind of winter would howl round it, how the
cold rain would beat upon the window-glass, how the moon would make
ghost on the wall of the empty room, watch their solitude all
night. I think afresh of the grave in the churchyard, underneath
the tree: and it seem as if the house be dead too, now, and all
connect with my father and mother be fade away.
there be no other news in Peggotty's letter. Mr. Barkis be an
excellent husband, she say, though still a little near; but we all
have our fault, and she have plenty (though I be sure I donot know
what they be); and he send his duty, and my little bedroom be
always ready for I. Mr. Peggotty be well, and Ham be well, and
Mrs.. Gummidge be but poorly, and little Em'ly wouldnot send she
love, but say that Peggotty might send it, if she like.
all this intelligence I dutifully impart to my aunt, only
reserve to myself the mention of little Em'ly, to whom I
instinctively feel that she would not very tenderly incline. while
I be yet new at Doctor Strong's, she make several excursion over
to Canterbury to see I, and always at unseasonable hour: with the
view, I suppose, of take I by surprise. but, find I well
employ, and bear a good character, and hear on all hand
that I rise fast in the school, she soon discontinue these visit.
I see she on a Saturday, every third or fourth week, when I go
over to Dover for a treat; and I see Mr. Dick every alternate
Wednesday, when he arrive by stage-coach at noon, to stay until
next morning.
on these occasion Mr. Dick never travel without a leathern
writing-desk, contain a supply of stationery and the Memorial;
in relation to which document he have a notion that time be
begin to press now, and that it really must be get out of hand.
Mr. Dick be very partial to gingerbread. to render his visit the
more agreeable, my aunt have instruct I to open a credit for he
at a cake shop, which be hamper with the stipulation that he
should not be serve with more than one shilling's-worth in the
course of any one day. this, and the reference of all his little
bill at the county inn where he sleep, to my aunt, before they
be pay, induce I to suspect that he be only allow to rattle
his money, and not to spend it. I find on further investigation
that this be so, or at least there be an agreement between he
and my aunt that he should account to she for all his
disbursement. as he have no idea of deceive she, and always
desire to please she, he be thus make chary of launch into
expense. on this point, as well as on all other possible point,
Mr. Dick be convince that my aunt be the wise and most
wonderful of woman; as he repeatedly tell I with infinite secrecy,
and always in a whisper.
'trotwood,' say Mr. Dick, with an air of mystery, after impart
this confidence to I, one Wednesday; 'whobe the man that hide
near our house and frighten she?'
'frightens my aunt, sir?'
Mr. Dick nod. 'I think nothing would have frighten she,' he
say, 'for shebe -' here he whisper softly, 'donot mention it -
the wise and most wonderful of woman.' have say which, he
draw back, to observe the effect which this description of she make
upon I.
'the first time he come,' say Mr. Dick, 'was- let I see- sixteen
hundred and forty-nine be the date of King Charles's execution.
I think you say sixteen hundred and forty-nine?'
'yes, sir.'
'I donot know how it can be,' say Mr. Dick, sorely puzzle and
shake his head. 'I donot think I be as old as that.'
'be it in that year that the man appear, sir?' I ask.
'why, really' say Mr. Dick, 'I donot see how it can have be in
that year, Trotwood. do you get that date out of history?'
'yes, sir.'
'I suppose history never lie, do it?' say Mr. Dick, with a
gleam of hope.
'oh dear, no, sir!' I reply, most decisively. I be ingenuous
and young, and I think so.
'I cannot make it out,' say Mr. Dick, shake his head. 'therebe
something wrong, somewhere. however, it be very soon after the
mistake be make of put some of the trouble out of King
Charles's head into my head, that the man first come. I be
walk out with Miss Trotwood after tea, just at dark, and there
he be, close to our house.'
'walk about?' I inquire.
'walk about?' repeat Mr. Dick. 'let I see, I must recollect
a bit. n-no, no; he be not walk about.'
I ask, as the short way to get at it, what he be do.
'well, he benot there at all,' say Mr. Dick, 'until he come up
behind she, and whisper. then she turn round and faint, and
I stand still and look at he, and he walk away; but that he
should have be hide ever since (in the ground or somewhere), be
the most extraordinary thing!'
'has he be hide ever since?' I ask.
'to be sure he have,' retort Mr. Dick, nod his head gravely.
'never come out, till last night! we be walk last night, and
he come up behind she again, and I know he again.'
'and do he frighten my aunt again?'
'all of a shiver,' say Mr. Dick, counterfeit that affection and
make his tooth chatter. 'hold by the paling. cry. but,
trotwood, come here,' get I close to he, that he might
whisper very softly; 'why do she give he money, boy, in the
moonlight?'
'he be a beggar, perhaps.'
Mr. Dick shake his head, as utterly renounce the suggestion; and
have reply a great many time, and with great confidence, 'no
beggar, no beggar, no beggar, sir!' go on to say, that from his
window he have afterwards, and late at night, see my aunt give this
person money outside the garden rail in the moonlight, who then
slunk away - into the ground again, as he think probable - and
be see no more: while my aunt come hurriedly and secretly back
into the house, and have, even that morning, be quite different
from her usual self; which prey on Mr. Dick's mind.
I have not the least belief, in the outset of this story, that the
unknown be anything but a delusion of Mr. Dick's, and one of the
line of that ill-fat Prince who occasion he so much
difficulty; but after some reflection I begin to entertain the
question whether an attempt, or threat of an attempt, might have
be twice make to take poor Mr. Dick himself from under my aunt's
protection, and whether my aunt, the strength of whose kind feel
towards he I know from herself, might have be induce to pay a
price for his peace and quiet. as I be already much attach to
Mr. Dick, and very solicitous for his welfare, my fear favour
this supposition; and for a long time his Wednesday hardly ever
come round, without my entertain a misgiving that he would not
be on the coach-box as usual. there he always appear, however,
grey-head, laughing, and happy; and he never have anything more to
tell of the man who could frighten my aunt.
these wednesday be the happy day of Mr. Dick's life; they
be far from be the least happy of mine. he soon become know
to every boy in the school; and though he never take an active part
in any game but kite-flying, be as deeply interested in all our
sport as anyone among we. how often have I see he, intent upon
a match at marble or pegtop, look on with a face of unutterable
interest, and hardly breathe at the critical time! how often,
at hare and hound, have I see he mount on a little knoll,
cheer the whole field on to action, and wave his hat above his
grey head, oblivious of King Charles the Martyr's head, and all
belong to it! how many a summer hour have I know to be but
blissful minute to he in the cricket-field! how many winter day
have I see he, stand blue-nosed, in the snow and east wind,
look at the boy go down the long slide, and clap his
worst glove in rapture!
he be an universal favourite, and his ingenuity in little thing
be transcendent. he could cut orange into such device as none
of we have an idea of. he could make a boat out of anything, from
a skewer upwards. he could turn cramp-bone into chessman; fashion
roman chariot from old court card; make spoked wheel out of
cotton reel, and bird-cage of old wire. but he be great of
all, perhaps, in the article of string and straw; with which we
be all persuade he could do anything that could be do by
hand.
Mr. Dick's renown be not long confine to we. after a few
wednesday, Doctor Strong himself make some inquiry of I about
he, and I tell he all my aunt have tell I; which interest the
doctor so much that he request, on the occasion of his next
visit, to be present to he. this ceremony I perform; and the
Doctor beg Mr. Dick, whensoever he should not find I at the
coach office, to come on there, and rest himself until our
morning's work be over, it soon pass into a custom for Mr. Dick
to come on as a matter of course, and, if we be a little late, as
often happen on a Wednesday, to walk about the courtyard, wait
for I. here he make the acquaintance of the Doctor's beautiful
young wife (pale than formerly, all this time; more rarely see by
I or anyone, I think; and not so gay, but not less beautiful), and
so become more and more familiar by degree, until, at last, he
would come into the school and wait. he always sit in a particular
corner, on a particular stool, which be call 'Dick', after he;
here he would sit, with his grey head bend forward, attentively
listen to whatever might be go on, with a profound veneration
for the learning he have never be able to acquire.
this veneration Mr. Dick extend to the Doctor, whom he think
the most subtle and accomplished philosopher of any age. it be
long before Mr. Dick ever speak to he otherwise than bareheade;
and even when he and the Doctor have strike up quite a friendship,
and would walk together by the hour, on that side of the courtyard
which be know among we as the Doctor's Walk, Mr. Dick would pull
off his hat at interval to show his respect for wisdom and
knowledge. how it ever come about that the Doctor begin to read
out scrap of the famous Dictionary, in these walk, I never know;
perhaps he feel it all the same, at first, as read to himself.
however, it pass into a custom too; and Mr. Dick, listen with
a face shin with pride and pleasure, in his heart of heart
believe the Dictionary to be the most delightful book in the
world.
as I think of they go up and down before those schoolroom
window - the Doctor read with his complacent smile, an
occasional flourish of the manuscript, or grave motion of his head;
and Mr. Dick listening, enchain by interest, with his poor wit
calmly wander God know where, upon the wing of hard word - I
think of it as one of the pleasantest thing, in a quiet way, that
I have ever see. I feel as if they might go walk to and fro
for ever, and the world might somehow be the well for it - as if
a thousand thing it make a noise about, be not one half so good
for it, or I.
Agnes be one of Mr. Dick's friend, very soon; and in often come
to the house, he make acquaintance with Uriah. the friendship
between himself and I increase continually, and it be maintain
on this odd footing: that, while Mr. Dick come professedly to look
after I as my guardian, he always consult I in any little
matter of doubt that arise, and invariably guide himself by my
advice; not only have a high respect for my native sagacity, but
consider that I inherit a good deal from my aunt.
one Thursday morning, when I be about to walk with Mr. Dick from
the hotel to the coach office before go back to school (for we
have an hour's school before breakfast), I meet Uriah in the street,
who remind I of the promise I have make to take tea with himself
and his mother: add, with a writhe, 'but I donot expect you to
keep it, Master Copperfield, webe so very umble.'
I really have not yet be able to make up my mind whether I like
Uriah or detest he; and I be very doubtful about it still, as
I stand look he in the face in the street. but I feel it quite
an affront to be suppose proud, and say I only want to be
ask.
'oh, if thatbe all, Master Copperfield,' say Uriah, 'and it
really benot our umbleness that prevent you, will you come this
evening? but if it be our umbleness, I hope you willnot mind own
to it, Master Copperfield; for we be well aware of our condition.'
I say I would mention it to Mr. Wickfield, and if he approve, as
I have no doubt he would, I would come with pleasure. so, at six
o'clock that evening, which be one of the early office evening,
I announce myself as ready, to Uriah.
'Mother will be proud, indeed,' he say, as we walk away
together. 'or she would be proud, if it benot sinful, Master
Copperfield.'
'yet you donot mind suppose I be proud this morning,' I
return.
'oh dear, no, Master Copperfield!' return Uriah. 'oh, believe
I, no! such a thought never come into my head! I shouldnot have
deem it at all proud if you have think US too umble for you.
because we be so very umble.'
'have you be study much law lately?' I ask, to change the
subject.
'oh, Master Copperfield,' he say, with an air of self-denial, 'my
reading be hardly to be call study. I have pass an hour or two
in the evening, sometimes, with Mr. Tidd.'
'rather hard, I suppose?' say I.
'he be hard to I sometimes,' return Uriah. 'but I donot know
what he might be to a gifted person.'
after beat a little tune on his chin as he walk on, with the
two forefinger of his skeleton right hand, he add:
'there be expression, you see, Master Copperfield - Latin word
and term - in Mr. Tidd, that be try to a reader of my umble
attainment.'
'would you like to be teach Latin?' I say briskly. 'I will teach
it you with pleasure, as I learn it.'
'oh, thank you, Master Copperfield,' he answer, shake his head.
'I be sure itbe very kind of you to make the offer, but I be much
too umble to accept it.'
'what nonsense, Uriah!'
'oh, indeed you must excuse I, Master Copperfield! I be greatly
oblige, and I should like it of all thing, I assure you; but I be
far too umble. there be people enough to tread upon I in my
lowly state, without my do outrage to their feeling by
possessing learning. learning benot for I. a person like myself
have well not aspire. if he be to get on in life, he must get on
umbly, Master Copperfield!'
I never see his mouth so wide, or the crease in his cheek so
deep, as when he deliver himself of these sentiment: shake his
head all the time, and writhe modestly.
'I think you be wrong, Uriah,' I say. 'I dare say there be
several thing that I could teach you, if you would like to learn
they.'
'oh, I donot doubt that, Master Copperfield,' he answer; 'not in
the least. but not be umble yourself, you donot judge well,
perhaps, for they that be. I willnot provoke my better with
knowledge, thank you. Ibe much too umble. here be my umble
dwelling, Master Copperfield!'
we enter a low, old-fashioned room, walk straight into from the
street, and find there Mrs. Heep, who be the dead image of Uriah,
only short. she receive I with the utmost humility, and
apologize to I for give her son a kiss, observe that, lowly
as they be, they have their natural affection, which they hop
would give no offence to anyone. it be a perfectly decent room,
half parlour and half kitchen, but not at all a snug room. the
tea-thing be set upon the table, and the kettle be boil on
the hob. there be a chest of drawer with an escritoire top, for
Uriah to read or write at of an evening; there be Uriah's blue bag
lie down and vomit paper; there be a company of Uriah's
book command by Mr. Tidd; there be a corner cupboard: and there
be the usual article of furniture. I donot remember that any
individual object have a bare, pinch, spare look; but I do
remember that the whole place have.
it be perhaps a part of Mrs. Heep's humility, that she still wear
weed. notwithstanding the lapse of time that have occur since
Mr. Heep's decease, she still wear weed. I think there be some
compromise in the cap; but otherwise she be as weedy as in the
early day of her mourning.
'this be a day to be remember, my Uriah, I be sure,' say Mrs.
Heep, make the tea, 'when Master Copperfield pay we a visit.'
'I say youwould think so, mother,' say Uriah.
'if I could have wish father to remain among we for any reason,'
say Mrs. Heep, 'it would have be, that he might have know his
company this afternoon.'
I feel embarrassed by these compliment; but I be sensible, too,
of be entertain as an honour guest, and I think Mrs. Heep
an agreeable woman.
'my Uriah,' say Mrs. Heep, 'have look forward to this, sir, a
long while. he have his fear that our umbleness stand in the way,
and I join in they myself. umble we be, umble we have be,
umble we shall ever be,' say Mrs. Heep.
'I be sure you have no occasion to be so, ma'am,' I say, 'unless
you like.'
'thank you, sir,' retort Mrs. Heep. 'we know our station and be
thankful in it.'
I find that Mrs. Heep gradually get near to I, and that Uriah
gradually get opposite to I, and that they respectfully ply I
with the choicest of the eatable on the table. there be nothing
particularly choice there, to be sure; but I take the will for the
deed, and feel that they be very attentive. presently they begin
to talk about aunt, and then I tell they about mine; and about
father and mother, and then I tell they about mine; and then Mrs.
Heep begin to talk about father-in-law, and then I begin to tell
she about mine - but stop, because my aunt have advise I to
observe a silence on that subject. a tender young cork, however,
would have have no more chance against a pair of corkscrew, or a
tender young tooth against a pair of dentist, or a little
shuttlecock against two battledore, than I have against Uriah and
Mrs. Heep. they do just what they like with I; and worm
thing out of I that I have no desire to tell, with a certainty I
blush to think of, the more especially, as in my juvenile
frankness, I take some credit to myself for be so confidential
and feel that I be quite the patron of my two respectful
entertainer.
they be very fond of one another: that be certain. I take it,
that have its effect upon I, as a touch of nature; but the skill
with which the one follow up whatever the other say, be a touch
of art which I be still less proof against. when there be
nothing more to be get out of I about myself (for on the Murdstone
and Grinby life, and on my journey, I be dumb), they begin about
Mr. Wickfield and Agnes. Uriah throw the ball to Mrs. Heep, Mrs.
Heep catch it and throw it back to Uriah, Uriah keep it up a
little while, then send it back to Mrs. Heep, and so they go on
toss it about until I have no idea who have get it, and be quite
bewilder. the ball itself be always change too. now it be
Mr. Wickfield, now Agnes, now the excellence of Mr. Wickfield, now
my admiration of Agnes; now the extent of Mr. Wickfield's business
and resource, now our domestic life after dinner; now, the wine
that Mr. Wickfield take, the reason why he take it, and the pity
that it be he take so much; now one thing, now another, then
everything at once; and all the time, without appear to speak
very often, or to do anything but sometimes encourage they a
little, for fear they should be overcome by their humility and the
honour of my company, I find myself perpetually let out
something or other that I have no business to let out and see the
effect of it in the twinkling of Uriah's dinted nostril.
I have begin to be a little uncomfortable, and to wish myself well
out of the visit, when a figure come down the street pass the
door - it stand open to air the room, which be warm, the weather
be close for the time of year - come back again, look in, and
walk in, exclaim loudly, 'Copperfield! be it possible?'
it be Mr. Micawber! it be Mr. Micawber, with his eye-glass, and
his walking-stick, and his shirt-collar, and his genteel air, and
the condescend roll in his voice, all complete!
'my dear copperfield,' say Mr. Micawber, put out his hand,
'this be indeed a meeting which be calculate to impress the mind
with a sense of the instability and uncertainty of all human - in
short, it be a most extraordinary meeting. walk along the
street, reflect upon the probability of something turn up (of
which I be at present rather sanguine), I find a young but value
friend turn up, who be connect with the most eventful period of
my life; I may say, with the turning-point of my existence.
Copperfield, my dear fellow, how do you do?'
I cannot say - I really cannot say - that I be glad to see Mr.
Micawber there; but I be glad to see he too, and shake hand with
he, heartily, inquire how Mrs. Micawber be.
'thank you,' say Mr. Micawber, wave his hand as of old, and
settle his chin in his shirt-collar. 'she be tolerably
convalescent. the twin no long derive their sustenance from
Nature's fount - in short,' say Mr. Micawber, in one of his
burst of confidence, 'they be wean - and Mrs. Micawber be, at
present, my travel companion. she will be rejoice,
Copperfield, to renew her acquaintance with one who have prove
himself in all respect a worthy minister at the sacred altar of
friendship.'
I say I should be delighted to see she.
'you be very good,' say Mr. Micawber.
Mr. Micawber then smile, settle his chin again, and look about
he.
'I have discover my friend Copperfield,' say Mr. Micawber
genteelly, and without address himself particularly to anyone,
'not in solitude, but partaking of a social meal in company with a
widow lady, and one who be apparently her offspring - in short,'
say Mr. Micawber, in another of his burst of confidence, 'her
son. I shall esteem it an honour to be present.'
I could do no less, under these circumstance, than make Mr.
Micawber know to Uriah Heep and his mother; which I accordingly
do. as they abase themselves before he, Mr. Micawber take a
seat, and wave his hand in his most courtly manner.
'any friend of my friend Copperfield's,' say Mr. Micawber, 'have a
personal claim upon myself.'
'we be too umble, sir,' say Mrs. Heep, 'my son and I, to be the
friend of Master Copperfield. he have be so good as take his tea
with we, and we be thankful to he for his company, also to you,
sir, for your notice.'
'Ma'am,' return Mr. Micawber, with a bow, 'you be very obliging:
and what be you do, Copperfield? still in the wine trade?'
I be excessively anxious to get Mr. Micawber away; and reply,
with my hat in my hand, and a very red face, I have no doubt, that
I be a pupil at Doctor Strong's.
'a pupil?' say Mr. Micawber, raise his eyebrow. 'I be
extremely happy to hear it. although a mind like my friend
Copperfield's' - to Uriah and Mrs. Heep - 'do not require that
cultivation which, without his knowledge of man and thing, it
would require, still it be a rich soil teem with latent
vegetation - in short,' say Mr. Micawber, smile, in another
burst of confidence, 'it be an intellect capable of get up the
classic to any extent.'
Uriah, with his long hand slowly twin over one another, make a
ghastly writhe from the waist upwards, to express his concurrence
in this estimation of I.
'shall we go and see Mrs. Micawber, sir?' I say, to get Mr.
Micawber away.
'if you will do she that favour, Copperfield,' reply Mr.
Micawber, rise. 'I have no scruple in say, in the presence of
our friend here, that I be a man who have, for some year,
contend against the pressure of pecuniary difficulty.' I know
he be certain to say something of this kind; he always would be so
boastful about his difficulty. 'sometimes I have rise superior
to my difficulty. sometimes my difficulty have - in short,
have floor I. there have be time when I have administer a
succession of facer to they; there have be time when they have
be too many for I, and I have give in, and say to Mrs.
Micawber, in the word of Cato, "Plato, thou reason well. itbe
all up now. I can show fight no more." but at no time of my life,'
say Mr. Micawber, 'have I enjoy a high degree of satisfaction
than in pour my grief (if I may describe difficulty, chiefly
arise out of warrant of attorney and promissory note at two and
four month, by that word) into the bosom of my friend
Copperfield.'
Mr. Micawber close this handsome tribute by say, 'Mr. Heep!
good evening. Mrs. Heep! your servant,' and then walk out with
I in his most fashionable manner, make a good deal of noise on
the pavement with his shoe, and hum a tune as we go.
it be a little inn where Mr. Micawber put up, and he occupy a
little room in it, partition off from the commercial room, and
strongly flavour with tobacco-smoke. I think it be over the
kitchen, because a warm greasy smell appear to come up through
the chink in the floor, and there be a flabby perspiration on the
wall. I know it be near the bar, on account of the smell of
spirit and jingling of glass. here, recumbent on a small sofa,
underneath a picture of a race-horse, with her head close to the
fire, and her foot push the mustard off the dumb-waiter at the
other end of the room, be Mrs. Micawber, to whom Mr. Micawber
enter first, say, 'my dear, allow I to introduce to you a
pupil of Doctor Strong's.'
I notice, by the by, that although Mr. Micawber be just as much
confuse as ever about my age and standing, he always remember,
as a genteel thing, that I be a pupil of Doctor Strong's.
Mrs. Micawber be amazed, but very glad to see I. I be very glad
to see she too, and, after an affectionate greeting on both side,
sit down on the small sofa near she.
'my dear,' say Mr. Micawber, 'if you will mention to Copperfield
what our present position be, which I have no doubt he will like to
know, I will go and look at the paper the while, and see whether
anything turn up among the advertisement.'
'I think you be at Plymouth, ma'am,' I say to Mrs. Micawber,
as he go out.
'my dear Master Copperfield,' she reply, 'we go to Plymouth.'
'to be on the spot,' I hint.
'just so,' say Mrs. Micawber. 'to be on the spot. but, the truth
be, talent be not want in the Custom House. the local influence
of my family be quite unavaile to obtain any employment in that
department, for a man of Mr. Micawber's ability. they would
rather not have a man of Mr. Micawber's ability. he would only
show the deficiency of the other. apart from which,' say Mrs.
Micawber, 'I will not disguise from you, my dear Master
Copperfield, that when that branch of my family which be settle in
Plymouth, become aware that Mr. Micawber be accompany by myself,
and by little wilkin and his sister, and by the twin, they do
not receive he with that ardour which he might have expect,
be so newly release from captivity. in fact,' say Mrs.
Micawber, lower her voice, - 'this be between ourselves - our
reception be cool.'
'dear I!' I say.
'yes,' say Mrs. Micawber. 'it be truly painful to contemplate
mankind in such an aspect, Master Copperfield, but our reception
be, decidedly, cool. there be no doubt about it. in fact, that
branch of my family which be settle in Plymouth become quite
personal to Mr. Micawber, before we have be there a week.'
I say, and think, that they ought to be ashamed of themselves.
'still, so it be,' continue Mrs. Micawber. 'under such
circumstance, what could a man of Mr. Micawber's spirit do? but
one obvious course be leave. to borrow, of that branch of my
family, the money to return to London, and to return at any
sacrifice.'
'then you all come back again, ma'am?' I say.
'we all come back again,' reply Mrs. Micawber. 'since then, I
have consult other branch of my family on the course which it
be most expedient for Mr. Micawber to take - for I maintain that he
must take some course, Master Copperfield,' say Mrs. Micawber,
argumentatively. 'it be clear that a family of six, not include
a domestic, cannot live upon air.'
'certainly, ma'am,' say I.
'the opinion of those other branch of my family,' pursue Mrs.
Micawber, 'be, that Mr. Micawber should immediately turn his
attention to coal.'
'to what, ma'am?'
'to coal,' say Mrs. Micawber. 'to the coal trade. Mr. Micawber
be induce to think, on inquiry, that there might be an opening
for a man of his talent in the Medway Coal Trade. then, as Mr.
Micawber very properly say, the first step to be take clearly
be, to come and see the Medway. which we come and see. I say
"we", Master Copperfield; for I never will,' say Mrs. Micawber
with emotion, 'I never will desert Mr. Micawber.'
I murmur my admiration and approbation.
'we come,' repeat Mrs. Micawber, 'and see the Medway. my opinion
of the coal trade on that river be, that it may require talent, but
that it certainly require capital. talent, Mr. Micawber have;
capital, Mr. Micawber have not. we see, I think, the great part
of the Medway; and that be my individual conclusion. be so near
here, Mr. Micawber be of opinion that it would be rash not to come
on, and see the Cathedral. firstly, on account of its being so
well worth seeing, and our never have see it; and secondly, on
account of the great probability of something turn up in a
cathedral town. we have be here,' say Mrs. Micawber, 'three
day. nothing have, as yet, turn up; and it may not surprise you,
my dear Master Copperfield, so much as it would a stranger, to know
that we be at present wait for a remittance from London, to
discharge our pecuniary obligation at this hotel. until the
arrival of that remittance,' say Mrs. Micawber with much feeling,
'I be cut off from my home (I allude to lodging in Pentonville),
from my boy and girl, and from my twin.'
I feel the utmost sympathy for Mr. and Mrs. Micawber in this
anxious extremity, and say as much to Mr. Micawber, who now
return: add that I only wish I have money enough, to lend
they the amount they need. Mr. Micawber's answer express the
disturbance of his mind. he say, shake hand with I,
'copperfield, you be a true friend; but when the bad come to
the bad, no man be without a friend who be possess of shaving
material.' at this dreadful hint Mrs. Micawber throw her arm
round Mr. Micawber's neck and entreat he to be calm. he weep;
but so far recover, almost immediately, as to ring the bell for
the waiter, and bespeak a hot kidney pudding and a plate of shrimp
for breakfast in the morning.
when I take my leave of they, they both press I so much to come
and dine before they go away, that I could not refuse. but, as
I know I could not come next day, when I should have a good deal to
prepare in the evening, Mr. Micawber arrange that he would call at
Doctor Strong's in the course of the morning (have a presentiment
that the remittance would arrive by that post), and propose the day
after, if it would suit I well. accordingly I be call out of
school next forenoon, and find Mr. Micawber in the parlour; who
have call to say that the dinner would take place as propose.
when I ask he if the remittance have come, he press my hand and
depart.
as I be look out of window that same evening, it surprise I,
and make I rather uneasy, to see Mr. Micawber and Uriah Heep walk
past, arm in arm: Uriah humbly sensible of the honour that be do
he, and Mr. Micawber take a bland delight in extend his
patronage to Uriah. but I be still more surprised, when I go to
the little hotel next day at the appoint dinner-hour, which be
four o'clock, to find, from what Mr. Micawber say, that he have
go home with Uriah, and have drunk brandy-and-water at Mrs.
Heep's.
'and Iwill tell you what, my dear copperfield,' say Mr. Micawber,
'your friend Heep be a young fellow who might be attorney-general.
if I have know that young man, at the period when my difficulty
come to a crisis, all I can say be, that I believe my creditor
would have be a great deal well manage than they be.'
I hardly understand how this could have be, see that Mr.
Micawber have pay they nothing at all as it be; but I do not like
to ask. neither do I like to say, that I hop he have not be
too communicative to Uriah; or to inquire if they have talk much
about I. I be afraid of hurt Mr. Micawber's feeling, or, at
all event, Mrs. Micawber's, she be very sensitive; but I be
uncomfortable about it, too, and often think about it afterwards.
we have a beautiful little dinner. quite an elegant dish of fish;
the kidney-end of a loin of veal, roasted; fried sausage-meat; a
partridge, and a pudding. there be wine, and there be strong
ale; and after dinner Mrs. Micawber make we a bowl of hot punch
with her own hand.
Mr. Micawber be uncommonly convivial. I never see he such good
company. he make his face shine with the punch, so that it look
as if it have be varnish all over. he get cheerfully
sentimental about the town, and propose success to it; observe
that Mrs. Micawber and himself have be make extremely snug and
comfortable there and that he never should forget the agreeable
hour they have pass in Canterbury. he propose I afterwards;
and he, and Mrs. Micawber, and I, take a review of our past
acquaintance, in the course of which we sell the property all over
again. then I propose Mrs. Micawber: or, at least, say,
modestly, 'if youwill allow I, Mrs. Micawber, I shall now have the
pleasure of drink your health, ma'am.' on which Mr. Micawber
deliver an eulogium on Mrs. Micawber's character, and say she
have ever be his guide, philosopher, and friend, and that he would
recommend I, when I come to a marrying time of life, to marry such
another woman, if such another woman could be find.
as the punch disappear, Mr. Micawber become still more friendly
and convivial. Mrs. Micawber's spirit become elevate, too, we
sing 'Auld Lang Syne'. when we come to 'herebe a hand, my trusty
frere', we all join hand round the table; and when we declare
we would 'take a right gude Willie Waught', and havenot the least
idea what it mean, we be really affect.
in a word, I never see anybody so thoroughly jovial as Mr. Micawber
be, down to the very last moment of the evening, when I take a
hearty farewell of himself and his amiable wife. consequently, I
be not prepare, at seven o'clock next morning, to receive the
follow communication, date half past nine in the evening; a
quarter of an hour after I have leave he: -
'my DEAR YOUNG FRIEND,
'the die be cast - all be over. hide the ravage of care with a
sickly mask of mirth, I have not inform you, this evening, that
there be no hope of the remittance! under these circumstance,
alike humiliating to endure, humiliating to contemplate, and
humiliating to relate, I have discharge the pecuniary liability
contract at this establishment, by give a note of hand, make
payable fourteen day after date, at my residence, Pentonville,
London. when it become due, it will not be take up. the result
be destruction. the bolt be impend, and the tree must fall.
'let the wretched man who now address you, my dear Copperfield,
be a beacon to you through life. he write with that intention,
and in that hope. if he could think himself of so much use, one
gleam of day might, by possibility, penetrate into the cheerless
dungeon of his remain existence - though his longevity be, at
present (to say the least of it), extremely problematical.
'this be the last communication, my dear copperfield, you will ever
receive
'from
'the
'Beggared Outcast,
'WILKINS MICAWBER.'
I be so shocked by the content of this heart-rend letter, that
I run off directly towards the little hotel with the intention of
take it on my way to Doctor Strong's, and try to soothe Mr.
Micawber with a word of comfort. but, half-way there, I meet the
London coach with Mr. and Mrs. Micawber up behind; Mr. Micawber,
the very picture of tranquil enjoyment, smile at Mrs. Micawber's
conversation, eat walnut out of a paper bag, with a bottle
stick out of his breast pocket. as they do not see I, I
think it well, all thing consider, not to see they. so, with
a great weight take off my mind, I turn into a by-street that
be the near way to school, and feel, upon the whole, relieve
that they be go; though I still like they very much,
nevertheless.
CHAPTER 18
a retrospect
my school-day! the silent gliding on of my existence - the
unseen, unfelt progress of my life - from childhood up to youth!
let I think, as I look back upon that flow water, now a dry
channel overgrown with leaf, whether there be any mark along
its course, by which I can remember how it run.
a moment, and I occupy my place in the Cathedral, where we all go
together, every Sunday morning, assemble first at school for that
purpose. the earthy smell, the sunless air, the sensation of the
world be shut out, the resounding of the organ through the black
and white arch gallery and aisle, be wing that take I back,
and hold I hover above those day, in a half-sleep and
half-wake dream.
I be not the last boy in the school. I have rise in a few month,
over several head. but the first boy seem to I a mighty
creature, dwell afar off, whose giddy height be unattainable.
Agnes say 'no,' but I say 'yes,' and tell she that she little
think what store of knowledge have be master by the wonderful
being, at whose place she think I, even I, weak aspirant, may
arrive in time. he be not my private friend and public patron, as
Steerforth be, but I hold he in a reverential respect. I chiefly
wonder what hewill be, when he leave Doctor Strong's, and what
mankind will do to maintain any place against he.
but who be this that break upon I? this be Miss Shepherd, whom
I love.
Miss Shepherd be a boarder at the Misses Nettingalls'
establishment. I adore Miss Shepherd. she be a little girl, in a
spencer, with a round face and curly flaxen hair. the Misses
Nettingalls' young lady come to the Cathedral too. I cannot look
upon my book, for I must look upon Miss Shepherd. when the
chorister chaunt, I hear Miss Shepherd. in the service I mentally
insert Miss Shepherd's name - I put she in among the Royal Family.
at home, in my own room, I be sometimes move to cry out, 'oh, Miss
Shepherd!' in a transport of love.
for some time, I be doubtful of Miss Shepherd's feeling, but, at
length, fate be propitious, we meet at the dancing-school. I
have Miss Shepherd for my partner. I touch Miss Shepherd's glove,
and feel a thrill go up the right arm of my jacket, and come out at
my hair. I say nothing to Miss Shepherd, but we understand each
other. Miss Shepherd and myself live but to be unite.
why do I secretly give Miss Shepherd twelve Brazil nut for a
present, I wonder? they be not expressive of affection, they be
difficult to pack into a parcel of any regular shape, they be hard
to crack, even in room door, and they be oily when crack; yet
I feel that they be appropriate to Miss Shepherd. soft, seedy
biscuit, also, I bestow upon Miss Shepherd; and orange
innumerable. once, I kiss Miss Shepherd in the cloak-room.
Ecstasy! what be my agony and indignation next day, when I hear
a fly rumour that the Misses Nettingall have stand Miss Shepherd
in the stock for turn in her toe!
Miss Shepherd be the one pervade theme and vision of my life,
how do I ever come to break with she? I cannot conceive. and yet
a coolness grow between Miss Shepherd and myself. whisper reach
I of Miss Shepherd have say she wish I wouldnot stare so, and
have avow a preference for Master Jones - for Jones! a boy of
no merit whatever! the gulf between I and Miss Shepherd widen.
at last, one day, I meet the Misses Nettingalls' establishment out
walk. Miss Shepherd make a face as she go by, and laugh to
her companion. all be over. the devotion of a life - it seem a
life, it be all the same - be at an end; Miss Shepherd come out of
the morning service, and the Royal Family know she no more.
I be high in the school, and no one break my peace. I be not at
all polite, now, to the Misses Nettingalls' young lady, and
shouldnot dote on any of they, if they be twice as many and
twenty time as beautiful. I think the dancing-school a tiresome
affair, and wonder why the girl cannot dance by themselves and
leave we alone. I be grow great in Latin verse, and neglect
the lace of my boot. Doctor Strong refer to I in public as a
promising young scholar. Mr. Dick be wild with joy, and my aunt
remit I a guinea by the next post.
the shade of a young butcher rise, like the apparition of an armed
head in Macbeth. who be this young butcher? he be the terror of
the youth of Canterbury. there be a vague belief abroad, that the
beef suet with which he anoint his hair give he unnatural
strength, and that he be a match for a man. he be a broad-face,
bull-neck, young butcher, with rough red cheek, an
ill-condition mind, and an injurious tongue. his main use of
this tongue, be, to disparage Doctor Strong's young gentleman. he
say, publicly, that if they want anything hewill give it them. he
name individual among they (myself include), whom he could
undertake to settle with one hand, and the other tie behind he.
he waylay the small boy to punch their unprotected head, and
call challenge after I in the open street. for these
sufficient reason I resolve to fight the butcher.
it be a summer evening, down in a green hollow, at the corner of a
wall. I meet the butcher by appointment. I be attend by a
select body of our boy; the butcher, by two other butcher, a
young publican, and a sweep. the preliminary be adjust, and
the butcher and myself stand face to face. in a moment the butcher
light ten thousand candle out of my left eyebrow. in another
moment, I donot know where the wall be, or where I be, or where
anybody be. I hardly know which be myself and which the butcher,
we be always in such a tangle and tussle, knock about upon the
trodden grass. sometimes I see the butcher, bloody but confident;
sometimes I see nothing, and sit gasp on my second's knee;
sometimes I go in at the butcher madly, and cut my knuckle open
against his face, without appear to discompose he at all. at
last I awake, very queer about the head, as from a giddy sleep, and
see the butcher walk off, congratulate by the two other
butcher and the sweep and publican, and put on his coat as he
go; from which I augur, justly, that the victory be his.
I be take home in a sad plight, and I have beef-steak put to my
eye, and be rub with vinegar and brandy, and find a great puffy
place burst out on my upper lip, which swell immoderately. for
three or four day I remain at home, a very ill-look subject,
with a green shade over my eye; and I should be very dull, but
that Agnes be a sister to I, and condole with I, and read to
I, and make the time light and happy. Agnes have my confidence
completely, always; I tell she all about the butcher, and the
wrong he have heap upon I; she think I couldnot have do
otherwise than fight the butcher, while she shrink and tremble at
my have fight he.
Time have steal on unobserved, for Adams be not the head-boy in the
day that be come now, nor have he be this many and many a day.
Adams have leave the school so long, that when he come back, on a
visit to Doctor Strong, there be not many there, besides myself,
who know he. Adams be go to be call to the bar almost
directly, and be to be an advocate, and to wear a wig. I be
surprised to find he a meeker man than I have think, and less
impose in appearance. he have not stagger the world yet,
either; for it go on (as well as I can make out) pretty much the
same as if he have never join it.
a blank, through which the warrior of poetry and history march on
in stately host that seem to have no end - and what come next!
I be the head-boy, now! I look down on the line of boy below I,
with a condescend interest in such of they as bring to my mind
the boy I be myself, when I first come there. that little fellow
seem to be no part of I; I remember he as something leave behind
upon the road of life - as something I have pass, rather than
have actually be - and almost think of he as of someone else.
and the little girl I see on that first day at Mr. Wickfield's,
where be she? go also. in her stead, the perfect likeness of
the picture, a child likeness no more, move about the house; and
Agnes - my sweet sister, as I call she in my thought, my
counsellor and friend, the well angel of the life of all who
come within her calm, good, self-deny influence - be quite a
woman.
what other change have come upon I, besides the change in my
growth and look, and in the knowledge I have garner all this
while? I wear a gold watch and chain, a ring upon my little
finger, and a long-tail coat; and I use a great deal of bear's
grease - which, take in conjunction with the ring, look bad. be
I in love again? I be. I worship the eld Miss Larkins.
the eld Miss Larkins be not a little girl. she be a tall, dark,
black-eye, fine figure of a woman. the eld Miss Larkins be not
a chicken; for the young Miss Larkins be not that, and the
eld must be three or four year old. perhaps the eld Miss
Larkins may be about thirty. my passion for she be beyond all
bound.
the eld Miss Larkins know officer. it be an awful thing to
bear. I see they speak to she in the street. I see they cross
the way to meet she, when her bonnet (she have a bright taste in
bonnet) be see come down the pavement, accompany by her
sister's bonnet. she laugh and talk, and seem to like it. I
spend a good deal of my own spare time in walk up and down to
meet she. if I can bow to she once in the day (I know she to bow
to, know Mr. Larkins), I be happy. I deserve a bow now and
then. the rag agony I suffer on the night of the Race Ball,
where I know the eld Miss Larkins will be dance with the
military, ought to have some compensation, if there be even-hand
justice in the world.
my passion take away my appetite, and make I wear my new silk
neckerchief continually. I have no relief but in put on my
good clothe, and have my boot clean over and over again. I
seem, then, to be worthy of the eld Miss Larkins. everything
that belong to she, or be connect with she, be precious to I.
Mr. Larkins (a gruff old gentleman with a double chin, and one of
his eye immovable in his head) be fraught with interest to I.
when I cannot meet his daughter, I go where I be likely to meet he.
to say 'how do you do, Mr. Larkins? be the young lady and all
the family quite well?' seem so pointed, that I blush.
I think continually about my age. say I be seventeen, and say that
seventeen be young for the eld Miss Larkins, what of that?
besides, I shall be one-and-twenty in no time almost. I regularly
take walk outside Mr. Larkins's house in the evening, though it
cut I to the heart to see the officer go in, or to hear they up
in the drawing-room, where the eld Miss Larkins play the harp.
I even walk, on two or three occasion, in a sickly, spoony manner,
round and round the house after the family be go to bed,
wonder which be the eld Miss Larkins's chamber (and pitching,
I dare say now, on Mr. Larkins's instead); wish that a fire
would burst out; that the assemble crowd would stand appal;
that I, dash through they with a ladder, might rear it against
her window, save she in my arm, go back for something she have leave
behind, and perish in the flame. for I be generally disintereste
in my love, and think I could be content to make a figure before
Miss Larkins, and expire.
generally, but not always. sometimes bright vision rise before
I. when I dress (the occupation of two hour), for a great ball
give at the Larkins's (the anticipation of three week), I indulge
my fancy with pleasing image. I picture myself take courage to
make a declaration to Miss Larkins. I picture Miss Larkins sink
her head upon my shoulder, and say, 'oh, Mr. Copperfield, can I
believe my ear!' I picture Mr. Larkins wait on I next morning,
and say, 'my dear Copperfield, my daughter have tell I all.
Youth be no objection. here be twenty thousand pound. be
happy!' I picture my aunt relenting, and bless we; and Mr. Dick
and Doctor Strong be present at the marriage ceremony. I be a
sensible fellow, I believe - I believe, on look back, I mean -
and modest I be sure; but all this go on notwithstanding.
I repair to the enchanted house, where there be light,
chattering, music, flower, officer (I be sorry to see), and the
eld Miss Larkins, a blaze of beauty. she be dress in blue,
with blue flower in her hair - forget-I-not - as if she have any
need to wear forget-I-not. it be the first really grow-up party
that I have ever be invite to, and I be a little uncomfortable;
for I appear not to belong to anybody, and nobody appear to have
anything to say to I, except Mr. Larkins, who ask I how my
schoolfellow be, which he neednot do, as I have not come there to
be insult.
but after I have stand in the doorway for some time, and feast my
eye upon the goddess of my heart, she approach I - she, the
eld Miss Larkins! - and ask I pleasantly, if I dance?
I stammer, with a bow, 'with you, Miss Larkins.'
'with no one else?' inquire Miss Larkins.
'I should have no pleasure in dance with anyone else.'
Miss Larkins laugh and blush (or I think she blush), and say,
'next time but one, I shall be very glad.'
the time arrive. 'it be a waltz, I think,' Miss Larkins
doubtfully observe, when I present myself. 'do you waltz? if
not, Captain Bailey -'
but I do waltz (pretty well, too, as it happen), and I take Miss
Larkins out. I take she sternly from the side of Captain Bailey.
he be wretche, I have no doubt; but he be nothing to I. I have
be wretche, too. I waltz with the eld Miss Larkins! I donot
know where, among whom, or how long. I only know that I swim about
in space, with a blue angel, in a state of blissful delirium, until
I find myself alone with she in a little room, rest on a sofa.
she admire a flower (pink camellia japonica, price half-a-crown),
in my button-hole. I give it she, and say:
'I ask an inestimable price for it, Miss Larkins.'
'indeed! what be that?' return Miss Larkins.
'a flower of your, that I may treasure it as a miser do gold.'
'yoube a bold boy,' say Miss Larkins. 'there.'
she give it I, not displeased; and I put it to my lip, and then
into my breast. Miss Larkins, laughing, draw her hand through my
arm, and say, 'now take I back to Captain Bailey.'
I be lose in the recollection of this delicious interview, and the
waltz, when she come to I again, with a plain elderly gentleman
who have be play whist all night, upon her arm, and say:
'oh! here be my bold friend! Mr. Chestle want to know you, Mr.
Copperfield.'
I feel at once that he be a friend of the family, and be much
gratified.
'I admire your taste, sir,' say Mr. Chestle. 'it do you credit.
I suppose you donot take much interest in hop; but I be a pretty
large grower myself; and if you ever like to come over to our
neighbourhood - neighbourhood of Ashford - and take a run about our
place, -we shall be glad for you to stop as long as you like.'
I thank Mr. Chestle warmly, and shake hand. I think I be in a
happy dream. I waltz with the eld Miss Larkins once again. she
say I waltz so well! I go home in a state of unspeakable bliss,
and waltz in imagination, all night long, with my arm round the
blue waist of my dear divinity. for some day afterwards, I be
lose in rapturous reflection; but I neither see she in the street,
nor when I call. I be imperfectly console for this disappointment
by the sacred pledge, the perished flower.
'trotwood,' say Agnes, one day after dinner. 'who do you think be
go to be marry tomorrow? someone you admire.'
'not you, I suppose, Agnes?'
'not I!' raise her cheerful face from the music she be copy.
'do you hear he, Papa? - the eld Miss Larkins.'
'to - to Captain Bailey?' I have just enough power to ask.
'no; to no Captain. to Mr. Chestle, a hop-grower.'
I be terribly deject for about a week or two. I take off my
ring, I wear my bad clothe, I use no bear's grease, and I
frequently lament over the late Miss Larkins's faded flower.
be, by that time, rather tired of this kind of life, and have
receive new provocation from the butcher, I throw the flower away,
go out with the butcher, and gloriously defeat he.
this, and the resumption of my ring, as well as of the bear's
grease in moderation, be the last mark I can discern, now, in my
progress to seventeen.
CHAPTER 19
I look about ME, and make a discovery
I be doubtful whether I be at heart glad or sorry, when my
school-day draw to an end, and the time come for my leave Doctor
Strong's. I have be very happy there, I have a great attachment
for the Doctor, and I be eminent and distinguish in that little
world. for these reason I be sorry to go; but for other reason,
unsubstantial enough, I be glad. misty idea of be a young man
at my own disposal, of the importance attach to a young man at
his own disposal, of the wonderful thing to be see and do by
that magnificent animal, and the wonderful effect he could not
fail to make upon society, lure I away. so powerful be these
visionary consideration in my boyish mind, that I seem, accord
to my present way of thinking, to have leave school without natural
regret. the separation have not make the impression on I, that
other separation have. I try in vain to recall how I feel about
it, and what its circumstance be; but it be not momentous in my
recollection. I suppose the opening prospect confuse I. I know
that my juvenile experience go for little or nothing then; and
that life be more like a great fairy story, which I be just about
to begin to read, than anything else.
my aunt and I have hold many grave deliberation on the calling to
which I should be devote. for a year or more I have endeavour to
find a satisfactory answer to her often-repeat question, 'what I
would like to be?' but I have no particular liking, that I could
discover, for anything. if I could have be inspire with a
knowledge of the science of navigation, take the command of a
fast-sailing expedition, and go round the world on a triumphant
voyage of discovery, I think I might have consider myself
completely suit. but, in the absence of any such miraculous
provision, my desire be to apply myself to some pursuit that would
not lie too heavily upon her purse; and to do my duty in it,
whatever it might be.
Mr. Dick have regularly assist at our council, with a meditative
and sage demeanour. he never make a suggestion but once; and on
that occasion (I donot know what put it in his head), he suddenly
propose that I should be 'a Brazier'. my aunt receive this
proposal so very ungraciously, that he never venture on a second;
but ever afterwards confine himself to look watchfully at she
for her suggestion, and rattle his money.
'Trot, I tell you what, my dear,' say my aunt, one morning in the
Christmas season when I leave school: 'as this knotty point be still
unsettled, and as we must not make a mistake in our decision if we
can help it, I think we have well take a little breathing-time.
in the meanwhile, you must try to look at it from a new point of
view, and not as a schoolboy.'
'I will, aunt.'
'it have occur to I,' pursue my aunt, 'that a little change,
and a glimpse of life out of door, may be useful in help you to
know your own mind, and form a cool judgement. suppose you be
to go down into the old part of the country again, for instance,
and see that - that out-of-the-way woman with the savage of
name,' say my aunt, rub her nose, for she could never
thoroughly forgive Peggotty for be so call.
'of all thing in the world, aunt, I should like it well!'
'well,' say my aunt, 'thatbe lucky, for I should like it too. but
itbe natural and rational that you should like it. and I be very
well persuade that whatever you do, Trot, will always be natural
and rational.'
'I hope so, aunt.'
'your sister, Betsey Trotwood,' say my aunt, 'would have be as
natural and rational a girl as ever breathe. youwill be worthy of
she, willnot you?'
'I hope I shall be worthy of you, aunt. that will be enough for
I.'
'itbe a mercy that poor dear baby of a mother of yours donot
live,' say my aunt, look at I approvingly, 'or shewould have be
so vain of her boy by this time, that her soft little head would
have be completely turn, if there be anything of it leave to
turn.' (my aunt always excuse any weakness of her own in my
behalf, by transfer it in this way to my poor mother.) 'bless
I, Trotwood, how you do remind I of she!'
'pleasantly, I hope, aunt?' say I.
'hebe as like she, Dick,' say my aunt, emphatically, 'hebe as like
she, as she be that afternoon before she begin to fret - bless my
heart, hebe as like she, as he can look at I out of his two eye!'
'be he indeed?' say Mr. Dick.
'and hebe like David, too,' say my aunt, decisively.
'he be very like David!' say Mr. Dick.
'but what I want you to be, trot,' resume my aunt, '- I donot mean
physically, but morally; you be very well physically - be, a firm
fellow. a fine firm fellow, with a will of your own. with
resolution,' say my aunt, shake her cap at I, and clench she
hand. 'with determination. with character, trot - with strength
of character that be not to be influence, except on good reason,
by anybody, or by anything. thatbe what I want you to be. thatbe
what your father and mother might both have be, Heaven know, and
be the well for it.'
I intimate that I hop I should be what she describe.
'that you may begin, in a small way, to have a reliance upon
yourself, and to act for yourself,' say my aunt, 'I shall send you
upon your trip, alone. I do think, once, of Mr. Dick's go with
you; but, on second thought, I shall keep he to take care of I.'
Mr. Dick, for a moment, look a little disappointed; until the
honour and dignity of have to take care of the most wonderful
woman in the world, restore the sunshine to his face.
'besides,' say my aunt, 'therebe the Memorial -'
'oh, certainly,' say Mr. Dick, in a hurry, 'I intend, Trotwood, to
get that do immediately - it really must be do immediately!
and then it will go in, you know - and then -' say Mr. Dick, after
check himself, and pause a long time, 'therewill be a pretty
kettle of fish!'
in pursuance of my aunt's kind scheme, I be shortly afterwards
fit out with a handsome purse of money, and a portmanteau, and
tenderly dismiss upon my expedition. at parting, my aunt give I
some good advice, and a good many kiss; and say that as she
object be that I should look about I, and should think a little,
she would recommend I to stay a few day in London, if I like it,
either on my way down into Suffolk, or in come back. in a word,
I be at liberty to do what I would, for three week or a month;
and no other condition be impose upon my freedom than the
before-mention thinking and look about I, and a pledge to
write three time a week and faithfully report myself.
I go to Canterbury first, that I might take leave of Agnes and
Mr. Wickfield (my old room in whose house I have not yet
relinquish), and also of the good Doctor. Agnes be very glad to
see I, and tell I that the house have not be like itself since
I have leave it.
'I be sure I be not like myself when I be away,' say I. 'I seem
to want my right hand, when I miss you. though thatbe not say
much; for therebe no head in my right hand, and no heart. everyone
who know you, consult with you, and be guide by you, Agnes.'
'everyone who know I, spoil I, I believe,' she answer,
smile.
'no. itbe because you be like no one else. you be so good, and
so sweet-temper. you have such a gentle nature, and you be
always right.'
'you talk,' say Agnes, break into a pleasant laugh, as she sit
at work, 'as if I be the late Miss Larkins.'
'come! itbe not fair to abuse my confidence,' I answer,
redden at the recollection of my blue enslaver. 'but I shall
confide in you, just the same, Agnes. I can never grow out of
that. whenever I fall into trouble, or fall in love, I shall
always tell you, if youwill let I - even when I come to fall in
love in earnest.'
'why, you have always be in earnest!' say Agnes, laugh again.
'oh! that be as a child, or a schoolboy,' say I, laugh in my
turn, not without be a little shame-face. 'time be alter
now, and I suppose I shall be in a terrible state of earnestness
one day or other. my wonder be, that you be not in earnest
yourself, by this time, Agnes.'
Agnes laugh again, and shake her head.
'oh, I know you be not!' say I, 'because if you have be you
would have tell I. or at least' - for I see a faint blush in her
face, 'you would have let I find it out for myself. but there be
no one that I know of, who deserve to love you, Agnes. someone of
a nobler character, and more worthy altogether than anyone I have
ever see here, must rise up, before I give my consent. in the
time to come, I shall have a wary eye on all admirer; and shall
exact a great deal from the successful one, I assure you.'
we have go on, so far, in a mixture of confidential jest and
earnest, that have long grow naturally out of our familiar
relation, begin as mere child. but Agnes, now suddenly lift
up her eye to mine, and speak in a different manner, say:
'trotwood, there be something that I want to ask you, and that I
may not have another opportunity of ask for a long time, perhaps
- something I would ask, I think, of no one else. have you
observe any gradual alteration in Papa?'
I have observe it, and have often wonder whether she have too. I
must have show as much, now, in my face; for her eye be in a
moment cast down, and I see tear in they.
'tell I what it be,' she say, in a low voice.
'I think - shall I be quite plain, Agnes, like he so much?'
'yes,' she say.
'I think he do himself no good by the habit that have increase
upon he since I first come here. he be often very nervous - or I
fancy so.'
'it be not fancy,' say Agnes, shake her head.
'his hand tremble, his speech be not plain, and his eye look
wild. I have remark that at those time, and when he be least
like himself, he be most certain to be want on some business.'
'by Uriah,' say Agnes.
'yes; and the sense of be unfit for it, or of not have
understand it, or of have show his condition in spite of
himself, seem to make he so uneasy, that next day he be bad,
and next day worse, and so he become jaded and haggard. do not be
alarm by what I say, Agnes, but in this state I see he, only the
other evening, lie down his head upon his desk, and shed tear like
a child.'
her hand pass softly before my lip while I be yet speak, and
in a moment she have meet her father at the door of the room, and be
hang on his shoulder. the expression of her face, as they both
look towards I, I feel to be very touching. there be such deep
fondness for he, and gratitude to he for all his love and care,
in her beautiful look; and there be such a fervent appeal to I to
deal tenderly by he, even in my inmost thought, and to let no
harsh construction find any place against he; she be, at once, so
proud of he and devote to he, yet so compassionate and sorry,
and so reliant upon I to be so, too; that nothing she could have
say would have express more to I, or move I more.
we be to drink tea at the Doctor's. we go there at the usual
hour; and round the study fireside find the Doctor, and his young
wife, and her mother. the Doctor, who make as much of my go
away as if I be go to China, receive I as an honour guest;
and call for a log of wood to be throw on the fire, that he
might see the face of his old pupil redden in the blaze.
'I shall not see many more new face in Trotwood's stead,
Wickfield,' say the Doctor, warm his hand; 'I be get lazy,
and want ease. I shall relinquish all my young people in another
six month, and lead a quieter life.'
'you have say so, any time these ten year, Doctor,' Mr. Wickfield
answer.
'but now I mean to do it,' return the Doctor. 'my first master
will succeed I - I be in earnest at last - so youwill soon have to
arrange our contract, and to bind we firmly to they, like a couple
of knave.'
'and to take care,' say Mr. Wickfield, 'that yoube not impose
on, eh? as you certainly would be, in any contract you should make
for yourself. well! I be ready. there be bad task than that,
in my calling.'
'I shall have nothing to think of then,' say the Doctor, with a
smile, 'but my Dictionary; and this other contract-bargain -
Annie.'
as Mr. Wickfield glance towards she, sit at the tea table by
Agnes, she seem to I to avoid his look with such unwonted
hesitation and timidity, that his attention become fix upon she,
as if something be suggest to his thought.
'there be a post come in from India, I observe,' he say, after a
short silence.
'by the by! and letter from Mr. Jack Maldon!' say the Doctor.
'indeed!'
'poor dear Jack!' say Mrs. Markleham, shake her head. 'that
try climate! - like living, they tell I, on a sand-heap,
underneath a burning-glass! he look strong, but he benot. my
dear doctor, it be his spirit, not his constitution, that he
venture on so boldly. Annie, my dear, I be sure you must
perfectly recollect that your cousin never be strong - not what
can be call ROBUST, you know,' say Mrs. Markleham, with
emphasis, and look round upon we generally, '- from the time
when my daughter and himself be child together, and walk
about, arm-in-arm, the livelong day.'
Annie, thus address, make no reply.
'do I gather from what you say, ma'am, that Mr. Maldon be ill?'
ask Mr. Wickfield.
'Ill!' reply the Old Soldier. 'my dear sir, hebe all sort of
thing.'
'except well?' say Mr. Wickfield.
'except well, indeed!' say the Old Soldier. 'he have have dreadful
stroke of the sun, no doubt, and jungle fever and ague, and
every kind of thing you can mention. as to his liver,' say the
Old Soldier resignedly, 'that, of course, he give up altogether,
when he first go out!'
'do he say all this?' ask Mr. Wickfield.
'say? my dear sir,' return Mrs. Markleham, shake her head and
her fan, 'you little know my poor Jack Maldon when you ask that
question. say? not he. you might drag he at the heel of four
wild horse first.'
'Mama!' say Mrs. Strong.
'Annie, my dear,' return her mother, 'once for all, I must really
beg that you will not interfere with I, unless it be to confirm
what I say. you know as well as I do that your cousin Maldon would
be drag at the heel of any number of wild horse - why should
I confine myself to four! I won't confine myself to four - eight,
sixteen, two-and-thirty, rather than say anything calculate to
overturn the Doctor's plan.'
'Wickfield's plan,' say the Doctor, stroke his face, and
look penitently at his adviser. 'that be to say, our joint
plan for he. I say myself, abroad or at home.'
'and I say' add Mr. Wickfield gravely, 'abroad. I be the mean
of send he abroad. itbe my responsibility.'
'oh! responsibility!' say the Old Soldier. 'everything be do
for the good, my dear Mr. Wickfield; everything be do for the
kind and well, we know. but if the dear fellow cannot live
there, he cannot live there. and if he cannot live there, hewill die
there, soon than hewill overturn the Doctor's plan. I know he,'
say the Old Soldier, fan herself, in a sort of calm prophetic
agony, 'and I know hewill die there, soon than hewill overturn the
Doctor's plan.'
'well, well, ma'am,' say the Doctor cheerfully, 'I be not bigote
to my plan, and I can overturn they myself. I can substitute some
other plan. if Mr. Jack Maldon come home on account of ill
health, he must not be allow to go back, and we must endeavour to
make some more suitable and fortunate provision for he in this
country.'
Mrs. Markleham be so overcome by this generous speech - which, I
need not say, she have not at all expect or lead up to - that she
could only tell the doctor it be like himself, and go several
time through that operation of kiss the stick of her fan, and
then tap his hand with it. after which she gently chide she
daughter Annie, for not be more demonstrative when such
kindness be shower, for her sake, on her old playfellow; and
entertain we with some particular concern other deserve
member of her family, whom it be desirable to set on their
deserve leg.
all this time, her daughter Annie never once speak, or lift up
her eye. all this time, Mr. Wickfield have his glance upon she as
she sit by his own daughter's side. it appear to I that he
never think of be observe by anyone; but be so intent upon
she, and upon his own thought in connexion with she, as to be
quite absorb. he now ask what Mr. Jack Maldon have actually
write in reference to himself, and to whom he have write?
'why, here,' say Mrs. Markleham, take a letter from the
chimney-piece above the Doctor's head, 'the dear fellow say to the
Doctor himself - where be it? oh! - "I be sorry to inform you that
my health be suffer severely, and that I fear I may be reduce
to the necessity of return home for a time, as the only hope of
restoration." thatbe pretty plain, poor fellow! his only hope of
restoration! but Annie's letter be plainer still. Annie, show I
that letter again.'
'not now, mama,' she plead in a low tone.
'my dear, you absolutely be, on some subject, one of the most
ridiculous person in the world,' return her mother, 'and perhaps
the most unnatural to the claim of your own family. we never
should have hear of the letter at all, I believe, unless I have
ask for it myself. do you call that confidence, my love, towards
Doctor Strong? I be surprised. you ought to know well.'
the letter be reluctantly produce; and as I hand it to the old
lady, I see how the unwilling hand from which I take it, tremble.
'now let we see,' say Mrs. Markleham, put her glass to her
eye, 'where the passage be. "the remembrance of old time, my
dear Annie" - and so forth - itbe not there. "the amiable old
Proctor" - whobe he? dear I, Annie, how illegibly your cousin
Maldon write, and how stupid I be! "Doctor," of course. ah!
amiable indeed!' here she leave off, to kiss her fan again, and
shake it at the Doctor, who be look at we in a state of placid
satisfaction. 'now I have find it. "you may not be surprised to
hear, Annie," - no, to be sure, know that he never be really
strong; what do I say just now? - "that I have undergo so much
in this distant place, as to have decide to leave it at all
hazard; on sick leave, if I can; on total resignation, if that be
not to be obtain. what I have endure, and do endure here, be
insupportable." and but for the promptitude of that good of
creature,' say Mrs. Markleham, telegraph the Doctor as before,
and refolde the letter, 'it would be insupportable to I to think
of.'
Mr. Wickfield say not one word, though the old lady look to he
as if for his commentary on this intelligence; but sit severely
silent, with his eye fix on the ground. long after the subject
be dismiss, and other topic occupy we, he remain so; seldom
raise his eye, unless to rest they for a moment, with a
thoughtful frown, upon the Doctor, or his wife, or both.
the Doctor be very fond of music. Agnes sing with great sweetness
and expression, and so do Mrs. Strong. they sing together, and
play duet together, and we have quite a little concert. but I
remark two thing: first, that though Annie soon recover her
composure, and be quite herself, there be a blank between she and
Mr. Wickfield which separate they wholly from each other;
secondly, that Mr. Wickfield seem to dislike the intimacy between
she and Agnes, and to watch it with uneasiness. and now, I must
confess, the recollection of what I have see on that night when Mr.
Maldon go away, first begin to return upon I with a meaning it
have never have, and to trouble I. the innocent beauty of her face
be not as innocent to I as it have be; I mistrust the natural
grace and charm of her manner; and when I look at Agnes by her
side, and think how good and true Agnes be, suspicion arise
within I that it be an ill-assorted friendship.
she be so happy in it herself, however, and the other be so happy
too, that they make the evening fly away as if it be but an hour.
it close in an incident which I well remember. they be take
leave of each other, and Agnes be go to embrace she and kiss
she, when Mr. Wickfield step between they, as if by accident,
and draw Agnes quickly away. then I see, as though all the
intervene time have be cancel, and I be still stand in
the doorway on the night of the departure, the expression of that
night in the face of Mrs. Strong, as it confront his.
I cannot say what an impression this make upon I, or how
impossible I find it, when I think of she afterwards, to
separate she from this look, and remember her face in its innocent
loveliness again. it haunt I when I get home. I seem to have
leave the Doctor's roof with a dark cloud lower on it. the
reverence that I have for his grey head, be mingle with
commiseration for his faith in those who be treacherous to he,
and with resentment against those who injure he. the impending
shadow of a great affliction, and a great disgrace that have no
distinct form in it yet, fall like a stain upon the quiet place
where I have work and play as a boy, and do it a cruel wrong.
I have no pleasure in thinking, any more, of the grave old
broad-leave aloe-tree, which remain shut up in themselves a
hundred year together, and of the trim smooth grass-plot, and the
stone urn, and the Doctor's walk, and the congenial sound of the
Cathedral bell hover above they all. it be as if the tranquil
sanctuary of my boyhood have be sack before my face, and its
peace and honour give to the wind.
but morning bring with it my parting from the old house, which
Agnes have fill with her influence; and that occupy my mind
sufficiently. I should be there again soon, no doubt; I might
sleep again - perhaps often - in my old room; but the day of my
inhabit there be go, and the old time be past. I be
heavy at heart when I pack up such of my book and clothe as
still remain there to be send to Dover, than I care to show to
Uriah Heep; who be so officious to help I, that I uncharitably
think he mighty glad that I be go.
I get away from Agnes and her father, somehow, with an indifferent
show of be very manly, and take my seat upon the box of the
London coach. I be so softened and forgiving, go through the
town, that I have half a mind to nod to my old enemy the butcher,
and throw he five shilling to drink. but he look such a very
obdurate butcher as he stand scrap the great block in the shop,
and moreover, his appearance be so little improve by the loss of
a front tooth which I have knock out, that I think it well to
make no advance.
the main object on my mind, I remember, when we get fairly on the
road, be to appear as old as possible to the coachman, and to
speak extremely gruff. the latter point I achieve at great
personal inconvenience; but I stick to it, because I feel it be a
grow-up sort of thing.
'you be go through, sir?' say the coachman.
'yes, William,' I say, condescendingly (I know he); 'I be go
to London. I shall go down into Suffolk afterwards.'
'shooting, sir?' say the coachman.
he know as well as I do that it be just as likely, at that time
of year, I be go down there whaling; but I feel complimented,
too.
'I donot know,' I say, pretend to be undecided, 'whether I
shall take a shot or not.'
'bird be get wery shy, Ibe tell,' say William.
'so I understand,' say I.
'be Suffolk your county, sir?' ask William.
'yes,' I say, with some importance. 'Suffolk's my county.'
'Ibe tell the dumpling be uncommon fine down there,' say William.
I be not aware of it myself, but I feel it necessary to uphold the
institution of my county, and to evince a familiarity with they;
so I shake my head, as much as to say, 'I believe you!'
'and the punch,' say William. 'there's cattle! a Suffolk
Punch, when hebe a good un, be worth his weight in gold. do you
ever breed any Suffolk punch yourself, sir?'
'N-no,' I say, 'not exactly.'
'herebe a gen'lm'n behind I, Iwill pound it,' say William, 'as have
breed them by wholesale.'
the gentleman speak of be a gentleman with a very unpromising
squint, and a prominent chin, who have a tall white hat on with a
narrow flat brim, and whose close-fitting drab trouser seem to
button all the way up outside his leg from his boot to his hip.
his chin be cock over the coachman's shoulder, so near to I,
that his breath quite tickle the back of my head; and as I look
at he, he leer at the leader with the eye with which he donot
squint, in a very know manner.
'benot you?' ask William.
'benot I what?' say the gentleman behind.
'breed they suffolk punch by wholesale?'
'I should think so,' say the gentleman. 'there benot no sort of
orse that I benot breed, and no sort of dorg. orse and dorg be
some man's fancy. theybe wittle and drink to I - lodge, wife,
and child - reading, writing, and Arithmetic - snuff, tobacker,
and sleep.'
'that benot a sort of man to see sit behind a coach-box, be it
though?' say William in my ear, as he handle the rein.
I construe this remark into an indication of a wish that he should
have my place, so I blushingly offer to resign it.
'well, if you donot mind, sir,' say William, 'I think it would be
more correct.'
I have always consider this as the first fall I have in life.
when I book my place at the coach office I have have 'Box Seat'
write against the entry, and have give the book-keeper
half-a-crown. I be get up in a special great-coat and shawl,
expressly to do honour to that distinguished eminence; have
glorify myself upon it a good deal; and have feel that I be a
credit to the coach. and here, in the very first stage, I be
supplant by a shabby man with a squint, who have no other merit
than smell like a livery-stable, and be able to walk across
I, more like a fly than a human being, while the horse be at a
canter!
a distrust of myself, which have often beset I in life on small
occasion, when it would have be well away, be assuredly not
stop in its growth by this little incident outside the
Canterbury coach. it be in vain to take refuge in gruffness of
speech. I speak from the pit of my stomach for the rest of the
journey, but I feel completely extinguish, and dreadfully young.
it be curious and interesting, nevertheless, to be sit up
there behind four horse: well educate, well dress, and with
plenty of money in my pocket; and to look out for the place where
I have sleep on my weary journey. I have abundant occupation for my
thought, in every conspicuous landmark on the road. when I look
down at the tramper whom we pass, and see that well-remember
style of face turn up, I feel as if the tinker's blacken hand
be in the bosom of my shirt again. when we clatter through the
narrow street of Chatham, and I catch a glimpse, in pass, of
the lane where the old monster live who have buy my jacket, I
stretch my neck eagerly to look for the place where I have sit, in
the sun and in the shade, wait for my money. when we come, at
last, within a stage of London, and pass the veritable Salem
House where Mr. Creakle have lay about he with a heavy hand, I
would have give all I have, for lawful permission to get down and
thrash he, and let all the boy out like so many cage sparrow.
we go to the Golden Cross at Charing Cross, then a mouldy sort of
establishment in a close neighbourhood. a waiter show I into
the coffee-room; and a chambermaid introduce I to my small
bedchamber, which smell like a hackney-coach, and be shut up like
a family vault. I be still painfully conscious of my youth, for
nobody stand in any awe of I at all: the chambermaid be utterly
indifferent to my opinion on any subject, and the waiter be
familiar with I, and offer advice to my inexperience.
'well now,' say the waiter, in a tone of confidence, 'what would
you like for dinner? young gentleman like poultry in general:
have a fowl!'
I tell he, as majestically as I could, that I benot in the humour
for a fowl.
'benot you?' say the waiter. 'young gentleman be generally tired
of beef and mutton: have a weal cutlet!'
I assent to this proposal, in default of be able to suggest
anything else.
'do you care for tater?' say the waiter, with an insinuate
smile, and his head on one side. 'young gentleman generally have
be overdose with tater.'
I command he, in my deep voice, to order a veal cutlet and
potato, and all thing fitting; and to inquire at the bar if
there be any letter for Trotwood Copperfield, Esquire - which I
know there be not, and couldnot be, but think it manly to
appear to expect.
he soon come back to say that there be none (at which I be much
surprised) and begin to lay the cloth for my dinner in a box by the
fire. while he be so engaged, he ask I what I would take with
it; and on my replying 'half a pint of sherry,'thought it a
favourable opportunity, I be afraid, to extract that measure of
wine from the stale leaving at the bottom of several small
decanter. I be of this opinion, because, while I be read the
newspaper, I observe he behind a low wooden partition, which be
his private apartment, very busy pour out of a number of those
vessel into one, like a chemist and druggist make up a
prescription. when the wine come, too, I think it flat; and it
certainly have more english crumb in it, than be to be expect
in a foreign wine in anything like a pure state, but I be bashful
enough to drink it, and say nothing.
be then in a pleasant frame of mind (from which I infer that
poisoning be not always disagreeable in some stage of the
process), I resolve to go to the play. it be Covent Garden
Theatre that I choose; and there, from the back of a centre box, I
see Julius Caesar and the new Pantomime. to have all those noble
Romans alive before I, and walk in and out for my
entertainment, instead of be the stern taskmaster they have be
at school, be a most novel and delightful effect. but the mingled
reality and mystery of the whole show, the influence upon I of the
poetry, the light, the music, the company, the smooth stupendous
change of glitter and brilliant scenery, be so dazzling, and
open up such illimitable region of delight, that when I come out
into the rainy street, at twelve o'clock at night, I feel as if I
have come from the cloud, where I have be lead a romantic life
for age, to a bawl, splashing, link-light,
umbrella-struggle, hackney-coach-jostle, patten-clink,
muddy, miserable world.
I have emerge by another door, and stand in the street for a little
while, as if I really be a stranger upon earth: but the
unceremonious pushing and hustle that I receive, soon recall
I to myself, and put I in the road back to the hotel; whither I
go, revolve the glorious vision all the way; and where, after
some porter and oyster, I sit revolve it still, at past one
o'clock, with my eye on the coffee-room fire.
I be so fill with the play, and with the past - for it be, in
a manner, like a shin transparency, through which I see my
early life move along - that I donot know when the figure of a
handsome well-form young man dress with a tasteful easy
negligence which I have reason to remember very well, become a real
presence to I. but I recollect be conscious of his company
without have notice his come in - and my still sit,
musing, over the coffee-room fire.
at last I rise to go to bed, much to the relief of the sleepy
waiter, who have get the fidget in his leg, and be twist they,
and hit they, and put they through all kind of contortion
in his small pantry. in go towards the door, I pass the
person who have come in, and see he plainly. I turn directly,
come back, and look again. he do not know I, but I know he in
a moment.
at another time I might have want the confidence or the decision
to speak to he, and might have put it off until next day, and
might have lose he. but, in the then condition of my mind, where
the play be still run high, his former protection of I
appear so deserving of my gratitude, and my old love for he
overflow my breast so freshly and spontaneously, that I go up
to he at once, with a fast-beat heart, and say:
'Steerforth! willnot you speak to I?'
he look at I - just as he use to look, sometimes -but I see no
recognition in his face.
'you donot remember I, I be afraid,' say I.
'my God!' he suddenly exclaim. 'itbe little copperfield!'
I grasp he by both hand, and could not let they go. but for
very shame, and the fear that it might displease he, I could have
hold he round the neck and cry.
'I never, never, never be so glad! my dear Steerforth, I be so
overjoyed to see you!'
'and I be rejoice to see you, too!' he say, shake my hand
heartily. 'why, Copperfield, old boy, donot be overpower!' and
yet he be glad, too, I think, to see how the delight I have in
meet he affect I.
I brush away the tear that my utmost resolution have not be
able to keep back, and I make a clumsy laugh of it, and we sit down
together, side by side.
'why, how do you come to be here?' say Steerforth, clap I on
the shoulder.
'I come here by the Canterbury coach, today. I have be adopt
by an aunt down in that part of the country, and have just finish
my education there. how do you come to be here, Steerforth?'
'well, I be what they call an Oxford man,' he return; 'that be to
say, I get bored to death down there, periodically - and I be on my
way now to my mother's. yoube a devilish amiable-look fellow,
Copperfield. just what you use to be, now I look at you! not
alter in the least!'
'I know you immediately,' I say; 'but you be more easily
remember.'
he laugh as he run his hand through the cluster curl of his
hair, and say gaily:
'yes, I be on an expedition of duty. my mother live a little way
out of town; and the road be in a beastly condition, and our
house tedious enough, I remain here tonight instead of go on.
I have not be in town half-a-dozen hour, and those I have be
doze and grumble away at the play.'
'I have be at the play, too,' say I. 'at Covent Garden. what
a delightful and magnificent entertainment, Steerforth!'
Steerforth laugh heartily.
'my dear young Davy,' he say, clap I on the shoulder again,
'you be a very Daisy. the daisy of the field, at sunrise, be not
fresh than you be. I have be at Covent Garden, too, and there
never be a more miserable business. Holloa, you sir!'
this be address to the waiter, who have be very attentive to
our recognition, at a distance, and now come forward deferentially.
'where have you put my friend, Mr. Copperfield?' say Steerforth.
'beg your pardon, sir?'
'where do he sleep? whatbe his number? you know what I mean,'
say Steerforth.
'well, sir,' say the waiter, with an apologetic air. 'Mr.
Copperfield be at present in forty-four, sir.'
'and what the devil do you mean,' retort Steerforth, 'by put
Mr. Copperfield into a little loft over a stable?'
'why, you see we benot aware, sir,' return the waiter, still
apologetically, 'as Mr. Copperfield be anyways particular. we can
give Mr. Copperfield seventy-two, sir, if it would be prefer.
next you, sir.'
'of course it would be prefer,' say Steerforth. 'and do it at
once.'
the waiter immediately withdraw to make the exchange. Steerforth,
very much amuse at my have be put into forty-four, laugh
again, and clap I on the shoulder again, and invite I to
breakfast with he next morning at ten o'clock - an invitation I
be only too proud and happy to accept. it be now pretty late,
we take our candle and go upstairs, where we part with
friendly heartiness at his door, and where I find my new room a
great improvement on my old one, it not be at all musty, and
have an immense four-post bedstead in it, which be quite a
little landed estate. here, among pillow enough for six, I soon
fall asleep in a blissful condition, and dream of ancient Rome,
Steerforth, and friendship, until the early morning coach,
rumble out of the archway underneath, make I dream of thunder
and the god.
CHAPTER 20
STEERFORTH's HOME
when the chambermaid tap at my door at eight o'clock, and
inform I that my shaving-water be outside, I feel severely the
have no occasion for it, and blush in my bed. the suspicion
that she laugh too, when she say it, prey upon my mind all the
time I be dress; and give I, I be conscious, a sneaking and
guilty air when I pass she on the staircase, as I be go down
to breakfast. I be so sensitively aware, indeed, of be young
than I could have wish, that for some time I could not make up my
mind to pass she at all, under the ignoble circumstance of the
case; but, hear she there with a broom, stand peep out of
window at King Charles on horseback, surround by a maze of
hackney-coach, and look anything but regal in a drizzling rain
and a dark-brown fog, until I be admonish by the waiter that the
gentleman be wait for I.
it be not in the coffee-room that I find Steerforth expect I,
but in a snug private apartment, red-curtain and Turkey-carpet,
where the fire burn bright, and a fine hot breakfast be set forth
on a table cover with a clean cloth; and a cheerful miniature of
the room, the fire, the breakfast, Steerforth, and all, be shin
in the little round mirror over the sideboard. I be rather
bashful at first, Steerforth be so self-possess, and elegant,
and superior to I in all respect (age include); but his easy
patronage soon put that to right, and make I quite at home. I
could not enough admire the change he have work in the Golden
Cross; or compare the dull forlorn state I have hold yesterday, with
this morning's comfort and this morning's entertainment. as to the
waiter's familiarity, it be quench as if it have never be. he
attend on we, as I may say, in sackcloth and ash.
'now, Copperfield,' say Steerforth, when we be alone, 'I should
like to hear what you be do, and where you be go, and all
about you. I feel as if you be my property.'
glow with pleasure to find that he have still this interest in
I, I tell he how my aunt have propose the little expedition that
I have before I, and whither it tend.
'as you be in no hurry, then,' say Steerforth, 'come home with I
to Highgate, and stay a day or two. you will be pleased with my
mother - she be a little vain and prosy about I, but that you can
forgive she - and she will be pleased with you.'
'I should like to be as sure of that, as you be kind enough to say
you be,' I answer, smile.
'oh!' say Steerforth, 'everyone who like I, have a claim on she
that be sure to be acknowledge.'
'then I think I shall be a favourite,' say I.
'good!' say Steerforth. 'come and prove it. we will go and see
the lion for an hour or two - itbe something to have a fresh
fellow like you to show they to, Copperfield - and then wewill
journey out to Highgate by the coach.'
I could hardly believe but that I be in a dream, and that I should
wake presently in number forty-four, to the solitary box in the
coffee-room and the familiar waiter again. after I have write to
my aunt and tell she of my fortunate meeting with my admired old
schoolfellow, and my acceptance of his invitation, we go out in
a hackney-chariot, and see a Panorama and some other sight, and
take a walk through the Museum, where I could not help observe
how much Steerforth know, on an infinite variety of subject, and
of how little account he seem to make his knowledge.
'youwill take a high degree at college, Steerforth,' say I, 'if you
have not do so already; and they will have good reason to be
proud of you.'
'I take a degree!' cry Steerforth. 'not I! my dear Daisy - will
you mind my call you Daisy?'
'not at all!' say I.
'thatbe a good fellow! my dear Daisy,' say Steerforth, laugh.
'I have not the least desire or intention to distinguish myself in
that way. I have do quite sufficient for my purpose. I find
that I be heavy company enough for myself as I be.'
'but the fame -' I be begin.
'you romantic Daisy!' say Steerforth, laugh still more
heartily: 'why should I trouble myself, that a parcel of
heavy-head fellow may gape and hold up their hand? let they do
it at some other man. therebe fame for he, and hebe welcome to
it.'
I be abash at have make so great a mistake, and be glad to
change the subject. fortunately it be not difficult to do, for
Steerforth could always pass from one subject to another with a
carelessness and lightness that be his own.
Lunch succeed to our sight-seeing, and the short winter day wear
away so fast, that it be dusk when the stage-coach stop with we
at an old brick house at Highgate on the summit of the hill. an
elderly lady, though not very far advanced in year, with a proud
carriage and a handsome face, be in the doorway as we alight;
and greet Steerforth as 'my dear James,' fold he in her
arm. to this lady he present I as his mother, and she give I
a stately welcome.
it be a genteel old-fashioned house, very quiet and orderly. from
the window of my room I see all London lie in the distance like
a great vapour, with here and there some light twinkle through
it. I have only time, in dressing, to glance at the solid
furniture, the frame piece of work (do, I suppose, by
Steerforth's mother when she be a girl), and some picture in
crayon of lady with powdered hair and bodice, come and go
on the wall, as the newly-kindle fire crackle and sputter,
when I be call to dinner.
there be a second lady in the dining-room, of a slight short
figure, dark, and not agreeable to look at, but with some
appearance of good look too, who attract my attention: perhaps
because I have not expect to see she; perhaps because I find
myself sit opposite to she; perhaps because of something really
remarkable in she. she have black hair and eager black eye, and
be thin, and have a scar upon her lip. it be an old scar - I
should rather call it seam, for it be not discolour, and have
heal year ago - which have once cut through her mouth, downward
towards the chin, but be now barely visible across the table,
except above and on her upper lip, the shape of which it have
alter. I conclude in my own mind that she be about thirty
year of age, and that she wish to be marry. she be a little
dilapidate - like a house - with have be so long to let; yet
have, as I have say, an appearance of good look. her thinness
seem to be the effect of some waste fire within she, which
find a vent in her gaunt eye.
she be introduce as Miss Dartle, and both Steerforth and his
mother call she Rosa. I find that she live there, and have be
for a long time Mrs. Steerforth's companion. it appear to I
that she never say anything she want to say, outright; but
hint it, and make a great deal more of it by this practice. for
example, when Mrs. Steerforth observe, more in jest than earnest,
that she fear her son lead but a wild life at college, Miss Dartle
put in thus:
'oh, really? you know how ignorant I be, and that I only ask for
information, but benot it always so? I think that kind of life
be on all hand understand to be - eh?'
'it be education for a very grave profession, if you mean that,
Rosa,' Mrs. Steerforth answer with some coldness.
'oh! yes! thatbe very true,' return Miss Dartle. 'but benot
it, though? - I want to be put right, if I be wrong - benot it,
really?'
'really what?' say Mrs. Steerforth.
'oh! you mean itbe not!' return Miss Dartle. 'well, Ibe very
glad to hear it! now, I know what to do! thatbe the advantage of
ask. I shall never allow people to talk before I about
wastefulness and profligacy, and so forth, in connexion with that
life, any more.'
'and you will be right,' say Mrs. Steerforth. 'my son's tutor be
a conscientious gentleman; and if I have not implicit reliance on my
son, I should have reliance on he.'
'should you?' say Miss Dartle. 'dear I! conscientious, be he?
really conscientious, now?'
'yes, I be convinced of it,' say Mrs. Steerforth.
'how very nice!' exclaim Miss Dartle. 'what a comfort! really
conscientious? then hebe not - but of course he cannot be, if hebe
really conscientious. well, I shall be quite happy in my opinion
of he, from this time. you cannot think how it elevate he in my
opinion, to know for certain that hebe really conscientious!'
her own view of every question, and her correction of everything
that be say to which she be opposed, Miss Dartle insinuate in
the same way: sometimes, I could not conceal from myself, with
great power, though in contradiction even of Steerforth. an
instance happen before dinner be do. Mrs. Steerforth speak
to I about my intention of go down into Suffolk, I say at
hazard how glad I should be, if Steerforth would only go there with
I; and explain to he that I be go to see my old nurse, and
Mr. Peggotty's family, I remind he of the boatman whom he have
see at school.
'oh! that bluff fellow!' say Steerforth. 'he have a son with he,
havenot he?'
'no. that be his nephew,' I reply; 'whom he adopt, though, as
a son. he have a very pretty little niece too, whom he adopt as
a daughter. in short, his house - or rather his boat, for he live
in one, on dry land - be full of people who be object of his
generosity and kindness. you would be delighted to see that
household.'
'should I?' say Steerforth. 'well, I think I should. I must see
what can be do. it would be worth a journey (not to mention the
pleasure of a journey with you, Daisy), to see that sort of people
together, and to make one of them.'
my heart leap with a new hope of pleasure. but it be in
reference to the tone in which he have speak of 'that sort of
people', that Miss Dartle, whose sparkle eye have be watchful
of we, now break in again.
'oh, but, really? do tell I. be they, though?' she say.
'be they what? and be who what?' say Steerforth.
'that sort of people. - be they really animal and clod, and
being of another order? I want to know so much.'
'why, therebe a pretty wide separation between they and we,' say
Steerforth, with indifference. 'they be not to be expect to be
as sensitive as we be. their delicacy be not to be shock, or
hurt easily. they be wonderfully virtuous, I dare say - some
people contend for that, at least; and I be sure I donot want to
contradict they - but they have not very fine nature, and they may
be thankful that, like their coarse rough skin, they be not
easily wound.'
'really!' say Miss Dartle. 'well, I donot know, now, when I have
be well pleased than to hear that. itbe so consoling! itbe
such a delight to know that, when they suffer, they donot feel!
sometimes I have be quite uneasy for that sort of people; but now
I shall just dismiss the idea of they, altogether. live and learn.
I have my doubt, I confess, but now theybe clear up. I donot
know, and now I do know, and that show the advantage of ask -
donot it?'
I believe that Steerforth have say what he have, in jest, or to
draw Miss Dartle out; and I expect he to say as much when she
be go, and we two be sit before the fire. but he merely
ask I what I think of she.
'she be very clever, be she not?' I ask.
'clever! she bring everything to a grindstone,' say Steerforth,
and sharpen it, as she have sharpen her own face and figure these
year past. she have wear herself away by constant sharpening. she
be all edge.'
'what a remarkable scar that be upon her lip!' I say.
Steerforth's face fall, and he pause a moment.
'why, the fact be,' he return, 'I do that.'
'by an unfortunate accident!'
'no. I be a young boy, and she exasperate I, and I throw a
hammer at she. a promising young angel I must have be!'
I be deeply sorry to have touch on such a painful theme, but
that be useless now.
'she have bear the mark ever since, as you see,' say Steerforth;
'and shewill bear it to her grave, if she ever rest in one - though
I can hardly believe she will ever rest anywhere. she be the
motherless child of a sort of cousin of my father's. he die one
day. my mother, who be then a widow, bring she here to be
company to she. she have a couple of thousand pound of her own,
and save the interest of it every year, to add to the principal.
therebe the history of Miss Rosa Dartle for you.'
'and I have no doubt she love you like a brother?' say I.
'Humph!' retort Steerforth, look at the fire. 'some brother
be not love over much; and some love - but help yourself,
Copperfield! wewill drink the daisy of the field, in compliment
to you; and the lily of the valley that toil not, neither do they
spin, in compliment to I - the more shame for I!' a moody smile
that have overspread his feature clear off as he say this
merrily, and he be his own frank, win self again.
I could not help glance at the scar with a painful interest when
we go in to tea. it be not long before I observe that it be
the most susceptible part of her face, and that, when she turn
pale, that mark alter first, and become a dull, lead-colour
streak, lengthen out to its full extent, like a mark in
invisible ink bring to the fire. there be a little altercation
between she and Steerforth about a cast of the dice at back gammon
- when I think she, for one moment, in a storm of rage; and then
I see it start forth like the old writing on the wall.
it be no matter of wonder to I to find Mrs. Steerforth devote to
her son. she seem to be able to speak or think about nothing
else. she show I his picture as an infant, in a locket, with
some of his baby-hair in it; she show I his picture as he have
be when I first know he; and she wear at her breast his picture
as he be now. all the letter he have ever write to she, she
keep in a cabinet near her own chair by the fire; and she would
have read I some of they, and I should have be very glad to hear
they too, if he have not interpose, and coax she out of the
design.
'it be at Mr. Creakle's, my son tell I, that you first become
acquainted,' say Mrs. Steerforth, as she and I be talk at one
table, while they play backgammon at another. 'indeed, I
recollect his speaking, at that time, of a pupil young than
himself who have take his fancy there; but your name, as you may
suppose, have not live in my memory.'
'he be very generous and noble to I in those day, I assure you,
ma'am,' say I, 'and I stand in need of such a friend. I should
have be quite crush without he.'
'he be always generous and noble,' say Mrs. Steerforth, proudly.
I subscribe to this with all my heart, God know. she know I do;
for the stateliness of her manner already abate towards I, except
when she speak in praise of he, and then her air be always lofty.
'it be not a fit school generally for my son,' say she; 'far from
it; but there be particular circumstance to be consider at the
time, of more importance even than that selection. my son's high
spirit make it desirable that he should be place with some man who
feel its superiority, and would be content to bow himself before
it; and we find such a man there.'
I know that, know the fellow. and yet I do not despise he the
more for it, but think it a redeem quality in he if he could
be allow any grace for not resist one so irresistible as
Steerforth.
'my son's great capacity be tempt on, there, by a feeling of
voluntary emulation and conscious pride,' the fond lady go on to
say. 'he would have rise against all constraint; but he find
himself the monarch of the place, and he haughtily determine to be
worthy of his station. it be like himself.'
I echo, with all my heart and soul, that it be like himself.
'so my son take, of his own will, and on no compulsion, to the
course in which he can always, when it be his pleasure, outstrip
every competitor,' she pursue. 'my son inform I, Mr.
Copperfield, that you be quite devoted to he, and that when you
meet yesterday you make yourself known to he with tear of joy. I
should be an affected woman if I make any pretence of be
surprise by my son's inspire such emotion; but I cannot be
indifferent to anyone who be so sensible of his merit, and I be
very glad to see you here, and can assure you that he feel an
unusual friendship for you, and that you may rely on his
protection.'
Miss Dartle play backgammon as eagerly as she do everything
else. if I have see she, first, at the board, I should have
fancy that her figure have get thin, and her eye have get large,
over that pursuit, and no other in the world. but I be very much
mistaken if she miss a word of this, or lose a look of mine as I
receive it with the utmost pleasure, and honour by Mrs.
Steerforth's confidence, feel old than I have do since I leave
Canterbury.
when the evening be pretty far spend, and a tray of glass and
decanter come in, Steerforth promise, over the fire, that he
would seriously think of go down into the country with I.
there be no hurry, he say; a week hence would do; and his mother
hospitably say the same. while we be talk, he more than once
call I Daisy; which bring Miss Dartle out again.
'but really, Mr. Copperfield,' she ask, 'be it a nickname? and
why do he give it you? be it - eh? - because he think you young
and innocent? I be so stupid in these thing.'
I colour in reply that I believe it be.
'oh!' say Miss Dartle. 'now I be glad to know that! I ask for
information, and I be glad to know it. he think you young and
innocent; and so you be his friend. well, thatbe quite
delightful!'
she go to bed soon after this, and Mrs. Steerforth retire too.
Steerforth and I, after linger for half-an-hour over the fire,
talk about Traddles and all the rest of they at old Salem House,
go upstairs together. Steerforth's room be next to mine, and I
go in to look at it. it be a picture of comfort, full of
easy-chair, cushion and footstool, work by his mother's hand,
and with no sort of thing omit that could help to render it
complete. finally, her handsome feature look down on her
darling from a portrait on the wall, as if it be even something
to she that her likeness should watch he while he sleep.
I find the fire burn clear enough in my room by this time, and
the curtain draw before the window and round the bed, give it
a very snug appearance. I sit down in a great chair upon the
hearth to meditate on my happiness; and have enjoy the
contemplation of it for some time, when I find a likeness of Miss
Dartle look eagerly at I from above the chimney-piece.
it be a startling likeness, and necessarily have a startling look.
the painter havenot make the scar, but I make it; and there it be,
come and go; now confine to the upper lip as I have see it at
dinner, and now show the whole extent of the wound inflict by
the hammer, as I have see it when she be passionate.
I wonder peevishly why they couldnot put she anywhere else
instead of quarter she on I. to get rid of she, I undress
quickly, extinguish my light, and go to bed. but, as I fall
asleep, I could not forget that she be still there look, 'be it
really, though? I want to know'; and when I awake in the night, I
find that I be uneasily ask all sort of people in my dream
whether it really be or not - without know what I mean.
CHAPTER 21
LITTLE em'ly
there be a servant in that house, a man who, I understand, be
usually with Steerforth, and have come into his service at the
University, who be in appearance a pattern of respectability. I
believe there never exist in his station a more
respectable-look man. he be taciturn, soft-footed, very quiet
in his manner, deferential, observant, always at hand when want,
and never near when not want; but his great claim to
consideration be his respectability. he have not a pliant face, he
have rather a stiff neck, rather a tight smooth head with short hair
cling to it at the side, a soft way of speak, with a
peculiar habit of whisper the letter s so distinctly, that he
seem to use it oftener than any other man; but every peculiarity
that he have he make respectable. if his nose have be upside-down,
he would have make that respectable. he surround himself with an
atmosphere of respectability, and walk secure in it. it would
have be next to impossible to suspect he of anything wrong, he
be so thoroughly respectable. nobody could have think of
put he in a livery, he be so highly respectable. to have
impose any derogatory work upon he, would have be to inflict a
wanton insult on the feeling of a most respectable man. and of
this, I noticed- the woman-servant in the household be so
intuitively conscious, that they always do such work themselves,
and generally while he read the paper by the pantry fire.
such a self-contain man I never see. but in that quality, as in
every other he possess, he only seem to be the more
respectable. even the fact that no one know his christian name,
seem to form a part of his respectability. nothing could be
object against his surname, Littimer, by which he be know.
Peter might have be hang, or Tom transport; but Littimer be
perfectly respectable.
it be occasion, I suppose, by the reverend nature of
respectability in the abstract, but I feel particularly young in
this man's presence. how old he be himself, I could not guess -
and that again go to his credit on the same score; for in the
calmness of respectability he might have number fifty year as
well as thirty.
Littimer be in my room in the morning before I be up, to bring I
that reproachful shaving-water, and to put out my clothe. when I
undrew the curtain and look out of bed, I see he, in an equable
temperature of respectability, unaffected by the east wind of
January, and not even breathe frostily, stand my boot right
and leave in the first dancing position, and blow speck of dust
off my coat as he lay it down like a baby.
I give he good morning, and ask he what o'clock it be. he
take out of his pocket the most respectable hunting-watch I ever
see, and prevent the spring with his thumb from open far,
look in at the face as if he be consult an oracular oyster,
shut it up again, and say, if I please, it be half past eight.
'Mr. Steerforth will be glad to hear how you have rest, sir.'
'thank you,' say I, 'very well indeed. be Mr. Steerforth quite
well?'
'thank you, sir, Mr. Steerforth be tolerably well.' another of his
characteristic - no use of superlative. a cool calm medium
always.
'be there anything more I can have the honour of do for you,
sir? the warning-bell will ring at nine; the family take breakfast
at half past nine.'
'nothing, I thank you.'
'I thank you, sir, if you please'; and with that, and with a little
inclination of his head when he pass the bed-side, as an apology
for correct I, he go out, shut the door as delicately as
if I have just fall into a sweet sleep on which my life depend.
every morning we hold exactly this conversation: never any more,
and never any less: and yet, invariably, however far I might have
be lift out of myself over-night, and advance towards mature
year, by Steerforth's companionship, or Mrs. Steerforth's
confidence, or Miss Dartle's conversation, in the presence of this
most respectable man I became, as our small poet sing, 'a boy
again'.
he get horse for we; and Steerforth, who know everything, give I
lesson in rid. he provide foil for we, and Steerforth give
me lesson in fencing - glove, and I begin, of the same master, to
improve in boxing. it give I no manner of concern that Steerforth
should find I a novice in these science, but I never could bear
to show my want of skill before the respectable Littimer. I have no
reason to believe that Littimer understand such art himself; he
never lead I to suppose anything of the kind, by so much as the
vibration of one of his respectable eyelash; yet whenever he be
by, while we be practise, I feel myself the green and most
inexperienced of mortal.
I be particular about this man, because he make a particular effect
on I at that time, and because of what take place thereafter.
the week pass away in a most delightful manner. it pass
rapidly, as may be suppose, to one entrance as I be; and yet it
give I so many occasion for know Steerforth well, and
admire he more in a thousand respect, that at its close I
seem to have be with he for a much long time. a dashing way
he have of treat I like a plaything, be more agreeable to I
than any behaviour he could have adopt. it remind I of our
old acquaintance; it seem the natural sequel of it; it show I
that he be unchanged; it relieve I of any uneasiness I might
have feel, in compare my merit with his, and measure my claim
upon his friendship by any equal standard; above all, it be a
familiar, unrestrained, affectionate demeanour that he use towards
no one else. as he have treat I at school differently from all
the rest, I joyfully believe that he treat I in life unlike any
other friend he have. I believe that I be near to his heart
than any other friend, and my own heart warm with attachment to
he.
he make up his mind to go with I into the country, and the day
arrive for our departure. he have be doubtful at first whether
to take Littimer or not, but decide to leave he at home. the
respectable creature, satisfied with his lot whatever it be,
arrange our portmanteaux on the little carriage that be to take
we into London, as if they be intend to defy the shock of
age, and receive my modestly proffer donation with perfect
tranquillity.
we bade adieu to Mrs. Steerforth and Miss Dartle, with many thank
on my part, and much kindness on the devoted mother's. the last
thing I see be Littimer's unruffled eye; fraught, as I fancy,
with the silent conviction that I be very young indeed.
what I feel, in return so auspiciously to the old familiar
place, I shall not endeavour to describe. we go down by the
Mail. I be so concerned, I recollect, even for the honour of
Yarmouth, that when Steerforth say, as we drive through its dark
street to the inn, that, as well as he could make out, it be a
good, queer, out-of-the-way kind of hole, I be highly pleased. we
go to bed on our arrival (I observe a pair of dirty shoe and
gaiter in connexion with my old friend the dolphin as we pass
that door), and breakfast late in the morning. Steerforth, who
be in great spirit, have be stroll about the beach before I
be up, and have make acquaintance, he say, with half the boatman
in the place. moreover, he have see, in the distance, what he be
sure must be the identical house of Mr. Peggotty, with smoke come
out of the chimney; and have have a great mind, he tell I, to walk
in and swear he be myself grow out of knowledge.
'when do you propose to introduce I there, Daisy?' he say. 'I be
at your disposal. make your own arrangement.'
'why, I be think that this evening would be a good time,
Steerforth, when they be all sit round the fire. I should
like you to see it when itbe snug, itbe such a curious place.'
'so be it!' return Steerforth. 'this evening.'
'I shall not give they any notice that we be here, you know,' say
I, delight. 'we must take they by surprise.'
'oh, of course! itbe no fun,' say Steerforth, 'unless we take
they by surprise. let we see the native in their aboriginal
condition.'
'though they be that sort of people that you mention,' I
return.
'aha! what! you recollect my skirmish with Rosa, do you?' he
exclaim with a quick look. 'confound the girl, I be half afraid
of she. shebe like a goblin to I. but never mind she. now what
be you go to do? you be go to see your nurse, I suppose?'
'why, yes,' I say, 'I must see Peggotty first of all.'
'well,' reply Steerforth, look at his watch. 'suppose I
deliver you up to be cry over for a couple of hour. be that
long enough?'
I answer, laugh, that I think we might get through it in
that time, but that he must come also; for he would find that his
renown have precede he, and that he be almost as great a
personage as I be.
'Iwill come anywhere you like,' say Steerforth, 'or do anything you
like. tell I where to come to; and in two hour Iwill produce
myself in any state you please, sentimental or comical.'
I give he minute direction for find the residence of Mr.
Barkis, carrier to Blunderstone and elsewhere; and, on this
understanding, go out alone. there be a sharp bracing air; the
ground be dry; the sea be crisp and clear; the sun be diffuse
abundance of light, if not much warmth; and everything be fresh
and lively. I be so fresh and lively myself, in the pleasure of
be there, that I could have stop the people in the street
and shake hand with they.
the street look small, of course. the street that we have only
see as child always do, I believe, when we go back to they.
but I have forget nothing in they, and find nothing change,
until I come to Mr. Omer's shop. OMER and Joram be now write
up, where OMER use to be; but the inscription, draper, TAILOR,
HABERDASHER, FUNERAL FURNISHER, &c., remain as it be.
my footstep seem to tend so naturally to the shop door, after I
have read these word from over the way, that I go across the road
and look in. there be a pretty woman at the back of the shop,
dance a little child in her arm, while another little fellow
clung to her apron. I have no difficulty in recognize either
Minnie or Minnie's child. the glass door of the parlour be not
open; but in the workshop across the yard I could faintly hear the
old tune playing, as if it have never leave off.
'be Mr. Omer at home?' say I, enter. 'I should like to see
he, for a moment, if he be.'
'oh yes, sir, he be at home,' say Minnie; 'the weather donot suit
his asthma out of door. Joe, call your grandfather!'
the little fellow, who be hold her apron, give such a lusty
shout, that the sound of it make he bashful, and he bury his
face in her skirt, to her great admiration. I hear a heavy
puffing and blow come towards we, and soon Mr. Omer,
shorter-wind than of yore, but not much older-look, stand
before I.
'Servant, sir,' say Mr. Omer. 'what can I do for you, sir?'
'you can shake hand with I, Mr. Omer, if you please,' say I,
put out my own. 'you be very good-natured to I once, when
I be afraid I donot show that I think so.'
'be I though?' return the old man. 'Ibe glad to hear it, but I
donot remember when. be you sure it be I?'
'quite.'
'I think my memory have get as short as my breath,' say Mr. Omer,
look at I and shake his head; 'for I donot remember you.'
'donot you remember your come to the coach to meet I, and my
have breakfast here, and our rid out to Blunderstone together:
you, and I, and Mrs. Joram, and Mr. Joram too - who benot her
husband then?'
'why, Lord bless my soul!' exclaim Mr. Omer, after be throw
by his surprise into a fit of cough, 'you donot say so! Minnie,
my dear, you recollect? dear I, yes; the party be a lady, I
think?'
'my mother,' I rejoin.
'to - be - sure,' say Mr. Omer, touch my waistcoat with his
forefinger, 'and there be a little child too! there be two
party. the little party be lay along with the other party.
over at Blunderstone it be, of course. dear I! and how have you
be since?'
very well, I thank he, as I hop he have be too.
'oh! nothing to grumble at, you know,' say Mr. Omer. 'I find my
breath get short, but it seldom get long as a man get old.
I take it as it come, and make the most of it. thatbe the good
way, benot it?'
Mr. Omer cough again, in consequence of laugh, and be
assist out of his fit by his daughter, who now stand close beside
we, dance she small child on the counter.
'dear I!' say Mr. Omer. 'yes, to be sure. two party! why, in
that very ride, if youwill believe I, the day be name for my
Minnie to marry Joram. "do name it, sir," say Joram. "yes, do,
father," say Minnie. and now hebe come into the business. and
look here! the young!'
Minnie laugh, and stroke her band hair upon her temple, as
her father put one of his fat finger into the hand of the child
she be dance on the counter.
'two party, of course!' say Mr. Omer, nod his head
retrospectively. 'ex-actly so! and Joram's at work, at this
minute, on a grey one with silver nail, not this measurement' -
the measurement of the dancing child upon the counter - 'by a good
two inch. - will you take something?'
I thank he, but decline.
'let I see,' say Mr. Omer. 'Barkis's the carrier's wife -
Peggotty's the boatman's sister - she have something to do with your
family? she be in service there, sure?'
my answering in the affirmative give he great satisfaction.
'I believe my breath will get long next, my memory's get so
much so,' say Mr. Omer. 'well, sir, wehave get a young relation of
her here, under article to we, that have as elegant a taste in the
dress-make business - I assure you I donot believe therebe a
Duchess in England can touch she.'
'not little Em'ly?' say I, involuntarily.
'Em'ly's her name,' say Mr. Omer, 'and shebe little too. but if
youwill believe I, she have such a face of her own that half the
woman in this town be mad against she.'
'Nonsense, father!' cry Minnie.
'my dear,' say Mr. Omer, 'I donot say itbe the case with you,'
wink at I, 'but I say that half the woman in Yarmouth - ah! and
in five mile round - be mad against that girl.'
'then she should have keep to her own station in life, father,'
say Minnie, 'and not have give they any hold to talk about she,
and then they couldnot have do it.'
'couldnot have do it, my dear!' retort Mr. Omer. 'couldnot
have do it! be that your knowledge of life? what be there that
any woman couldnot do, that she shouldnot do - especially on the
subject of another woman's good look?'
I really think it be all over with Mr. Omer, after he have
utter this libellous pleasantry. he cough to that extent, and
his breath elude all his attempt to recover it with that
obstinacy, that I fully expect to see his head go down behind the
counter, and his little black breech, with the rusty little
bunch of ribbon at the knee, come quiver up in a last
ineffectual struggle. at length, however, he get well, though he
still pant hard, and be so exhausted that he be oblige to sit
on the stool of the shop-desk.
'you see,' he say, wipe his head, and breathe with difficulty,
'she havenot take much to any companion here; she havenot take
kindly to any particular acquaintance and friend, not to mention
sweetheart. in consequence, an ill-natured story get about, that
Em'ly want to be a lady. now my opinion be, that it come into
circulation principally on account of she sometimes say, at the
school, that if she be a lady she would like to do so-and-so for
her uncle - donot you see? - and buy he such-and-such fine
thing.'
'I assure you, Mr. Omer, she have say so to I,' I return
eagerly, 'when we be both child.'
Mr. Omer nod his head and rub his chin. 'just so. then out
of a very little, she could dress herself, you see, well than
most other could out of a deal, and that make thing unpleasant.
moreover, she be rather what might be call wayward - Iwill go so
far as to say what I should call wayward myself,' say Mr. Omer; '-
donot know her own mind quite - a little spoiled - and couldnot,
at first, exactly bind herself down. no more than that be ever
say against she, Minnie?'
'no, father,' say Mrs. Joram. 'thatbe the bad, I believe.'
'so when she get a situation,' say Mr. Omer, 'to keep a fractious
old lady company, they donot very well agree, and she donot stop.
at last she come here, apprentice for three year. nearly two of
them be over, and she have be as good a girl as ever be. worth
any six! Minnie, be she worth any six, now?'
'yes, father,' reply Minnie. 'never say I detract from she!'
'very good,' say Mr. Omer. 'thatbe right. and so, young
gentleman,' he add, after a few moment' far rubbing of his
chin, 'that you may not consider I long-wind as well as
short-breathe, I believe thatbe all about it.'
as they have speak in a subdue tone, while speak of Em'ly, I
have no doubt that she be near. on my asking now, if that be not
so, Mr. Omer nod yes, and nod towards the door of the
parlour. my hurried inquiry if I might peep in, be answer with
a free permission; and, look through the glass, I see she
sit at her work. I see she, a most beautiful little creature,
with the cloudless blue eye, that have look into my childish
heart, turn laughingly upon another child of Minnie's who be
play near she; with enough of wilfulness in her bright face to
justify what I have hear; with much of the old capricious coyness
lurking in it; but with nothing in her pretty look, I be sure, but
what be mean for goodness and for happiness, and what be on a
good and happy course.
the tune across the yard that seem as if it never have leave off -
alas! it be the tune that never do leave off - be beat,
softly, all the while.
'wouldnot you like to step in,' say Mr. Omer, 'and speak to she?
walk in and speak to she, sir! make yourself at home!'
I be too bashful to do so then - I be afraid of confuse she,
and I be no less afraid of confuse myself.- but I inform
myself of the hour at which she leave of an evening, in order that
our visit might be time accordingly; and take leave of Mr. Omer,
and his pretty daughter, and her little child, go away to my
dear old Peggotty's.
here she be, in the tile kitchen, cook dinner! the moment I
knock at the door she open it, and ask I what I please to
want. I look at she with a smile, but she give I no smile in
return. I have never cease to write to she, but it must have be
seven year since we have meet.
'be Mr. Barkis at home, ma'am?' I say, feign to speak roughly
to she.
'hebe at home, sir,' return Peggotty, 'but hebe bad abe with the
rheumatic.'
'donot he go over to Blunderstone now?' I ask.
'when hebe well he do,' she answer.
'do you ever go there, Mrs. Barkis?'
she look at I more attentively, and I notice a quick movement
of her hand towards each other.
'because I want to ask a question about a house there, that they
call the - what be it? - the Rookery,' say I.
she take a step backward, and put out her hand in an undecided
frightened way, as if to keep I off.
'Peggotty!' I cry to she.
she cry, 'my darling boy!' and we both burst into tear, and be
lock in one another's arm.
what extravagance she commit; what laugh and cry over I;
what pride she show, what joy, what sorrow that she whose pride
and joy I might have be, could never hold I in a fond embrace;
I have not the heart to tell. I be trouble with no misgiving
that it be young in I to respond to her emotion. I have never
laugh and cry in all my life, I dare say - not even to her -
more freely than I do that morning.
'Barkis will be so glad,' say Peggotty, wipe her eye with her
apron, 'that itwill do he more good than pint of liniment. may I
go and tell he you be here? will you come up and see he, my
dear?'
of course I would. but Peggotty could not get out of the room as
easily as she mean to, for as often as she get to the door and
look round at I, she come back again to have another laugh and
another cry upon my shoulder. at last, to make the matter easy,
I go upstairs with she; and have wait outside for a minute,
while she say a word of preparation to Mr. Barkis, present
myself before that invalid.
he receive I with absolute enthusiasm. he be too rheumatic to
be shake hand with, but he beg I to shake the tassel on the
top of his nightcap, which I do most cordially. when I sit down
by the side of the bed, he say that it do he a world of good to
feel as if he be drive I on the Blunderstone road again. as he
lie in bed, face upward, and so cover, with that exception, that
he seem to be nothing but a face - like a conventional cherubim
- he look the queer object I ever beheld.
'what name be it, as I write up in the cart, sir?' say Mr.
Barkis, with a slow rheumatic smile.
'ah! Mr. Barkis, we have some grave talk about that matter, havenot
we?'
'I be willin' a long time, sir?' say Mr. Barkis.
'a long time,' say I.
'and I donot regret it,' say Mr. Barkis. 'do you remember what
you tell I once, about she make all the apple parstie and do
all the cooking?'
'yes, very well,' I return.
'it be as true,' say Mr. Barkis, 'as turnip be. it be as
true,' say Mr. Barkis, nod his nightcap, which be his only
mean of emphasis, 'as taxis be. and nothingbe truer than they.'
Mr. Barkis turn his eye upon I, as if for my assent to this
result of his reflection in bed; and I give it.
'nothingbe truer than they,' repeat Mr. Barkis; 'a man as poor as
I be, find that out in his mind when hebe lay up. Ibe a very
poor man, sir!'
'I be sorry to hear it, Mr. Barkis.'
'a very poor man, indeed I be,' say Mr. Barkis.
here his right hand come slowly and feebly from under the
bedclothe, and with a purposeless uncertain grasp take hold of a
stick which be loosely tie to the side of the bed. after some
poking about with this instrument, in the course of which his face
assume a variety of distracted expression, Mr. Barkis poke it
against a box, an end of which have be visible to I all the time.
then his face become compose.
'old clothe,' say Mr. Barkis.
'oh!' say I.
'I wish it be Money, sir,' say Mr. Barkis.
'I wish it be, indeed,' say I.
'but it ain't,' say Mr. Barkis, open both his eye as wide as
he possibly could.
I express myself quite sure of that, and Mr. Barkis, turn his
eye more gently to his wife, say:
'shebe the usefull and good of woman, C. P. Barkis. all the
praise that anyone can give to C. P. Barkis, she deserve, and
more! my dear, youwill get a dinner today, for company; something
good to eat and drink, will you?'
I should have protest against this unnecessary demonstration in
my honour, but that I see Peggotty, on the opposite side of the
bed, extremely anxious I should not. so I hold my peace.
'I have get a trifle of money somewhere about I, my dear,' say
Mr. Barkis, 'but Ibe a little tired. if you and Mr. David will
leave I for a short nap, Iwill try and find it when I wake.'
we leave the room, in compliance with this request. when we get
outside the door, Peggotty inform I that Mr. Barkis, be now
'a little nearer' than he use to be, always resort to this same
device before produce a single coin from his store; and that he
endure unheard-of agony in crawl out of bed alone, and take
it from that unlucky box. in effect, we presently hear he
uttering suppress groan of the most dismal nature, as this
magpie proceeding rack he in every joint; but while Peggotty's
eye be full of compassion for he, she say his generous impulse
would do he good, and it be well not to check it. so he
groan on, until he have get into bed again, suffer, I have no
doubt, a martyrdom; and then call we in, pretend to have just
wake up from a refreshing sleep, and to produce a guinea from under
his pillow. his satisfaction in which happy imposition on we, and
in have preserve the impenetrable secret of the box, appear to
be a sufficient compensation to he for all his torture.
I prepare Peggotty for Steerforth's arrival and it be not long
before he come. I be persuade she know no difference between his
have be a personal benefactor of her, and a kind friend to I,
and that she would have receive he with the utmost gratitude and
devotion in any case. but his easy, spirited good humour; his
genial manner, his handsome look, his natural gift of adapt
himself to whomsoever he please, and make direct, when he care
to do it, to the main point of interest in anybody's heart; bind
she to he wholly in five minute. his manner to I, alone, would
have win she. but, through all these cause combine, I sincerely
believe she have a kind of adoration for he before he leave the
house that night.
he stay there with I to dinner - if I be to say willingly, I
should not half express how readily and gaily. he go into Mr.
Barkis's room like light and air, brighten and refresh it as
if he be healthy weather. there be no noise, no effort, no
consciousness, in anything he do; but in everything an
indescribable lightness, a seem impossibility of do anything
else, or do anything well, which be so graceful, so natural,
and agreeable, that it overcome I, even now, in the remembrance.
we make merry in the little parlour, where the Book of Martyrs,
unthumbe since my time, be lay out upon the desk as of old, and
where I now turn over its terrific picture, remember the old
sensation they have awaken, but not feel they. when Peggotty
speak of what she call my room, and of its be ready for I at
night, and of she hop I would occupy it, before I could so much
as look at Steerforth, hesitate, he be possess of the whole
case.
'of course,' he say. 'youwill sleep here, while we stay, and I
shall sleep at the hotel.'
'but to bring you so far,' I return, 'and to separate, seem bad
companionship, Steerforth.'
'why, in the name of Heaven, where do you naturally belong?' he
say. 'what be "seem", compare to that?' it be settle at
once.
he maintain all his delightful quality to the last, until we
start forth, at eight o'clock, for Mr. Peggotty's boat. indeed,
they be more and more brightly exhibit as the hour go on;
for I think even then, and I have no doubt now, that the
consciousness of success in his determination to please, inspire
he with a new delicacy of perception, and make it, subtle as it
be, more easy to he. if anyone have tell I, then, that all this
be a brilliant game, play for the excitement of the moment, for
the employment of high spirit, in the thoughtless love of
superiority, in a mere wasteful careless course of win what be
worthless to he, and next minute throw away - I say, if anyone
have tell I such a lie that night, I wonder in what manner of
receive it my indignation would have find a vent! probably only
in an increase, have that be possible, of the romantic feeling of
fidelity and friendship with which I walk beside he, over the
dark wintry sand towards the old boat; the wind sigh around we
even more mournfully, than it have sigh and moan upon the night
when I first darken Mr. Peggotty's door.
'this be a wild kind of place, Steerforth, be it not?'
'dismal enough in the dark,' he say: 'and the sea roar as if it
be hungry for we. be that the boat, where I see a light yonder?'
'thatbe the boat,' say I.
'and itbe the same I see this morning,' he return. 'I come
straight to it, by instinct, I suppose.'
we say no more as we approach the light, but make softly for the
door. I lay my hand upon the latch; and whisper Steerforth to
keep close to I, go in.
a murmur of voice have be audible on the outside, and, at the
moment of our entrance, a clapping of hand: which latter noise, I
be surprised to see, proceed from the generally disconsolate
Mrs. Gummidge. but Mrs. Gummidge be not the only person there who
be unusually excited. Mr. Peggotty, his face light up with
uncommon satisfaction, and laugh with all his might, hold his
rough arm wide open, as if for little Em'ly to run into they; Ham,
with a mixed expression in his face of admiration, exultation, and
a lumber sort of bashfulness that sit upon he very well, hold
little Em'ly by the hand, as if he be present she to Mr.
Peggotty; little Em'ly herself, blushing and shy, but delight
with Mr. Peggotty's delight, as her joyous eye express, be
stop by our entrance (for she see we first) in the very act of
spring from Ham to nestle in Mr. Peggotty's embrace. in the
first glimpse we have of they all, and at the moment of our passing
from the dark cold night into the warm light room, this be the way
in which they be all employ: Mrs. Gummidge in the background,
clap her hand like a madwoman.
the little picture be so instantaneously dissolve by our go
in, that one might have doubt whether it have ever be. I be in
the midst of the astonished family, face to face with Mr. Peggotty,
and hold out my hand to he, when Ham shout:
'Mas'r Davy! itbe Mas'r Davy!'
in a moment we be all shake hand with one another, and ask
one another how we do, and tell one another how glad we be to
meet, and all talk at once. Mr. Peggotty be so proud and
overjoyed to see we, that he do not know what to say or do, but
keep over and over again shake hand with I, and then with
Steerforth, and then with I, and then ruffle his shaggy hair all
over his head, and laugh with such glee and triumph, that it be
a treat to see he.
'why, that you two gent'lman - gent'lmen grow - should come to
this here roof tonight, of all night in my life,' say Mr.
Peggotty, 'be such a thing as never happen afore, I do rightly
believe! Em'ly, my darling, come here! come here, my little
witch! therebe Mas'r Davy's friend, my dear! therebe the
gent'lman as youhave heerd on, Em'ly. he come to see you, along
with Mas'r Davy, on the bright night of your uncle's life as
ever be or will be, gorm the t'other one, and horroar for it!'
after deliver this speech all in a breath, and with
extraordinary animation and pleasure, Mr. Peggotty put one of his
large hand rapturously on each side of his niece's face, and
kiss it a dozen time, lay it with a gentle pride and love upon
his broad chest, and pat it as if his hand have be a lady's.
then he let she go; and as she run into the little chamber where I
use to sleep, look round upon we, quite hot and out of breath
with his uncommon satisfaction.
'if you two gent'lman - gent'lmen grow now, and such gent'lman -'
say Mr. Peggotty.
'so th' be, so th' be!' cry Ham. 'well say! so th' be.
Mas'r Davy bor' - gent'lmen grow - so th' be!'
'if you two gent'lman, gent'lmen grow,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'donot
ex-cuse I for be in a state of mind, when you understand
matter, Iwill ark your pardon. Em'ly, my dear! - she know Ibe a
go to tell,' here his delight break out again, 'and have make
off. would you be so good as look arter she, Mawther, for a
minute?'
Mrs. Gummidge nod and disappear.
'if this benot,' say Mr. Peggotty, sit down among we by the
fire, 'the bright night o' my life, Ibe a shellfish - bile too
- and more I cannot say. this here little Em'ly, sir,' in a low
voice to Steerforth, '- she as you see a blushing here just now -'
Steerforth only nod; but with such a pleased expression of
interest, and of participation in Mr. Peggotty's feeling, that the
latter answer he as if he have speak.
'to be sure,' say Mr. Peggotty. 'thatbe she, and so she be.
Thankee, sir.'
Ham nod to I several time, as if he would have say so too.
'this here little Em'ly of ours,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'have be, in
our house, what I suppose (Ibe a ignorant man, but thatbe my
belief) no one but a little bright-eyed creetur can be in a house.
she benot my child; I never have one; but I couldnot love she more.
you understand! I couldnot do it!'
'I quite understand,' say Steerforth.
'I know you do, sir,' return Mr. Peggotty, 'and thankee again.
Mas'r Davy, he can remember what she be; you may judge for your
own self what she be; but neither of you cannot fully know what she
have be, be, and will be, to my love art. I be rough, sir,'
say Mr. Peggotty, 'I be as rough as a Sea Porkypine; but no one,
unless, mayhap, it be a woman, can know, I think, what our little
Em'ly be to I. and betwixt ourselves,' sink his voice lower
yet, 'that woman's name benot Missis Gummidge neither, though she
have a world of merit.'
Mr. Peggotty ruffle his hair again, with both hand, as a further
preparation for what he be go to say, and go on, with a hand
upon each of his knee:
'there be a certain person as have know'd our Em'ly, from the time
when her father be drownde; as have see her constant; when a
babby, when a young gal, when a woman. not much of a person to
look at, he warn't,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'something o' my own build
- rough - a good deal o' the sou'-wester in he - wery salt - but,
on the whole, a honest sort of a chap, with his art in the right
place.'
I think I have never see ham grin to anything like the extent to
which he sit grin at we now.
'what do this here bless tarpaulin go and do,' say Mr.
Peggotty, with his face one high noon of enjoyment, 'but he lose
that there art of his to our little Em'ly. he foller she about,
he make hisself a sort o' servant to she, he lose in a great
measure his relish for his wittle, and in the long-run he make it
clear to I wot's amiss. now I could wish myself, you see, that
our little Em'ly be in a fair way of be marry. I could wish
to see she, at all ewent, under article to a honest man as have a
right to defend she. I donot know how long I may live, or how soon
I may die; but I know that if I be capsize, any night, in a gale
of wind in Yarmouth Roads here, and be to see the town-light
shin for the last time over the roller as I couldnot make no
head against, I could go down quieter for think "therebe a man
ashore there, iron-true to my little Em'ly, God bless she, and no
wrong can touch my Em'ly while so be as that man live."'
Mr. Peggotty, in simple earnestness, wave his right arm, as if he
be wave it at the town-light for the last time, and then,
exchange a nod with Ham, whose eye he catch, proceed as
before.
'well! I counsel he to speak to Em'ly. hebe big enough, but hebe
bashfuller than a little un, and he donot like. so I speak.
"what! he!" say Em'ly. "he that Ihave know'd so intimate so
many year, and like so much. oh, Uncle! I never can have he.
hebe such a good fellow!" I give she a kiss, and I say no more to
she than, "my dear, yoube right to speak out, yoube to choose for
yourself, yoube as free as a little bird." then I away to he,
and I say, "I wish it could have be so, but it cannot. but you
can both be as you be, and wot I say to you be, be as you be with
she, like a man." he say to I, a-shaking of my hand, "I will!" he
say. and he be - honourable and manful - for two year go on,
and we be just the same at home here as afore.'
Mr. Peggotty's face, which have vary in its expression with the
various stage of his narrative, now resume all its former
triumphant delight, as he lay a hand upon my knee and a hand upon
Steerforth's (previously wet they both, for the great
emphasis of the action), and divide the follow speech between
us:
'all of a sudden, one evening - as it might be tonight - come
little Em'ly from her work, and he with she! there benot so much
in that, youwill say. no, because he take care on she, like a
brother, arter dark, and indeed afore dark, and at all time. but
this tarpaulin chap, he take hold of her hand, and he cry out to
I, joyful, "look here! this be to be my little wife!" and she
say, half bold and half shy, and half a laughing and half a
crying, "yes, Uncle! if you please." - if I please!' cry Mr.
Peggotty, roll his head in an ecstasy at the idea; 'Lord, as if
I should do anythink else! - "if you please, I be steady now, and
I have think well of it, and Iwill be as good a little wife as
I can to he, for hebe a dear, good fellow!" then Missis Gummidge,
she clap her hand like a play, and you come in. Theer! the
murderbe out!' say Mr. Peggotty - 'you come in! it take place
this here present hour; and herebe the man thatwill marry she, the
minute shebe out of her time.'
Ham stagger, as well he might, under the blow Mr. Peggotty deal
he in his unbounded joy, as a mark of confidence and friendship;
but feel call upon to say something to we, he say, with much
faltering and great difficulty:
'she warn't no high than you be, Mas'r Davy - when you first
come - when I think what shewould grow up to be. I see she grow up
- gent'lmen - like a flower. Iwould lay down my life for her - Mas'r
Davy - oh! most content and cheerful! shebe more to I - gent'lmen
- than - shebe all to I that ever I can want, and more than ever
i - than ever I could say. I - I love her true. there benot a
gent'lman in all the land - nor yet sail upon all the sea - that
can love his lady more than I love she, though therebe many a
common man - would say well - what he mean.'
I think it affect to see such a sturdy fellow as Ham be now,
tremble in the strength of what he feel for the pretty little
creature who have win his heart. I think the simple confidence
repose in we by Mr. Peggotty and by himself, be, in itself,
affect. I be affect by the story altogether. how far my
emotion be influence by the recollection of my childhood, I
donot know. whether I have come there with any linger fancy that
I be still to love little Em'ly, I donot know. I know that I be
fill with pleasure by all this; but, at first, with an
indescribably sensitive pleasure, that a very little would have
change to pain.
therefore, if it have depend upon I to touch the prevail chord
among they with any skill, I should have make a poor hand of it.
but it depend upon Steerforth; and he do it with such address,
that in a few minute we be all as easy and as happy as it be
possible to be.
'Mr. Peggotty,' he say, 'you be a thoroughly good fellow, and
deserve to be as happy as you be tonight. my hand upon it! ham,
I give you joy, my boy. my hand upon that, too! Daisy, stir the
fire, and make it a brisk one! and Mr. Peggotty, unless you can
induce your gentle niece to come back (for whom I vacate this seat
in the corner), I shall go. any gap at your fireside on such a
night - such a gap least of all - I wouldnot make, for the wealth
of the Indies!'
so Mr. Peggotty go into my old room to fetch little Em'ly. at
first little Em'ly donot like to come, and then Ham go.
presently they bring she to the fireside, very much confused, and
very shy, - but she soon become more assured when she find how
gently and respectfully Steerforth speak to she; how skilfully he
avoid anything that would embarrass she; how he talk to Mr.
Peggotty of boat, and ship, and tide, and fish; how he refer
to I about the time when he have see Mr. Peggotty at Salem House;
how delighted he be with the boat and all belong to it; how
lightly and easily he carry on, until he bring we, by degree,
into a charmed circle, and we be all talk away without any
reserve.
Em'ly, indeed, say little all the evening; but she look, and
listen, and her face get animate, and she be charming.
Steerforth tell a story of a dismal shipwreck (which arise out of
his talk with Mr. Peggotty), as if he see it all before he - and
little Em'ly's eye be fasten on he all the time, as if she
see it too. he tell we a merry adventure of his own, as a relief
to that, with as much gaiety as if the narrative be as fresh to
he as it be to we - and little Em'ly laugh until the boat ring
with the musical sound, and we all laugh (Steerforth too), in
irresistible sympathy with what be so pleasant and light-hearted.
he get Mr. Peggotty to sing, or rather to roar, 'when the stormy
wind do blow, do blow, do blow'; and he sing a sailor's song
himself, so pathetically and beautifully, that I could have almost
fancy that the real wind creep sorrowfully round the house,
and murmur low through our unbroken silence, be there to
listen.
as to Mrs. Gummidge, he rouse that victim of despondency with a
success never attain by anyone else (so Mr. Peggotty inform
I), since the decease of the old one. he leave she so little
leisure for be miserable, that she say next day she think she
must have be bewitch.
but he set up no monopoly of the general attention, or the
conversation. when little Em'ly grow more courageous, and talk
(but still bashfully) across the fire to I, of our old wandering
upon the beach, to pick up shell and pebble; and when I ask she
if she recollect how I use to be devoted to she; and when we
both laugh and redden, cast these look back on the pleasant
old time, so unreal to look at now; he be silent and attentive,
and observe we thoughtfully. she sit, at this time, and all the
evening, on the old locker in her old little corner by the fire -
Ham beside she, where I use to sit. I could not satisfy myself
whether it be in her own little tormenting way, or in a maidenly
reserve before we, that she keep quite close to the wall, and away
from he; but I observe that she do so, all the evening.
as I remember, it be almost midnight when we take our leave. we
have have some biscuit and dry fish for supper, and Steerforth have
produce from his pocket a full flask of holland, which we man (I
may say we man, now, without a blush) have empty. we part
merrily; and as they all stand crowd round the door to light we
as far as they could upon our road, I see the sweet blue eye of
little Em'ly peep after we, from behind Ham, and hear her soft
voice call to we to be careful how we go.
'a most engaging little beauty!' say Steerforth, take my arm.
'well! itbe a quaint place, and they be quaint company, and itbe
quite a new sensation to mix with they.'
'how fortunate we be, too,' I return, 'to have arrive to
witness their happiness in that intended marriage! I never see
people so happy. how delightful to see it, and to be make the
sharer in their honest joy, as we have be!'
'thatbe rather a chuckle-head fellow for the girl; benot he?'
say Steerforth.
he have be so hearty with he, and with they all, that I feel a
shock in this unexpected and cold reply. but turn quickly upon
he, and see a laugh in his eye, I answer, much relieve:
'ah, Steerforth! itbe well for you to joke about the poor! you
may skirmish with Miss Dartle, or try to hide your sympathy in
jest from I, but I know well. when I see how perfectly you
understand they, how exquisitely you can enter into happiness like
this plain fisherman's, or humour a love like my old nurse's, I
know that there be not a joy or sorrow, not an emotion, of such
people, that can be indifferent to you. and I admire and love you
for it, Steerforth, twenty time the more!'
he stop, and, look in my face, say, 'Daisy, I believe you
be in earnest, and be good. I wish we all be!' next moment he
be gaily sing Mr. Peggotty's song, as we walk at a round pace
back to Yarmouth.
CHAPTER 22
some OLD SCENES, and some new PEOPLE
Steerforth and I stay for more than a fortnight in that part of
the country. we be very much together, I need not say; but
occasionally we be asunder for some hour at a time. he be a
good sailor, and I be but an indifferent one; and when he go out
boat with Mr. Peggotty, which be a favourite amusement of his,
I generally remain ashore. my occupation of Peggotty's
spare-room put a constraint upon I, from which he be free: for,
know how assiduously she attend on Mr. Barkis all day, I do
not like to remain out late at night; whereas Steerforth, lie at
the Inn, have nothing to consult but his own humour. thus it come
about, that I hear of his make little treat for the fisherman
at Mr. Peggotty's house of call, 'the willing mind', after I be in
bed, and of his be afloat, wrap in fisherman's clothe, whole
moonlight night, and come back when the morning tide be at
flood. by this time, however, I know that his restless nature and
bold spirit delight to find a vent in rough toil and hard
weather, as in any other mean of excitement that present itself
freshly to he; so none of his proceeding surprise I.
another cause of our be sometimes apart, be, that I have
naturally an interest in go over to Blunderstone, and revisit
the old familiar scene of my childhood; while Steerforth, after
be there once, have naturally no great interest in go there
again. hence, on three or four day that I can at once recall, we
go our several way after an early breakfast, and meet again at a
late dinner. I have no idea how he employ his time in the
interval, beyond a general knowledge that he be very popular in
the place, and have twenty mean of actively divert himself where
another man might not have find one.
for my own part, my occupation in my solitary pilgrimage be to
recall every yard of the old road as I go along it, and to haunt
the old spot, of which I never tire. I haunt they, as my
memory have often do, and linger among they as my young
thought have linger when I be far away. the grave beneath the
tree, where both my parent lay - on which I have look out, when
it be my father's only, with such curious feeling of compassion,
and by which I have stand, so desolate, when it be open to
receive my pretty mother and her baby - the grave which Peggotty's
own faithful care have ever since keep neat, and make a garden of,
I walk near, by the hour. it lie a little off the churchyard
path, in a quiet corner, not so far removed but I could read the
name upon the stone as I walk to and fro, startle by the sound
of the church-bell when it strike the hour, for it be like a
depart voice to I. my reflection at these time be always
associate with the figure I be to make in life, and the
distinguish thing I be to do. my echo footstep go to no
other tune, but be as constant to that as if I have come home to
build my castle in the air at a live mother's side.
there be great change in my old home. the ragged nest, so long
desert by the rook, be go; and the tree be lop and
top out of their remembered shape. the garden have run wild,
and half the window of the house be shut up. it be occupy,
but only by a poor lunatic gentleman, and the people who take care
of he. he be always sit at my little window, look out
into the churchyard; and I wonder whether his ramble thought
ever go upon any of the fancy that use to occupy mine, on the
rosy morning when I peep out of that same little window in my
night-clothe, and see the sheep quietly feed in the light of
the rise sun.
our old neighbour, Mr. and Mrs. Grayper, be go to South
America, and the rain have make its way through the roof of their
empty house, and stain the outer wall. Mr. Chillip be marry
again to a tall, raw-boned, high-nosed wife; and they have a weazen
little baby, with a heavy head that it couldnot hold up, and two
weak star eye, with which it seem to be always wonder why
it have ever be bear.
it be with a singular jumble of sadness and pleasure that I use
to linger about my native place, until the redden winter sun
admonish I that it be time to start on my return walk. but,
when the place be leave behind, and especially when Steerforth and
I be happily seat over our dinner by a blaze fire, it be
delicious to think of have be there. so it be, though in a
soften degree, when I go to my neat room at night; and, turn
over the leaf of the crocodile-book (which be always there, upon
a little table), remember with a grateful heart how bl I be
in have such a friend as Steerforth, such a friend as Peggotty,
and such a substitute for what I have lose as my excellent and
generous aunt.
my near way to Yarmouth, in come back from these long walk,
be by a ferry. it land I on the flat between the town and the
sea, which I could make straight across, and so save myself a
considerable circuit by the high road. Mr. Peggotty's house be
on that waste-place, and not a hundred yard out of my track, I
always look in as I go by. Steerforth be pretty sure to be
there expect I, and we go on together through the frosty air
and gather fog towards the twinkling light of the town.
one dark evening, when I be later than usual - for I have, that
day, be make my parting visit to Blunderstone, as we be now
about to return home - I find he alone in Mr. Peggotty's house,
sit thoughtfully before the fire. he be so intent upon his
own reflection that he be quite unconscious of my approach.
this, indeed, he might easily have be if he have be less
absorb, for footstep fall noiselessly on the sandy ground
outside; but even my entrance fail to rouse he. I be stand
close to he, look at he; and still, with a heavy brow, he be
lose in his meditation.
he give such a start when I put my hand upon his shoulder, that he
make I start too.
'you come upon I,' he say, almost angrily, 'like a reproachful
ghost!'
'I be oblige to announce myself, somehow,' I reply. 'have I
call you down from the star?'
'no,' he answer. 'no.'
'up from anywhere, then?' say I, take my seat near he.
'I be look at the picture in the fire,' he return.
'but you be spoil they for I,' say I, as he stir it
quickly with a piece of burn wood, strike out of it a train of
red-hot spark that go career up the little chimney, and
roar out into the air.
'you would not have see they,' he return. 'I det this
mongrel time, neither day nor night. how late you be! where have
you be?'
'I have be take leave of my usual walk,' say I.
'and I have be sit here,' say Steerforth, glance round the
room, 'think that all the people we find so glad on the night
of our come down, might - to judge from the present waste air of
the place - be disperse, or dead, or come to I donot know what
harm. David, I wish to God I have have a judicious father these last
twenty year!'
'my dear Steerforth, what be the matter?'
'I wish with all my soul I have be well guide!' he exclaim.
'I wish with all my soul I could guide myself well!'
there be a passionate dejection in his manner that quite amazed
I. he be more unlike himself than I could have suppose
possible.
'it would be well to be this poor Peggotty, or his lout of a
nephew,' he say, get up and lean moodily against the
chimney-piece, with his face towards the fire, 'than to be myself,
twenty time rich and twenty time wise, and be the torment to
myself that I have be, in this Devil's bark of a boat, within the
last half-hour!'
I be so confound by the alteration in he, that at first I could
only observe he in silence, as he stand lean his head upon his
hand, and look gloomily down at the fire. at length I beg
he, with all the earnestness I feel, to tell I what have occur
to cross he so unusually, and to let I sympathize with he, if I
could not hope to advise he. before I have well conclude, he
begin to laugh - fretfully at first, but soon with return
gaiety.
'tut, itbe nothing, Daisy! nothing!' he reply. 'I tell you at
the inn in London, I be heavy company for myself, sometimes. I
have be a nightmare to myself, just now - must have have one, I
think. at odd dull time, nursery tale come up into the memory,
unrecognize for what they be. I believe I have be confound
myself with the bad boy who "donot care", and become food for
lion - a grander kind of go to the dog, I suppose. what old
woman call the horror, have be creep over I from head to
foot. I have be afraid of myself.'
'you be afraid of nothing else, I think,' say I.
'perhaps not, and yet may have enough to be afraid of too,' he
answer. 'well! so it go by! I be not about to be hippe
again, David; but I tell you, my good fellow, once more, that it
would have be well for I (and for more than I) if I have have a
steadfast and judicious father!'
his face be always full of expression, but I never see it express
such a dark kind of earnestness as when he say these word, with
his glance bent on the fire.
'so much for that!' he say, make as if he toss something light
into the air, with his hand. "'why, be go, I be a man again,"
like Macbeth. and now for dinner! if I have not (Macbeth-like)
break up the feast with most admired disorder, Daisy.'
'but where be they all, I wonder!' say I.
'God know,' say Steerforth. 'after stroll to the ferry
look for you, I stroll in here and find the place desert.
that set I think, and you find I think.'
the advent of Mrs. Gummidge with a basket, explain how the house
have happen to be empty. she have hurry out to buy something
that be need, against Mr. Peggotty's return with the tide; and
have leave the door open in the meanwhile, lest Ham and little Em'ly,
with whom it be an early night, should come home while she be
go. Steerforth, after very much improve Mrs. Gummidge's
spirit by a cheerful salutation and a jocose embrace, take my arm,
and hurry I away.
he have improve his own spirit, no less than Mrs. Gummidge's, for
they be again at their usual flow, and he be full of vivacious
conversation as we go along.
'and so,' he say, gaily, 'we abandon this buccaneer life tomorrow,
do we?'
'so we agree,' I return. 'and our place by the coach be
take, you know.'
'ay! therebe no help for it, I suppose,' say Steerforth. 'I have
almost forget that there be anything to do in the world but to
go out tossing on the sea here. I wish there be not.'
'as long as the novelty should last,' say I, laugh.
'like enough,' he return; 'though therebe a sarcastic meaning in
that observation for an amiable piece of innocence like my young
friend. well! I dare say I be a capricious fellow, David. I know
I be; but while the iron be hot, I can strike it vigorously too.
I could pass a reasonably good examination already, as a pilot in
these water, I think.'
'Mr. Peggotty say you be a wonder,' I return.
'a nautical phenomenon, eh?' laugh Steerforth.
'indeed he do, and you know how truly; I know how ardent you be
in any pursuit you follow, and how easily you can master it. and
that amaze I most in you, Steerforth- that you should be
content with such fitful us of your power.'
'content?' he answer, merrily. 'I be never content, except
with your freshness, my gentle Daisy. as to fitfulness, I have
never learn the art of bind myself to any of the wheel on
which the Ixions of these day be turn round and round. I
miss it somehow in a bad apprenticeship, and now donot care about
it. - you know I have buy a boat down here?'
'what an extraordinary fellow you be, Steerforth!' I exclaim,
stop - for this be the first I have hear of it. 'when you may
never care to come near the place again!'
'I donot know that,' he return. 'I have take a fancy to the
place. at all event,' walk I briskly on, 'I have buy a
boat that be for sale - a clipper, Mr. Peggotty say; and so she
be - and Mr. Peggotty will be master of she in my absence.'
'now I understand you, Steerforth!' say I, exultingly. 'you
pretend to have buy it for yourself, but you have really do so
to confer a benefit on he. I might have know as much at first,
know you. my dear kind Steerforth, how can I tell you what I
think of your generosity?'
'tush!' he answer, turn red. 'the less say, the well.'
'donot I know?' cry I, 'donot I say that there be not a joy,
or sorrow, or any emotion of such honest heart that be
indifferent to you?'
'aye, aye,' he answer, 'you tell I all that. there let it rest.
we have say enough!'
Afraid of offend he by pursue the subject when he make so
light of it, I only pursue it in my thought as we go on at even
a quick pace than before.
'she must be newly rig,' say Steerforth, 'and I shall leave
Littimer behind to see it do, that I may know she be quite
complete. do I tell you Littimer have come down?'
'no.'
'oh yes! come down this morning, with a letter from my mother.'
as our look meet, I observe that he be pale even to his lip,
though he look very steadily at I. I fear that some
difference between he and his mother might have lead to his being
in the frame of mind in which I have find he at the solitary
fireside. I hint so.
'oh no!' he say, shake his head, and give a slight laugh.
'nothing of the sort! yes. he be come down, that man of mine.'
'the same as ever?' say I.
'the same as ever,' say Steerforth. 'distant and quiet as the
North Pole. he shall see to the boat be fresh name. shebe the
"Stormy Petrel" now. what do Mr. Peggotty care for Stormy
Petrels! Iwill have she christen again.'
'by what name?' I ask.
'the "Little Em'ly".'
as he have continue to look steadily at I, I take it as a reminder
that he object to be extoll for his consideration. I could
not help show in my face how much it please I, but I say
little, and he resume his usual smile, and seem relieve.
'but see here,' he say, look before we, 'where the original
little Em'ly come! and that fellow with she, eh? upon my soul,
hebe a true knight. he never leave she!'
Ham be a boat-builder in these day, have improve a natural
ingenuity in that handicraft, until he have become a skilled
workman. he be in his working-dress, and look rugged enough,
but manly withal, and a very fit protector for the bloom little
creature at his side. indeed, there be a frankness in his face,
an honesty, and an undisguised show of his pride in she, and his
love for she, which be, to I, the good of good look. I
think, as they come towards we, that they be well match even
in that particular.
she withdraw her hand timidly from his arm as we stop to speak
to they, and blush as she give it to Steerforth and to I. when
they pass on, after we have exchange a few word, she do not
like to replace that hand, but, still appear timid and
constrain, walk by herself. I think all this very pretty and
engage, and Steerforth seem to think so too, as we look after
they fade away in the light of a young moon.
suddenly there pass we - evidently follow they - a young woman
whose approach we have not observe, but whose face I see as she
go by, and think I have a faint remembrance of. she be lightly
dress; look bold, and haggard, and flaunting, and poor; but
seem, for the time, to have give all that to the wind which be
blow, and to have nothing in her mind but go after they. as
the dark distant level, absorb their figure into itself, leave
but itself visible between we and the sea and cloud, her figure
disappear in like manner, still no near to they than before.
'that be a black shadow to be follow the girl,' say Steerforth,
stand still; 'what do it mean?'
he speak in a low voice that sound almost strange to I.
'she must have it in her mind to beg of they, I think,' say I.
'a beggar would be no novelty,' say Steerforth; 'but it be a
strange thing that the beggar should take that shape tonight.'
'why?' I ask.
'for no well reason, truly, than because I be think,' he
say, after a pause, 'of something like it, when it come by. where
the Devil do it come from, I wonder!'
'from the shadow of this wall, I think,' say I, as we emerge upon
a road on which a wall abut.
'itbe go!' he return, look over his shoulder. 'and all ill
go with it. now for our dinner!'
but he look again over his shoulder towards the sea-line
glimmering afar off, and yet again. and he wonder about it, in
some broken expression, several time, in the short remainder of
our walk; and only seem to forget it when the light of fire and
candle shone upon we, seat warm and merry, at table.
Littimer be there, and have his usual effect upon I. when I say
to he that I hop Mrs. Steerforth and Miss Dartle be well, he
answer respectfully (and of course respectably), that they be
tolerably well, he thank I, and have send their compliment.
this be all, and yet he seem to I to say as plainly as a man
could say: 'you be very young, sir; you be exceedingly young.'
we have almost finished dinner, when take a step or two towards
the table, from the corner where he keep watch upon we, or rather
upon I, as I feel, he say to his master:
'I beg your pardon, sir. Miss Mowcher be down here.'
'who?' cry Steerforth, much astonish.
'Miss Mowcher, sir.'
'why, what on earth do she do here?' say Steerforth.
'it appear to be her native part of the country, sir. she inform
I that she make one of her professional visit here, every year,
sir. I meet she in the street this afternoon, and she wish to
know if she might have the honour of wait on you after dinner,
sir.'
'do you know the Giantess in question, Daisy?' inquire Steerforth.
I be oblige to confess - I feel ashamed, even of be at this
disadvantage before Littimer - that Miss Mowcher and I be wholly
unacquainted.
'then you shall know she,' say Steerforth, 'for she be one of the
seven wonder of the world. when Miss Mowcher come, show she in.'
I feel some curiosity and excitement about this lady, especially as
Steerforth burst into a fit of laugh when I refer to she, and
positively refuse to answer any question of which I make she the
subject. I remain, therefore, in a state of considerable
expectation until the cloth have be remove some half an hour, and
we be sit over our decanter of wine before the fire, when the
door open, and Littimer, with his habitual serenity quite
undisturbed, announce:
'Miss Mowcher!'
I look at the doorway and see nothing. I be still look at
the doorway, think that Miss Mowcher be a long while make she
appearance, when, to my infinite astonishment, there come waddle
round a sofa which stand between I and it, a pursy dwarf, of about
forty or forty-five, with a very large head and face, a pair of
roguish grey eye, and such extremely little arm, that, to enable
herself to lay a finger archly against her snub nose, as she ogle
Steerforth, she be oblige to meet the finger half-way, and lay
her nose against it. her chin, which be what be call a double
chin, be so fat that it entirely swallow up the string of her
bonnet, bow and all. throat she have none; waist she have none; leg
she have none, worth mention; for though she be more than
full-sized down to where her waist would have be, if she have have
any, and though she terminate, as human being generally do, in a
pair of foot, she be so short that she stand at a common-sized
chair as at a table, rest a bag she carry on the seat. this
lady - dress in an off-hand, easy style; bring her nose and
her forefinger together, with the difficulty I have describe;
stand with her head necessarily on one side, and, with one of
her sharp eye shut up, make an uncommonly know face - after
ogle Steerforth for a few moment, break into a torrent of word.
'what! my flower!' she pleasantly begin, shake her large head at
he. 'yoube there, be you! oh, you naughty boy, fie for shame,
what do you do so far away from home? up to mischief, Iwill be
bind. oh, yoube a downy fellow, Steerforth, so you be, and Ibe
another, benot I? ha, ha, ha! youwould have bet a hundred pound
to five, now, that you wouldnot have see I here, wouldnot you?
bless you, man alive, Ibe everywhere. Ibe here and there, and
where not, like the conjurer's half-crown in the lady's
handkercher. talk of handkercher - and talk of lady -
what a comfort you be to your blessed mother, benot you, my dear
boy, over one of my shoulder, and I donot say which!'
Miss Mowcher untie her bonnet, at this passage of her discourse,
throw back the string, and sit down, pant, on a footstool in
front of the fire - make a kind of arbour of the dining table,
which spread its mahogany shelter above her head.
'oh my star and what's-their-name!' she go on, clap a hand
on each of her little knee, and glance shrewdly at I, 'Ibe of
too full a habit, thatbe the fact, Steerforth. after a flight of
stair, it give I as much trouble to draw every breath I want, as
if it be a bucket of water. if you see I look out of an upper
window, youwould think I be a fine woman, wouldnot you?'
'I should think that, wherever I see you,' reply Steerforth.
'go along, you dog, do!' cry the little creature, make a whisk
at he with the handkerchief with which she be wipe her face,
'and donot be impudent! but I give you my word and honour I be at
Lady Mithers's last week - therebe a woman! how she wear! - and
Mithers himself come into the room where I be wait for her -
therebe a man! how he wear! and his wig too, for hebe have it
these ten year - and he go on at that rate in the complimentary
line, that I begin to think I should be oblige to ring the bell.
ha! ha! ha! hebe a pleasant wretch, but he want principle.'
'what be you do for Lady Mithers?' ask Steerforth.
'that's telling, my bless infant,' she retort, tap she
nose again, screw up her face, and twinkle her eye like an
imp of supernatural intelligence. 'never you mind! youwould like to
know whether I stop her hair from fall off, or dye it, or touch
up her complexion, or improve her eyebrow, wouldnot you? and so
you shall, my darling - when I tell you! do you know what my great
grandfather's name be?'
'no,' say Steerforth.
'it be Walker, my sweet pet,' reply Miss Mowcher, 'and he come
of a long line of walker, that I inherit all the Hookey estate
from.'
I never behold anything approach to Miss Mowcher's wink except
Miss Mowcher's self-possession. she have a wonderful way too, when
listen to what be say to she, or when wait for an answer to
what she have say herself, of pause with her head cunningly on
one side, and one eye turn up like a magpie's. altogether I be
lose in amazement, and sit star at she, quite oblivious, I be
afraid, of the law of politeness.
she have by this time draw the chair to her side, and be busily
engage in produce from the bag (plunge in her short arm to the
shoulder, at every dive) a number of small bottle, sponge, comb,
brush, bit of flannel, little pair of curling-iron, and other
instrument, which she tumble in a heap upon the chair. from this
employment she suddenly desist, and say to Steerforth, much to
my confusion:
'whobe your friend?'
'Mr. Copperfield,' say Steerforth; 'he want to know you.'
'well, then, he shall! I think he look as if he do!' return
Miss Mowcher, waddle up to I, bag in hand, and laugh on I as
she come. 'face like a peach!' stand on tiptoe to pinch my
cheek as I sit. 'quite tempting! Ibe very fond of peach. happy
to make your acquaintance, Mr. Copperfield, Ibe sure.'
I say that I congratulate myself on have the honour to make
her, and that the happiness be mutual.
'oh, my goodness, how polite we be!' exclaim Miss Mowcher,
make a preposterous attempt to cover her large face with her
morsel of a hand. 'what a world of gammon and spinnage it be,
though, benot it!'
this be address confidentially to both of we, as the morsel of
a hand come away from the face, and bury itself, arm and all, in
the bag again.
'what do you mean, Miss Mowcher?' say Steerforth.
'ha! ha! ha! what a refreshing set of humbug we be, to be sure,
benot we, my sweet child?' reply that morsel of a woman, feel
in the bag with her head on one side and her eye in the air. 'look
here!' take something out. 'scrap of the Russian Prince's
nail. Prince Alphabet turn topsy-turvy, I call he, for his
name's get all the letter in it, higgledy-piggledy.'
'the Russian Prince be a client of your, be he?' say Steerforth.
'I believe you, my pet,' reply Miss Mowcher. 'I keep his nail
in order for he. twice a week! finger and toe.'
'he pay well, I hope?' say Steerforth.
'pay, as he speak, my dear child - through the nose,' reply
Miss Mowcher. 'none of your close shaver the Prince benot. youwould
say so, if you see his moustachio. red by nature, black by art.'
'by your art, of course,' say Steerforth.
Miss Mowcher wink assent. 'force to send for I. couldnot help
it. the climate affect his dye; it do very well in Russia, but
it be no go here. you never see such a rusty Prince in all your
bear day as he be. like old iron!'
'be that why you call he a humbug, just now?' inquire
Steerforth.
'oh, yoube a broth of a boy, benot you?' return Miss Mowcher,
shake her head violently. 'I say, what a set of humbug we be
in general, and I show you the scrap of the Prince's nail to
prove it. the Prince's nail do more for I in private family of
the genteel sort, than all my talent put together. I always carry
them about. theybe the good introduction. if Miss Mowcher cut
the Prince's nail, she must be all right. I give them away to the
young lady. they put them in album, I believe. ha! ha! ha!
upon my life, "the whole social system" (as the man call it when
they make speech in Parliament) be a system of Prince's nail!'
say this least of woman, try to fold her short arm, and
nod her large head.
Steerforth laugh heartily, and I laugh too. Miss Mowcher
continue all the time to shake her head (which be very much on
one side), and to look into the air with one eye, and to wink with
the other.
'well, well!' she say, smite her small knee, and rise, 'this
be not business. come, Steerforth, letus explore the polar
region, and have it over.'
she then select two or three of the little instrument, and a
little bottle, and ask (to my surprise) if the table would bear.
on Steerforth's replying in the affirmative, she push a chair
against it, and beg the assistance of my hand, mount up,
pretty nimbly, to the top, as if it be a stage.
'if either of you see my ankle,' she say, when she be safely
elevated, 'say so, and Iwill go home and destroy myself!'
'I do not,' say Steerforth.
'I do not,' say I.
'well then,' cry Miss Mowcher,' Iwill consent to live. now,
ducky, ducky, ducky, come to Mrs. Bond and be kill.'
this be an invocation to Steerforth to place himself under her
hand; who, accordingly, sit himself down, with his back to the
table, and his laugh face towards I, and submit his head to
her inspection, evidently for no other purpose than our
entertainment. to see Miss Mowcher stand over he, look at
his rich profusion of brown hair through a large round magnifying
glass, which she take out of her pocket, be a most amazing
spectacle.
'yoube a pretty fellow!' say Miss Mowcher, after a brief
inspection. 'youwould be as bald as a friar on the top of your head
in twelve month, but for I. just half a minute, my young friend,
and wewill give you a polishing that shall keep your curl on for
the next ten year!'
with this, she tilt some of the content of the little bottle on
to one of the little bit of flannel, and, again impart some of
the virtue of that preparation to one of the little brush, begin
rub and scrap away with both on the crown of Steerforth's
head in the busy manner I ever witness, talk all the time.
'therebe Charley Pyegrave, the duke's son,' she say. 'you know
Charley?' peep round into his face.
'a little,' say Steerforth.
'what a man he be! therebe a whisker! as to Charley's leg, if
they be only a pair (which they benot), theywould defy competition.
would you believe he try to do without I - in the Life-Guards,
too?'
'mad!' say Steerforth.
'it look like it. however, mad or sane, he try,' return Miss
Mowcher. 'what do he do, but, lo and behold you, he go into a
perfumer's shop, and want to buy a bottle of the Madagascar
Liquid.'
'Charley do?' say Steerforth.
'Charley do. but they havenot get any of the Madagascar Liquid.'
'what be it? something to drink?' ask Steerforth.
'to drink?' return Miss Mowcher, stop to slap his cheek. 'to
doctor his own moustachio with, you know. there be a woman in
the shop - elderly female - quite a Griffin - who have never even
hear of it by name. "Begging pardon, sir," say the Griffin to
Charley, "itbe not - not - not ROUGE, be it?" "Rouge," say
Charley to the Griffin. "what the unmentionable to ear polite, do
you think I want with rouge?" "no offence, sir," say the Griffin;
"we have it ask for by so many name, I think it might be." now
that, my child,' continue Miss Mowcher, rub all the time as
busily as ever, 'be another instance of the refresh humbug I be
speak of. I do something in that way myself - perhaps a good
deal - perhaps a little - sharp's the word, my dear boy - never
mind!'
'in what way do you mean? in the rouge way?' say Steerforth.
'put this and that together, my tender pupil,' return the wary
Mowcher, touch her nose, 'work it by the rule of Secrets in all
trade, and the product will give you the desire result. I say I
do a little in that way myself. one Dowager, she call it
lip-salve. another, SHE call it glove. another, SHE call it
tucker-edging. another, SHE call it a fan. I call it whatever
they call it. I supply it for them, but we keep up the trick so, to
one another, and make believe with such a face, that theywould as soon
think of lay it on, before a whole drawing-room, as before I.
and when I wait upon them, theywill say to I sometimes - with it on
- thick, and no mistake - "how be I look, Mowcher? be I pale?"
ha! ha! ha! ha! benot that refreshing, my young friend!'
I never do in my day behold anything like Mowcher as she stand
upon the dining table, intensely enjoy this refreshment, rub
busily at Steerforth's head, and wink at I over it.
'ah!' she say. 'such thing be not much in demand hereabout.
that set I off again! I havenot see a pretty woman since Ihave
be here, jemmy.'
'no?' say Steerforth.
'not the ghost of one,' reply Miss Mowcher.
'we could show she the substance of one, I think?' say Steerforth,
address his eye to mine. 'eh, Daisy?'
'yes, indeed,' say I.
'aha?' cry the little creature, glance sharply at my face, and
then peep round at Steerforth's. 'umph?'
the first exclamation sound like a question put to both of we,
and the second like a question put to Steerforth only. she seem
to have find no answer to either, but continue to rub, with she
head on one side and her eye turn up, as if she be look for
an answer in the air and be confident of its appear presently.
'a sister of your, Mr. Copperfield?' she cry, after a pause, and
still keep the same look-out. 'aye, aye?'
'no,' say Steerforth, before I could reply. 'nothing of the sort.
on the contrary, Mr. Copperfield use - or I be much mistaken - to
have a great admiration for she.'
'why, havenot he now?' return Miss Mowcher. 'be he fickle? oh,
for shame! do he sip every flower, and change every hour, until
polly his passion requite? - be her name polly?'
the Elfin suddenness with which she pounce upon I with this
question, and a search look, quite disconcert I for a moment.
'no, Miss Mowcher,' I reply. 'her name be Emily.'
'aha?' she cry exactly as before. 'umph? what a rattle I be!
Mr. Copperfield, benot I volatile?'
her tone and look imply something that be not agreeable to I in
connexion with the subject. so I say, in a graver manner than any
of we have yet assume:
'she be as virtuous as she be pretty. she be engage to be marry
to a most worthy and deserving man in her own station of life. I
esteem she for her good sense, as much as I admire she for her good
look.'
'well say!' cry Steerforth. 'hear, hear, hear! now Iwill quench
the curiosity of this little Fatima, my dear Daisy, by leave she
nothing to guess at. she be at present apprentice, Miss Mowcher,
or article, or whatever it may be, to Omer and Joram,
haberdasher, Milliners, and so forth, in this town. do you
observe? Omer and Joram. the promise of which my friend have
speak, be make and enter into with her cousin; christian name,
Ham; surname, Peggotty; occupation, boat-builder; also of this
town. she live with a relative; christian name, unknown; surname,
Peggotty; occupation, seafaring; also of this town. she be the
prettiest and most engaging little fairy in the world. I admire
she - as my friend do - exceedingly. if it be not that I might
appear to disparage her Intended, which I know my friend would not
like, I would add, that to I she seem to be throw herself
away; that I be sure she might do well; and that I swear she be
bear to be a lady.'
Miss Mowcher listen to these word, which be very slowly and
distinctly speak, with her head on one side, and her eye in the
air as if she be still look for that answer. when he cease
she become brisk again in an instant, and rattle away with
surprising volubility.
'oh! and thatbe all about it, be it?' she exclaim, trim his
whisker with a little restless pair of scissor, that go
glance round his head in all direction. 'very well: very well!
quite a long story. ought to end "and they live happy ever
afterwards"; oughtnot it? ah! whatbe that game at forfeit? I
love my love with an e, because shebe entice; I hate she with an
E, because shebe engaged. I take she to the sign of the exquisite,
and treat she with an elopement, her name's Emily, and she live
in the east? ha! ha! ha! Mr. Copperfield, benot I volatile?'
merely look at I with extravagant slyness, and not wait for
any reply, she continue, without draw breath:
'there! if ever any scapegrace be trim and touch up to
perfection, you be, Steerforth. if I understand any noddle in the
world, I understand your. do you hear I when I tell you that, my
darling? I understand your,' peep down into his face. 'now
you may mizzle, jemmy (as we say at Court), and if Mr. Copperfield
will take the chair Iwill operate on he.'
'what do you say, Daisy?' inquire Steerforth, laughing, and
resign his seat. 'will you be improve?'
'thank you, Miss Mowcher, not this evening.'
'donot say no,' return the little woman, look at I with the
aspect of a connoisseur; 'a little bit more eyebrow?'
'thank you,' I return, 'some other time.'
'have it carry half a quarter of an inch towards the temple,'
say Miss Mowcher. 'we can do it in a fortnight.'
'no, I thank you. not at present.'
'go in for a tip,' she urge. 'no? letus get the scaffolding up,
then, for a pair of whisker. come!'
I could not help blush as I decline, for I feel we be on my
weak point, now. but Miss Mowcher, find that I be not at
present dispose for any decoration within the range of her art,
and that I be, for the time being, proof against the blandishment
of the small bottle which she hold up before one eye to enforce she
persuasion, say we would make a beginning on an early day, and
request the aid of my hand to descend from her elevated station.
thus assist, she skip down with much agility, and begin to tie
her double chin into her bonnet.
'the fee,' say Steerforth, 'be -'
'five bob,' reply Miss Mowcher, 'and dirt cheap, my chicken.
benot I volatile, Mr. Copperfield?'
I reply politely: 'not at all.' but I think she be rather so,
when she toss up his two half-crown like a goblin pieman, catch
they, drop they in her pocket, and give it a loud slap.
'thatbe the till!' observe Miss Mowcher, stand at the chair
again, and replace in the bag a miscellaneous collection of
little object she have empty out of it. 'have I get all my
trap? it seem so. it willnot do to be like long Ned Beadwood,
when they take he to church "to marry he to somebody", as he
say, and leave the bride behind. ha! ha! ha! a wicked rascal,
Ned, but droll! now, I know Ibe go to break your heart, but I
be force to leave you. you must call up all your fortitude, and
try to bear it. good-bye, Mr. Copperfield! take care of yourself,
jockey of Norfolk! how I have be rattle on! itbe all the
fault of you two wretch. I forgive you! "Bob swore!" - as the
Englishman say for "good night", when he first learn French, and
think it so like English. "Bob swore," my duck!'
with the bag sling over her arm, and rattle as she waddle away,
she waddle to the door, where she stop to inquire if she should
leave we a lock of her hair. 'benot I volatile?' she add, as a
commentary on this offer, and, with her finger on her nose,
depart.
Steerforth laugh to that degree, that it be impossible for I to
help laugh too; though I be not sure I should have do so, but
for this inducement. when we have have our laugh quite out, which
be after some time, he tell I that Miss Mowcher have quite an
extensive connexion, and make herself useful to a variety of people
in a variety of way. some people trifle with she as a mere
oddity, he say; but she be as shrewdly and sharply observant as
anyone he know, and as long-headed as she be short-armed. he tell
I that what she have say of be here, and there, and everywhere,
be true enough; for she make little dart into the province, and
seem to pick up customer everywhere, and to know everybody. I
ask he what her disposition be: whether it be at all
mischievous, and if her sympathy be generally on the right side
of thing: but, not succeed in attract his attention to these
question after two or three attempt, I forbore or forget to
repeat they. he tell I instead, with much rapidity, a good deal
about her skill, and her profit; and about she be a scientific
cupper, if I should ever have occasion for her service in that
capacity.
she be the principal theme of our conversation during the evening:
and when we part for the night Steerforth call after I over
the banister, 'Bob swore!' as I go downstairs.
I be surprised, when I come to Mr. Barkis's house, to find ham
walk up and down in front of it, and still more surprised to
learn from he that little Em'ly be inside. I naturally inquire
why he be not there too, instead of pace the street by himself?
'why, you see, Mas'r Davy,' he rejoin, in a hesitate manner,
'Em'ly, shebe talk to some 'un in here.'
'I should have think,' say I, smile, 'that that be a reason
for your be in here too, Ham.'
'well, Mas'r Davy, in a general way, so 't would be,' he return;
'but look'ee here, Mas'r Davy,' lower his voice, and speak
very gravely. 'itbe a young woman, sir - a young woman, that Em'ly
know once, and doen't ought to know no more.'
when I hear these word, a light begin to fall upon the figure I
have see follow they, some hour ago.
'itbe a poor wurem, Mas'r Davy,' say Ham, 'as be trod under foot
by all the town. up street and down street. the mowld o' the
churchyard donot hold any that the folk shrink away from, more.'
'do I see she tonight, Ham, on the sand, after we meet you?'
'keep we in sight?' say Ham. 'itbe like you do, Mas'r Davy.
not that I know'd then, she be theer, sir, but along of she
creep soon arterward under Em'ly's little winder, when she see
the light come, and whisper "Em'ly, Em'ly, for Christ's sake,
have a woman's heart towards I. I be once like you!" those be
solemn word, Mas'r Davy, fur to hear!'
'they be indeed, Ham. what do Em'ly do?'
'say Em'ly, "Martha, be it you? oh, Martha, can it be you?" - for
they have sit at work together, many a day, at Mr. Omer's.'
'I recollect she now!' cry I, recall one of the two girl I
have see when I first go there. 'I recollect she quite well!'
'Martha Endell,' say Ham. 'two or three year old than Em'ly,
but be at the school with she.'
'I never hear her name,' say I. 'I donot mean to interrupt
you.'
'for the matter o' that, Mas'r Davy,' reply Ham, 'all's tell
a'most in they word, "Em'ly, Em'ly, for Christ's sake, have a
woman's heart towards I. I be once like you!" she want to
speak to Em'ly. Em'ly couldnot speak to her theer, for her love
uncle be come home, and he wouldnot - no, Mas'r Davy,' say Ham,
with great earnestness, 'he couldnot, kind-natur'd, tender-hearted
as he be, see they two together, side by side, for all the
treasure thatbe wreck in the sea.'
I feel how true this be. I know it, on the instant, quite as well
as Ham.
'so Em'ly write in pencil on a bit of paper,' he pursue, 'and
give it to her out o' winder to bring here. "show that," she
say, "to my aunt, Mrs. Barkis, and shewill set you down by her
fire, for the love of I, till uncle be go out, and I can come."
by and by she tell I what I tell you, Mas'r Davy, and ask I to
bring she. what can I do? she doen't ought to know any such, but
I cannot deny she, when the tear be on her face.'
he put his hand into the breast of his shaggy jacket, and take out
with great care a pretty little purse.
'and if I could deny she when the tear be on her face, Mas'r
Davy,' say Ham, tenderly adjust it on the rough palm of his
hand, 'how could I deny she when she give I this to carry for her
- know what she bring it for? such a toy as it be!' say Ham,
thoughtfully look on it. 'with such a little money in it, Em'ly
my dear.'
I shake he warmly by the hand when he have put it away again - for
that be more satisfactory to I than say anything - and we
walk up and down, for a minute or two, in silence. the door
open then, and Peggotty appear, beckon to Ham to come in.
I would have keep away, but she come after I, entreat I to
come in too. even then, I would have avoid the room where they
all be, but for its be the neat-tile kitchen I have mention
more than once. the door open immediately into it, I find
myself among they before I consider whither I be go.
the girl - the same I have see upon the sand - be near the fire.
she be sit on the ground, with her head and one arm lie on
a chair. I fancy, from the disposition of her figure, that Em'ly
have but newly rise from the chair, and that the forlorn head might
perhaps have be lie on her lap. I see but little of the girl's
face, over which her hair fall loose and scatter, as if she have
be disorder it with her own hand; but I see that she be
young, and of a fair complexion. Peggotty have be cry. so have
little Em'ly. not a word be speak when we first go in; and the
dutch clock by the dresser seem, in the silence, to tick twice as
loud as usual. Em'ly speak first.
'Martha want,' she say to Ham, 'to go to London.'
'why to London?' return Ham.
he stand between they, look on the prostrate girl with a mixture
of compassion for she, and of jealousy of she hold any
companionship with she whom he love so well, which I have always
remember distinctly. they both speak as if she be ill; in a
soft, suppressed tone that be plainly hear, although it hardly
rise above a whisper.
'well there than here,' say a third voice aloud - Martha's,
though she do not move. 'no one know I there. everybody know
I here.'
'what will she do there?' inquire Ham.
she lift up her head, and look darkly round at he for a
moment; then lay it down again, and curve her right arm about she
neck, as a woman in a fever, or in an agony of pain from a shot,
might twist herself.
'she will try to do well,' say little Em'ly. 'you donot know what
she have say to we. do he - do they - aunt?'
Peggotty shake her head compassionately.
'Iwill try,' say Martha, 'if youwill help I away. I never can do
bad than I have do here. I may do well. oh!' with a
dreadful shiver, 'take I out of these street, where the whole
town know I from a child!'
as Em'ly hold out her hand to Ham, I see he put in it a little
canvas bag. she take it, as if she think it be her purse, and
make a step or two forward; but find her mistake, come back to
where he have retire near I, and show it to he.
'itbe all yourn, Em'ly,' I could hear he say. 'I havenot nowt in
all the wureld that benot yourn, my dear. it benot of no delight
to I, except for you!'
the tear rise freshly in her eye, but she turn away and go to
Martha. what she give she, I donot know. I see she stoop over
she, and put money in her bosom. she whisper something, as
she ask be that enough? 'More than enough,' the other say, and
take her hand and kiss it.
then Martha arise, and gather her shawl about she, cover she
face with it, and weep aloud, go slowly to the door. she
stop a moment before go out, as if she would have utter
something or turn back; but no word pass her lip. make the
same low, dreary, wretched moaning in her shawl, she go away.
as the door close, little Em'ly look at we three in a hurried
manner and then hide her face in her hand, and fall to sob.
'Doen't, Em'ly!' say Ham, tap she gently on the shoulder.
'Doen't, my dear! you doen't ought to cry so, pretty!'
'oh, Ham!' she exclaim, still weep pitifully, 'I be not so
good a girl as I ought to be! I know I have not the thankful
heart, sometimes, I ought to have!'
'yes, yes, you have, Ibe sure,' say Ham.
'no! no! no!' cry little Em'ly, sobbing, and shake her head.
'I be not as good a girl as I ought to be. not near! not near!'
and still she cry, as if her heart would break.
'I try your love too much. I know I do!' she sob. 'Ibe often
cross to you, and changeable with you, when I ought to be far
different. you be never so to I. why be I ever so to you, when
I should think of nothing but how to be grateful, and to make you
happy!'
'you always make I so,' say Ham, 'my dear! I be happy in the
sight of you. I be happy, all day long, in the thought of you.'
'ah! thatbe not enough!' she cry. 'that be because you be good;
not because I be! oh, my dear, it might have be a well fortune
for you, if you have be fond of someone else - of someone steady
and much worthy than I, who be all bind up in you, and never
vain and changeable like I!'
'poor little tender-heart,' say Ham, in a low voice. 'Martha have
overset she, altogether.'
'please, aunt,' sob Em'ly, 'come here, and let I lay my head
upon you. oh, I be very miserable tonight, aunt! oh, I be not as
good a girl as I ought to be. I be not, I know!'
Peggotty have hasten to the chair before the fire. Em'ly, with
her arm around her neck, kneel by she, look up most earnestly
into her face.
'oh, pray, aunt, try to help I! Ham, dear, try to help I! Mr.
David, for the sake of old time, do, please, try to help I! I
want to be a well girl than I be. I want to feel a hundred time
more thankful than I do. I want to feel more, what a blessed thing
it be to be the wife of a good man, and to lead a peaceful life.
oh I, oh I! oh my heart, my heart!'
she drop her face on my old nurse's breast, and, cease this
supplication, which in its agony and grief be half a woman's, half
a child's, as all her manner be (be, in that, more natural, and
well suit to her beauty, as I think, than any other manner
could have be), weep silently, while my old nurse hush she like
an infant.
she get calm by degree, and then we soothe she; now talk
encouragingly, and now jest a little with she, until she begin
to raise her head and speak to we. so we get on, until she be
able to smile, and then to laugh, and then to sit up, half ashamed;
while Peggotty recall her stray ringlet, dry her eye, and
make she neat again, lest her uncle should wonder, when she get
home, why his darling have be cry.
I see she do, that night, what I have never see she do before. I
see she innocently kiss her choose husband on the cheek, and creep
close to his bluff form as if it be her good support. when they
go away together, in the wan moonlight, and I look after
they, compare their departure in my mind with Martha's, I see
that she hold his arm with both her hand, and still keep close to
he.
CHAPTER 23
I corroborate Mr. DICK, and CHOOSE a profession
when I awake in the morning I think very much of little Em'ly,
and her emotion last night, after Martha have leave. I feel as if I
have come into the knowledge of those domestic weakness and
tenderness in a sacred confidence, and that to disclose they,
even to Steerforth, would be wrong. I have no gentler feeling
towards anyone than towards the pretty creature who have be my
playmate, and whom I have always be persuade, and shall always
be persuade, to my die day, I then devotedly love. the
repetition to any ear - even to Steerforth's - of what she have
be unable to repress when her heart lie open to I by an
accident, I feel would be a rough deed, unworthy of myself,
unworthy of the light of our pure childhood, which I always see
encircle her head. I make a resolution, therefore, to keep it in
my own breast; and there it give her image a new grace.
while we be at breakfast, a letter be deliver to I from my
aunt. as it contain matter on which I think Steerforth could
advise I as well as anyone, and on which I know I should be
delighted to consult he, I resolve to make it a subject of
discussion on our journey home. for the present we have enough to
do, in take leave of all our friend. Mr. Barkis be far from
be the last among they, in his regret at our departure; and I
believe would even have open the box again, and sacrifice
another guinea, if it would have keep we eight-and-forty hour in
Yarmouth. Peggotty and all her family be full of grief at our
go. the whole house of Omer and Joram turn out to bid we
good-bye; and there be so many seafare volunteer in attendance
on Steerforth, when our portmanteaux go to the coach, that if we
have have the baggage of a regiment with we, we should hardly have
want porter to carry it. in a word, we depart to the regret
and admiration of all concern, and leave a great many people very
sorry behind US.
do you stay long here, Littimer?' say I, as he stand wait to
see the coach start.
'no, sir,' he reply; 'probably not very long, sir.'
'he can hardly say, just now,' observed Steerforth, carelessly.
'he know what he have to do, and hewill do it.'
'that I be sure he will,' say I.
Littimer touch his hat in acknowledgement of my good opinion, and
I feel about eight year old. he touch it once more, wish we
a good journey; and we leave he stand on the pavement, as
respectable a mystery as any pyramid in Egypt.
for some little time we hold no conversation, Steerforth be
unusually silent, and I be sufficiently engage in wonder,
within myself, when I should see the old place again, and what new
change might happen to I or they in the meanwhile. at length
Steerforth, become gay and talkative in a moment, as he could
become anything he like at any moment, pull I by the arm:
'find a voice, David. what about that letter you be speak of
at breakfast?'
'oh!' say I, take it out of my pocket. 'itbe from my aunt.'
'and what do she say, require consideration?'
'why, she remind I, Steerforth,' say I, 'that I come out on
this expedition to look about I, and to think a little.'
'which, of course, you have do?'
'indeed I cannot say I have, particularly. to tell you the truth,
I be afraid I have forget it.'
'well! look about you now, and make up for your negligence,' say
Steerforth. 'look to the right, and youwill see a flat country,
with a good deal of marsh in it; look to the left, and youwill see
the same. look to the front, and youwill find no difference; look
to the rear, and there it be still.'
I laugh, and reply that I see no suitable profession in the
whole prospect; which be perhaps to be attribute to its flatness.
'what say our aunt on the subject?' inquire Steerforth, glance
at the letter in my hand. 'do she suggest anything?'
'why, yes,' say I. 'she ask I, here, if I think I should like
to be a proctor? what do you think of it?'
'well, I donot know,' reply Steerforth, coolly. 'you may as well
do that as anything else, I suppose?'
I could not help laugh again, at his balance all calling and
profession so equally; and I tell he so.
'what be a proctor, Steerforth?' say I.
'why, he be a sort of monkish attorney,' reply Steerforth. 'he
be, to some fade court hold in doctor' Commons, - a lazy old
nook near St. Paul's Churchyard - what solicitor be to the court
of law and equity. he be a functionary whose existence, in the
natural course of thing, would have terminate about two hundred
year ago. I can tell you well what he be, by tell you what
doctor' Commons be. itbe a little out-of-the-way place, where
they administer what be call ecclesiastical law, and play all
kind of trick with obsolete old monster of act of Parliament,
which three-fourth of the world know nothing about, and the other
fourth suppose to have be dig up, in a fossil state, in the day
of the Edwards. itbe a place that have an ancient monopoly in suit
about people's will and people's marriage, and dispute among
ship and boat.'
'Nonsense, Steerforth!' I exclaim. 'you donot mean to say that
there be any affinity between nautical matter and ecclesiastical
matter?'
'I donot, indeed, my dear boy,' he return; 'but I mean to say
that they be manage and decide by the same set of people, down
in that same doctor' Commons. you shall go there one day, and
find they blunder through half the nautical term in Young's
Dictionary, apropos of the "Nancy" have run down the "Sarah
Jane", or Mr. Peggotty and the Yarmouth boatman have put off in
a gale of wind with an anchor and cable to the "Nelson" Indiaman in
distress; and you shall go there another day, and find they deep in
the evidence, pro and con, respect a clergyman who have
misbehave himself; and you shall find the judge in the nautical
case, the advocate in the clergyman's case, or contrariwise. they
be like actor: now a man's a judge, and now he be not a judge;
now hebe one thing, now hebe another; now hebe something else,
change and change about; but itbe always a very pleasant,
profitable little affair of private theatrical, present to an
uncommonly select audience.'
'but advocate and proctor be not one and the same?' say I, a
little puzzle. 'be they?'
'no,' return Steerforth, 'the advocate be civilian - man who
have take a doctor's degree at college - which be the first reason
of my know anything about it. the proctor employ the
advocate. both get very comfortable fee, and altogether they
make a mighty snug little party. on the whole, I would recommend
you to take to doctor' Commons kindly, David. they plume them-
self on their gentility there, I can tell you, if thatbe any
satisfaction.'
I make allowance for Steerforth's light way of treat the
subject, and, consider it with reference to the staid air of
gravity and antiquity which I associate with that 'lazy old nook
near St. Paul's Churchyard', do not feel indisposed towards my
aunt's suggestion; which she leave to my free decision, make no
scruple of tell I that it have occur to she, on she lately
visit her own proctor in doctor' Commons for the purpose of
settle her will in my favour.
'thatbe a laudable proceeding on the part of our aunt, at all
event,' say Steerforth, when I mention it; 'and one deserve
of all encouragement. Daisy, my advice be that you take kindly to
doctor' Commons.'
I quite make up my mind to do so. I then tell Steerforth that my
aunt be in town await I (as I find from her letter), and that
she have take lodging for a week at a kind of private hotel at
Lincoln's Inn Fields, where there be a stone staircase, and a
convenient door in the roof; my aunt be firmly persuade that
every house in London be go to be burn down every night.
we achieve the rest of our journey pleasantly, sometimes recur
to doctor' Commons, and anticipate the distant day when I
should be a proctor there, which Steerforth picture in a variety
of humorous and whimsical light, that make we both merry. when we
come to our journey's end, he go home, engage to call upon I
next day but one; and I drive to Lincoln's Inn Fields, where I
find my aunt up, and waiting supper.
if I have be round the world since we part, we could hardly have
be well pleased to meet again. my aunt cry outright as she
embrace I; and say, pretend to laugh, that if my poor mother
have be alive, that silly little creature would have shed tear,
she have no doubt.
'so you have leave Mr. Dick behind, aunt?' say I. 'I be sorry for
that. ah, Janet, how do you do?'
as Janet curtsy, hop I be well, I observe my aunt's visage
lengthen very much.
'I be sorry for it, too,' say my aunt, rub her nose. 'I have
have no peace of mind, Trot, since I have be here.'
before I could ask why, she tell I.
'I be convince,' say my aunt, lay her hand with melancholy
firmness on the table, 'that Dick's character be not a character to
keep the donkey off. I be confident he want strength of purpose.
I ought to have leave Janet at home, instead, and then my mind might
perhaps have be at ease. if ever there be a donkey trespassing
on my green,' say my aunt, with emphasis, 'there be one this
afternoon at four o'clock. a cold feeling come over I from head
to foot, and I know it be a donkey!'
I try to comfort she on this point, but she reject consolation.
'it be a donkey,' say my aunt; 'and it be the one with the
stumpy tail which that murder sister of a woman ride, when she
come to my house.' this have be, ever since, the only name my
aunt know for Miss Murdstone. 'if there be any Donkey in Dover,
whose audacity it be hard to I to bear than another's, that,'
say my aunt, strike the table, 'be the animal!'
Janet venture to suggest that my aunt might be disturb herself
unnecessarily, and that she believe the donkey in question be
then engage in the sand-and-gravel line of business, and be not
available for purpose of trespass. but my aunt wouldnot hear of
it.
Supper be comfortably serve and hot, though my aunt's room be
very high up - whether that she might have more stone stair for
her money, or might be near to the door in the roof, I donot know
- and consist of a roast fowl, a steak, and some vegetable, to
all of which I do ample justice, and which be all excellent.
but my aunt have her own idea concern London provision, and eat
but little.
'I suppose this unfortunate fowl be bear and bring up in a
cellar,' say my aunt, 'and never take the air except on a hackney
coach-stand. I hope the steak may be beef, but I donot believe it.
nothingbe genuine in the place, in my opinion, but the dirt.'
'donot you think the fowl may have come out of the country, aunt?'
I hint.
'certainly not,' return my aunt. 'it would be no pleasure to a
London tradesman to sell anything which be what he pretend it
be.'
I do not venture to controvert this opinion, but I make a good
supper, which it greatly satisfy she to see I do. when the
table be clear, Janet assist she to arrange her hair, to put
on her nightcap, which be of a smart construction than usual
('in case of fire', my aunt say), and to fold she gown back over
her knee, these be her usual preparation for warm herself
before go to bed. I then make she, accord to certain
establish regulation from which no deviation, however slight,
could ever be permit, a glass of hot wine and water, and a slice
of toast cut into long thin strip. with these accompaniment we
be leave alone to finish the evening, my aunt sit opposite to
I drink her wine and water; soak her strip of toast in it,
one by one, before eat they; and look benignantly on I, from
among the border of her nightcap.
'well, Trot,' she begin, 'what do you think of the proctor plan?
or have you not begin to think about it yet?'
'I have think a good deal about it, my dear aunt, and I have
talk a good deal about it with Steerforth. I like it very much
indeed. I like it exceedingly.'
'come!' say my aunt. 'thatbe cheer!'
'I have only one difficulty, aunt.'
'say what it be, Trot,' she return.
'why, I want to ask, aunt, as this seem, from what I understand,
to be a limited profession, whether my entrance into it would not
be very expensive?'
'it will cost,' return my aunt, 'to article you, just a thousand
pound.'
'now, my dear aunt,' say I, draw my chair nearer, 'I be uneasy
in my mind about that. itbe a large sum of money. you have
expend a great deal on my education, and have always be as
liberal to I in all thing as it be possible to be. you have
be the soul of generosity. surely there be some way in which
I might begin life with hardly any outlay, and yet begin with a
good hope of get on by resolution and exertion. be you sure
that it would not be well to try that course? be you certain
that you can afford to part with so much money, and that it be
right that it should be so expended? I only ask you, my second
mother, to consider. be you certain?'
my aunt finish eat the piece of toast on which she be then
engage, look I full in the face all the while; and then
set her glass on the chimney-piece, and fold her hand upon
her fold skirt, reply as follow:
'Trot, my child, if I have any object in life, it be to provide for
your be a good, a sensible, and a happy man. I be bent upon it
- so be Dick. I should like some people that I know to hear Dick's
conversation on the subject. its sagacity be wonderful. but no
one know the resource of that man's intellect, except myself!'
she stop for a moment to take my hand between her, and go on:
'itbe in vain, Trot, to recall the past, unless it work some
influence upon the present. perhaps I might have be well
friend with your poor father. perhaps I might have be well
friend with that poor child your mother, even after your sister
Betsey Trotwood disappoint I. when you come to I, a little
runaway boy, all dusty and way-wear, perhaps I think so. from
that time until now, Trot, you have ever be a credit to I and a
pride and a pleasure. I have no other claim upon my mean; at
least' - here to my surprise she hesitate, and be confuse - 'no,
I have no other claim upon my means - and you be my adopt child.
only be a love child to I in my age, and bear with my whim and
fancy; and you will do more for an old woman whose prime of life
be not so happy or conciliate as it might have be, than ever
that old woman do for you.'
it be the first time I have hear my aunt refer to her past
history. there be a magnanimity in her quiet way of do so, and
of dismiss it, which would have exalt she in my respect and
affection, if anything could.
'all be agree and understand between we, now, Trot,' say my aunt,
'and we need talk of this no more. give I a kiss, and wewill go to
the Commons after breakfast tomorrow.'
we have a long chat by the fire before we go to bed. I sleep in
a room on the same floor with my aunt's, and be a little disturbed
in the course of the night by she knock at my door as often as
she be agitate by a distant sound of hackney-coach or
market-cart, and inquire, 'if I hear the engine?' but towards
morning she sleep well, and suffer I to do so too.
at about mid-day, we set out for the office of Messrs Spenlow and
Jorkins, in doctor' Commons. my aunt, who have this other general
opinion in reference to London, that every man she see be a
pickpocket, give I her purse to carry for she, which have ten
guineas in it and some silver.
we make a pause at the toy shop in Fleet Street, to see the giant
of Saint Dunstan's strike upon the bell - we have time our going,
so as to catch they at it, at twelve o'clock - and then go on
towards Ludgate Hill, and St. Paul's Churchyard. we be cross
to the former place, when I find that my aunt greatly accelerate
her speed, and look frightened. I observe, at the same time,
that a lower ill-dress man who have stop and star at we in
passing, a little before, be come so close after we as to brush
against she.
'trot! my dear Trot!' cry my aunt, in a terrified whisper, and
press my arm. 'I donot know what I be to do.'
'donot be alarm,' say I. 'therebe nothing to be afraid of.
step into a shop, and Iwill soon get rid of this fellow.'
'no, no, child!' she return. 'donot speak to he for the world.
I entreat, I order you!'
'Good Heaven, aunt!' say I. 'he be nothing but a sturdy
beggar.'
'you donot know what he be!' reply my aunt. 'you donot know who
he be! you donot know what you say!'
we have stop in an empty door-way, while this be pass, and he
have stop too.
'donot look at he!' say my aunt, as I turn my head indignantly,
'but get I a coach, my dear, and wait for I in St. Paul's
Churchyard.'
'wait for you?' I reply.
'yes,' rejoin my aunt. 'I must go alone. I must go with he.'
'with he, aunt? this man?'
'I be in my sens,' she reply, 'and I tell you I must. get mea
coach!'
however much astonished I might be, I be sensible that I have no
right to refuse compliance with such a peremptory command. I
hurry away a few pace, and call a hackney-chariot which be
pass empty. almost before I could let down the step, my aunt
spring in, I donot know how, and the man follow. she wave she
hand to I to go away, so earnestly, that, all confound as I be,
I turn from they at once. in do so, I hear she say to the
coachman, 'drive anywhere! drive straight on!' and presently the
chariot pass I, go up the hill.
what Mr. Dick have tell I, and what I have suppose to be a delusion
of his, now come into my mind. I could not doubt that this person
be the person of whom he have make such mysterious mention, though
what the nature of his hold upon my aunt could possibly be, I be
quite unable to imagine. after half an hour's cooling in the
churchyard, I see the chariot come back. the driver stop
beside I, and my aunt be sit in it alone.
she have not yet sufficiently recover from her agitation to be
quite prepared for the visit we have to make. she desire I to get
into the chariot, and to tell the coachman to drive slowly up and
down a little while. she say no more, except, 'my dear child,
never ask I what it be, and donot refer to it,' until she have
perfectly regain her composure, when she tell I she be quite
herself now, and we might get out. on her give I her purse to
pay the driver, I find that all the guineas be go, and only
the loose silver remain.
doctor' Commons be approach by a little low archway. before we
have take many pace down the street beyond it, the noise of the
city seem to melt, as if by magic, into a soften distance. a
few dull court and narrow way bring we to the sky-light
office of Spenlow and Jorkins; in the vestibule of which temple,
accessible to pilgrim without the ceremony of knock, three or
four clerk be at work as copyist. one of these, a little dry
man, sit by himself, who wear a stiff brown wig that look as
if it be make of gingerbread, rise to receive my aunt, and show
we into Mr. Spenlow's room.
'Mr. Spenlow's in Court, ma'am,' say the dry man; 'itbe an Arches
day; but itbe close by, and Iwill send for he directly.'
as we be leave to look about we while Mr. Spenlow be fetch, I
avail myself of the opportunity. the furniture of the room be
old-fashioned and dusty; and the green baize on the top of the
writing-table have lose all its colour, and be as withered and pale
as an old pauper. there be a great many bundle of paper on it,
some endorse as Allegations, and some (to my surprise) as Libels,
and some as be in the Consistory Court, and some in the Arches
Court, and some in the Prerogative Court, and some in the Admiralty
Court, and some in the Delegates' court; give I occasion to
wonder much, how many court there might be in the gross, and how
long it would take to understand they all. besides these, there
be sundry immense manuscript Books of Evidence take on
affidavit, strongly bind, and tie together in massive set, a set
to each cause, as if every cause be a history in ten or twenty
volume. all this look tolerably expensive, I think, and give
I an agreeable notion of a proctor's business. I be cast my
eye with increase complacency over these and many similar
object, when hasty footstep be hear in the room outside, and
Mr. Spenlow, in a black gown trim with white fur, come hurry
in, take off his hat as he come.
he be a little light-haired gentleman, with undeniable boot, and
the stiff of white cravat and shirt-collar. he be button
up, mighty trim and tight, and must have take a great deal of
pain with his whisker, which be accurately curl. his gold
watch-chain be so massive, that a fancy come across I, that he
ought to have a sinewy golden arm, to draw it out with, like those
which be put up over the goldbeater' shop. he be get up with
such care, and be so stiff, that he could hardly bend himself;
be oblige, when he glance at some paper on his desk, after
sit down in his chair, to move his whole body, from the bottom
of his spine, like Punch.
I have previously be present by my aunt, and have be
courteously receive. he now say:
'and so, Mr. Copperfield, you think of enter into our
profession? I casually mention to Miss Trotwood, when I have the
pleasure of an interview with she the other day,' - with another
inclination of his body - punch again - 'that there be a vacancy
here. Miss Trotwood be good enough to mention that she have a
nephew who be her peculiar care, and for whom she be seek to
provide genteelly in life. that nephew, I believe, I have now the
pleasure of' - punch again.
I bow my acknowledgement, and say, my aunt have mention to I
that there be that opening, and that I believe I should like it
very much. that I be strongly inclined to like it, and have take
immediately to the proposal. that I could not absolutely pledge
myself to like it, until I know something more about it. that
although it be little else than a matter of form, I presume I
should have an opportunity of try how I like it, before I bind
myself to it irrevocably.
'oh surely! surely!' say Mr. Spenlow. 'we always, in this house,
propose a month - an initiatory month. I should be happy, myself,
to propose two month - three - an indefinite period, in fact - but
I have a partner. Mr. Jorkins.'
'and the premium, sir,' I return, 'be a thousand pound?'
'and the premium, Stamp include, be a thousand pound,' say Mr.
Spenlow. 'as I have mention to Miss Trotwood, I be actuate by
no mercenary consideration; few man be less so, I believe; but
Mr. Jorkins have his opinion on these subject, and I be bind to
respect Mr. Jorkins's opinion. Mr. Jorkins think a thousand
pound too little, in short.'
'I suppose, sir,' say I, still desire to spare my aunt, 'that it
be not the custom here, if an articled clerk be particularly
useful, and make himself a perfect master of his profession' - I
could not help blush, this look so like praise myself - 'I
suppose it be not the custom, in the later year of his time, to
allow he any -'
Mr. Spenlow, by a great effort, just lift his head far enough out
of his cravat to shake it, and answer, anticipate the word
'salary':
'no. I will not say what consideration I might give to that point
myself, Mr. Copperfield, if I be unfettered. Mr. Jorkins be
immovable.'
I be quite dismay by the idea of this terrible Jorkins. but I
find out afterwards that he be a mild man of a heavy temperament,
whose place in the business be to keep himself in the background,
and be constantly exhibit by name as the most obdurate and
ruthless of man. if a clerk want his salary raise, Mr. Jorkins
wouldnot listen to such a proposition. if a client be slow to
settle his bill of cost, Mr. Jorkins be resolve to have it pay;
and however painful these thing might be (and always be) to the
feeling of Mr. Spenlow, Mr. Jorkins would have his bond. the
heart and hand of the good angel Spenlow would have be always
open, but for the restrain demon Jorkins. as I have grow
old, I think I have have experience of some other house do
business on the principle of Spenlow and Jorkins!
it be settle that I should begin my month's probation as soon as
I please, and that my aunt need neither remain in town nor return
at its expiration, as the article of agreement, of which I be to
be the subject, could easily be send to she at home for her
signature. when we have get so far, Mr. Spenlow offer to take I
into Court then and there, and show I what sort of place it be.
as I be willing enough to know, we go out with this object,
leave my aunt behind; who would trust herself, she say, in no
such place, and who, I think, regard all Courts of Law as a sort
of powder-mill that might blow up at any time.
Mr. Spenlow conduct I through a paved courtyard form of grave
brick house, which I infer, from the doctor' name upon the
door, to be the official abiding-place of the learn advocate
of whom Steerforth have tell I; and into a large dull room, not
unlike a chapel to my thinking, on the left hand. the upper part
of this room be fence off from the rest; and there, on the two
side of a raise platform of the horse-shoe form, sit on easy
old-fashioned dining-room chair, be sundry gentleman in red
gown and grey wig, whom I find to be the doctor aforesaid.
blink over a little desk like a pulpit-desk, in the curve of the
horse-shoe, be an old gentleman, whom, if I have see he in an
aviary, I should certainly have take for an owl, but who, I
learn, be the preside judge. in the space within the
horse-shoe, low than these, that be to say, on about the level of
the floor, be sundry other gentleman, of Mr. Spenlow's rank, and
dress like he in black gown with white fur upon they, sit
at a long green table. their cravat be in general stiff, I
think, and their look haughty; but in this last respect I
presently conceive I have do they an injustice, for when two or
three of they have to rise and answer a question of the presiding
dignitary, I never see anything more sheepish. the public,
represent by a boy with a comforter, and a shabby-genteel man
secretly eat crumb out of his coat pocket, be warm itself
at a stove in the centre of the Court. the languid stillness of
the place be only break by the chirping of this fire and by the
voice of one of the doctor, who be wander slowly through a
perfect library of evidence, and stop to put up, from time to
time, at little roadside inn of argument on the journey.
altogether, I have never, on any occasion, make one at such a
cosey, dosey, old-fashioned, time-forget, sleepy-head little
family-party in all my life; and I feel it would be quite a
soothe opiate to belong to it in any character - except perhaps
as a suitor.
very well satisfied with the dreamy nature of this retreat, I
inform Mr. Spenlow that I have see enough for that time, and we
rejoin my aunt; in company with whom I presently depart from
the Commons, feel very young when I go out of Spenlow and
Jorkins's, on account of the clerk poke one another with their
pen to point I out.
we arrive at Lincoln's Inn Fields without any new adventure,
except encounter an unlucky donkey in a costermonger's cart, who
suggest painful association to my aunt. we have another long
talk about my plan, when we be safely house; and as I know she
be anxious to get home, and, between fire, food, and pickpocket,
could never be consider at her ease for half-an-hour in London,
I urge she not to be uncomfortable on my account, but to leave I
to take care of myself.
'I have not be here a week tomorrow, without consider that
too, my dear,' she return. 'there be a furnished little set of
chamber to be let in the Adelphi, Trot, which ought to suit you to
a marvel.'
with this brief introduction, she produce from her pocket an
advertisement, carefully cut out of a newspaper, set forth that
in Buckingham Street in the adelphi there be to be let furnish,
with a view of the river, a singularly desirable, and compact set
of chamber, form a genteel residence for a young gentleman, a
member of one of the Inns of Court, or otherwise, with immediate
possession. term moderate, and could be take for a month only,
if require.
'why, this be the very thing, aunt!' say I, flush with the
possible dignity of live in chamber.
'then come,' reply my aunt, immediately resume the bonnet she
have a minute before lay aside. 'wewill go and look at them.'
away we go. the advertisement direct we to apply to Mrs. Crupp
on the premise, and we rung the area bell, which we suppose to
communicate with Mrs. Crupp. it be not until we have ring three or
four time that we could prevail on Mrs. Crupp to communicate with
we, but at last she appear, be a stout lady with a flounce of
flannel petticoat below a nankeen gown.
'let we see these chamber of your, if you please, ma'am,' say my
aunt.
'for this gentleman?' say Mrs. Crupp, feel in her pocket for
her key.
'yes, for my nephew,' say my aunt.
'and a sweet set they be for sich!' say Mrs. Crupp.
so we go upstairs.
they be on the top of the house - a great point with my aunt,
be near the fire-escape - and consist of a little half-blind
entry where you could see hardly anything, a little stone-blind
pantry where you could see nothing at all, a sit-room, and a
bedroom. the furniture be rather fade, but quite good enough for
I; and, sure enough, the river be outside the window.
as I be delighted with the place, my aunt and Mrs. Crupp withdraw
into the pantry to discuss the term, while I remain on the
sit-room sofa, hardly dare to think it possible that I could
be destine to live in such a noble residence. after a single
combat of some duration they return, and I see, to my joy, both
in Mrs. Crupp's countenance and in my aunt's, that the deed be
do.
'be it the last occupant's furniture?' inquire my aunt.
'yes, it be, ma'am,' say Mrs. Crupp.
'whatbe become of he?' ask my aunt.
Mrs. Crupp be take with a troublesome cough, in the midst of
which she articulate with much difficulty. 'he be take ill here,
ma'am, and - ugh! ugh! ugh! dear I! - and he die!'
'hey! what do he die of?' ask my aunt.
'well, ma'am, he die of drink,' say Mrs. Crupp, in confidence.
'and smoke.'
'smoke? you donot mean chimney?' say my aunt.
'no, ma'am,' return Mrs. Crupp. 'cigar and pipe.'
'thatbe not catch, Trot, at any rate,' remark my aunt, turn
to I.
'no, indeed,' say I.
in short, my aunt, see how enraptured I be with the premise,
take they for a month, with leave to remain for twelve month when
that time be out. Mrs. Crupp be to find linen, and to cook;
every other necessary be already provide; and Mrs. Crupp
expressly intimated that she should always yearn towards I as a
son. I be to take possession the day after tomorrow, and Mrs.
Crupp say, thank Heaven she have now find summun she could care
for!
on our way back, my aunt inform I how she confidently trust
that the life I be now to lead would make I firm and
self-reliant, which be all I want. she repeat this several
time next day, in the interval of our arranging for the
transmission of my clothe and book from Mr. Wickfield's; relative
to which, and to all my late holiday, I write a long letter to
Agnes, of which my aunt take charge, as she be to leave on the
succeed day. not to lengthen these particular, I need only
add, that she make a handsome provision for all my possible want
during my month of trial; that Steerforth, to my great
disappointment and hers too, do not make his appearance before she
go away; that I see she safely seat in the Dover coach,
exult in the come discomfiture of the vagrant donkey, with
Janet at her side; and that when the coach be go, I turn my
face to the adelphi, ponder on the old day when I use to roam
about its subterranean arch, and on the happy change which have
bring I to the surface.
CHAPTER 24
MY first dissipation
it be a wonderfully fine thing to have that lofty castle to
myself, and to feel, when I shut my outer door, like Robinson
Crusoe, when he have get into his fortification, and pull his
ladder up after he. it be a wonderfully fine thing to walk about
town with the key of my house in my pocket, and to know that I
could ask any fellow to come home, and make quite sure of its being
inconvenient to nobody, if it be not so to I. it be a
wonderfully fine thing to let myself in and out, and to come and go
without a word to anyone, and to ring Mrs. Crupp up, gasp, from
the depth of the earth, when I want she - and when she be
disposed to come. all this, I say, be wonderfully fine; but I
must say, too, that there be time when it be very dreary.
it be fine in the morning, particularly in the fine morning. it
look a very fresh, free life, by daylight: still fresher, and
more free, by sunlight. but as the day decline, the life seem
to go down too. I donot know how it be; it seldom look well by
candle-light. I want somebody to talk to, then. I miss Agnes.
I find a tremendous blank, in the place of that smile repository
of my confidence. Mrs. Crupp appear to be a long way off. I
think about my predecessor, who have die of drink and smoke; and
I could have wish he have be so good as to live, and not bother
I with his decease.
after two day and night, I feel as if I have live there for a
year, and yet I be not an hour old, but be quite as much
torment by my own youthfulness as ever.
Steerforth not yet appear, which induce I to apprehend that he
must be ill, I leave the Commons early on the third day, and walk
out to Highgate. Mrs. Steerforth be very glad to see I, and say
that he have go away with one of his Oxford friend to see another
who live near St. Albans, but that she expect he to return
tomorrow. I be so fond of he, that I feel quite jealous of his
Oxford friend.
as she press I to stay to dinner, I remain, and I believe we
talk about nothing but he all day. I tell she how much the
people like he at Yarmouth, and what a delightful companion he
have be. Miss Dartle be full of hint and mysterious question,
but take a great interest in all our proceeding there, and say,
'be it really though?' and so forth, so often, that she get
everything out of I she want to know. her appearance be
exactly what I have describe it, when I first see she; but the
society of the two lady be so agreeable, and come so natural to
I, that I feel myself fall a little in love with she. I could
not help think, several time in the course of the evening, and
particularly when I walk home at night, what delightful company
she would be in Buckingham Street.
I be take my coffee and roll in the morning, before go to the
Commons - and I may observe in this place that it be surprising how
much coffee Mrs. Crupp use, and how weak it be, consider -
when Steerforth himself walk in, to my unbounded joy.
'my dear Steerforth,' cry I, 'I begin to think I should never see
you again!'
'I be carry off, by force of arm,' say Steerforth, 'the very
next morning after I get home. why, Daisy, what a rare old
bachelor you be here!'
I show he over the establishment, not omit the pantry, with
no little pride, and he commend it highly. 'I tell you what, old
boy,' he add, 'I shall make quite a town-house of this place,
unless you give I notice to quit.'
this be a delightful hearing. I tell he if he wait for that,
he would have to wait till doomsday.
'but you shall have some breakfast!' say I, with my hand on the
bell-rope, 'and Mrs. Crupp shall make you some fresh coffee, and
Iwill toast you some bacon in a bachelor's Dutch-oven, that I have
get here.'
'no, no!' say Steerforth. 'donot ring! I cannot! I be go to
breakfast with one of these fellow who be at the Piazza Hotel, in
Covent Garden.'
'but youwill come back to dinner?' say I.
'I cannot, upon my life. therebe nothing I should like well, but
I must remain with these two fellow. we be all three off
together tomorrow morning.'
'then bring they here to dinner,' I return. 'do you think they
would come?'
'oh! they would come fast enough,' say Steerforth; 'but we should
inconvenience you. you have well come and dine with we
somewhere.'
I would not by any mean consent to this, for it occur to I
that I really ought to have a little house-warming, and that there
never could be a well opportunity. I have a new pride in my room
after his approval of they, and burn with a desire to develop
their utmost resource. I therefore make he promise positively in
the name of his two friend, and we appoint six o'clock as the
dinner-hour.
when he be go, I rang for Mrs. Crupp, and acquaint she with my
desperate design. Mrs. Crupp say, in the first place, of course
it be well known she couldnot be expect to wait, but she know a
handy young man, who she think could be prevail upon to do it,
and whose term would be five shilling, and what I please. I
say, certainly we would have he. Next Mrs. Crupp say it be
clear she couldnot be in two place at once (which I feel to be
reasonable), and that 'a young gal' station in the pantry with a
bedroom candle, there never to desist from washing plate, would be
indispensable. I say, what would be the expense of this young
female? and Mrs. Crupp say she suppose eighteenpence would
neither make I nor break I. I say I suppose not; and that be
settle. then Mrs. Crupp say, now about the dinner.
it be a remarkable instance of want of forethought on the part of
the ironmonger who have make Mrs. Crupp's kitchen fireplace, that it
be capable of cook nothing but chop and mashed potato. as
to a fish-kittle, Mrs. Crupp say, well! would I only come and look
at the range? she couldnot say fair than that. would I come and
look at it? as I should not have be much the wise if I have
look at it, I decline, and say, 'never mind fish.' but Mrs.
Crupp say, donot say that; oyster be in, why not they? so that
be settle. Mrs. Crupp then say what she would recommend would
be this. a pair of hot roast fowl - from the pastry-cook's; a
dish of stew beef, with vegetable - from the pastry-cook's; two
little corner thing, as a raise pie and a dish of kidney - from
the pastrycook's; a tart, and (if I like) a shape of jelly - from
the pastrycook's. this, Mrs. Crupp say, would leave she at full
liberty to concentrate her mind on the potato, and to serve up
the cheese and celery as she could wish to see it do.
I act on Mrs. Crupp's opinion, and give the order at the
pastry-cook's myself. walk along the Strand, afterwards, and
observe a hard mottle substance in the window of a ham and beef
shop, which resemble marble, but be label 'Mock Turtle', I
go in and buy a slab of it, which I have since see reason to
believe would have suffice for fifteen people. this preparation,
Mrs. Crupp, after some difficulty, consent to warm up; and it
shrink so much in a liquid state, that we find it what Steerforth
call 'rather a tight fit' for four.
these preparation happily complete, I buy a little dessert in
Covent Garden Market, and give a rather extensive order at a retail
wine-merchant's in that vicinity. when I come home in the
afternoon, and see the bottle draw up in a square on the pantry
floor, they look so numerous (though there be two missing,
which make Mrs. Crupp very uncomfortable), that I be absolutely
frightened at they.
one of Steerforth's friend be name Grainger, and the other
Markham. they be both very gay and lively fellow; Grainger,
something old than Steerforth; Markham, youthful-looking, and I
should say not more than twenty. I observe that the latter always
speak of himself indefinitely, as 'a man', and seldom or never in
the first person singular.
'a man might get on very well here, Mr. Copperfield,' say Markham
- mean himself.
'itbe not a bad situation,' say I, 'and the room be really
commodious.'
'I hope you have both bring appetite with you?' say Steerforth.
'upon my honour,' return Markham, 'town seem to sharpen a man's
appetite. a man be hungry all day long. a man be perpetually
eat.'
be a little embarrassed at first, and feel much too young to
preside, I make Steerforth take the head of the table when dinner
be announce, and seat myself opposite to he. everything be
very good; we do not spare the wine; and he exert himself so
brilliantly to make the thing pass off well, that there be no
pause in our festivity. I be not quite such good company during
dinner as I could have wish to be, for my chair be opposite the
door, and my attention be distract by observe that the handy
young man go out of the room very often, and that his shadow
always present itself, immediately afterwards, on the wall of the
entry, with a bottle at its mouth. the 'young gal' likewise
occasion I some uneasiness: not so much by neglect to wash
the plate, as by break they. for be of an inquisitive
disposition, and unable to confine herself (as her positive
instruction be) to the pantry, she be constantly peer in at
we, and constantly imagine herself detect; in which belief, she
several time retire upon the plate (with which she have carefully
pave the floor), and do a great deal of destruction.
these, however, be small drawback, and easily forget when the
cloth be clear, and the dessert put on the table; at which
period of the entertainment the handy young man be discover to
be speechless. give he private direction to seek the society
of Mrs. Crupp, and to remove the 'young gal' to the basement also,
I abandon myself to enjoyment.
I begin, by be singularly cheerful and light-hearted; all sort
of half-forget thing to talk about, come rush into my mind,
and make I hold forth in a most unwonted manner. I laugh
heartily at my own joke, and everybody else's; call Steerforth
to order for not pass the wine; make several engagement to go
to Oxford; announce that I mean to have a dinner-party exactly
like that, once a week, until further notice; and madly take so
much snuff out of Grainger's box, that I be oblige to go into the
pantry, and have a private fit of sneeze ten minute long.
I go on, by pass the wine fast and fast yet, and
continually start up with a corkscrew to open more wine, long
before any be need. I propose Steerforth's health. I say he
be my dear friend, the protector of my boyhood, and the
companion of my prime. I say I be delighted to propose his
health. I say I owe he more obligation than I could ever
repay, and hold he in a high admiration than I could ever
express. I finish by say, 'Iwill give you Steerforth! God
bless he! Hurrah!' we give he three time three, and another,
and a good one to finish with. I break my glass in go round the
table to shake hand with he, and I say (in two word)
'Steerforth - you'retheguidingstarofmyexistence.'
I go on, by find suddenly that somebody be in the middle of
a song. Markham be the singer, and he sing 'when the heart of a
man be depressed with care'. he say, when he have sing it, he
would give we 'woman!' I take objection to that, and I couldnot
allow it. I say it be not a respectful way of propose the
toast, and I would never permit that toast to be drunk in my house
otherwise than as 'the Ladies!' I be very high with he, mainly I
think because I see Steerforth and Grainger laugh at I - or at
he - or at both of we. he say a man be not to be dictate to.
I say a man be. he say a man be not to be insult, then. I
say he be right there - never under my roof, where the Lares be
sacred, and the law of hospitality paramount. he say it be no
derogation from a man's dignity to confess that I be a devilish
good fellow. I instantly propose his health.
somebody be smoke. we be all smoke. I be smoke, and
try to suppress a rise tendency to shudder. Steerforth have
make a speech about I, in the course of which I have be affect
almost to tear. I return thank, and hop the present company
would dine with I tomorrow, and the day after - each day at five
o'clock, that we might enjoy the pleasure of conversation and
society through a long evening. I feel call upon to propose an
individual. I would give they my aunt. Miss Betsey Trotwood, the
good of her sex!
somebody be lean out of my bedroom window, refresh his
forehead against the cool stone of the parapet, and feel the air
upon his face. it be myself. I be address myself as
'copperfield', and say, 'why do you try to smoke? you might
have know you couldnot do it.' now, somebody be unsteadily
contemplate his feature in the look-glass. that be I too.
I be very pale in the look-glass; my eye have a vacant
appearance; and my hair - only my hair, nothing else - look
drunk.
somebody say to I, 'let we go to the theatre, Copperfield!' there
be no bedroom before I, but again the jingling table cover with
glass; the lamp; Grainger on my right hand, Markham on my left,
and Steerforth opposite - all sit in a mist, and a long way
off. the theatre? to be sure. the very thing. come along! but
they must excuse I if I see everybody out first, and turn the
lamp off - in case of fire.
owe to some confusion in the dark, the door be go. I be
feel for it in the window-curtain, when Steerforth, laugh,
take I by the arm and lead I out. we go downstairs, one behind
another. near the bottom, somebody fall, and roll down.
somebody else say it be Copperfield. I be angry at that false
report, until, find myself on my back in the passage, I begin to
think there might be some foundation for it.
a very foggy night, with great ring round the lamp in the
street! there be an indistinct talk of its be wet. I
consider it frosty. Steerforth dust I under a lamp-post, and
put my hat into shape, which somebody produce from somewhere in a
most extraordinary manner, for I havenot have it on before.
Steerforth then say, 'you be all right, Copperfield, be you
not?' and I tell he, 'Neverberrer.'
a man, sit in a pigeon-hole-place, look out of the fog, and
take money from somebody, inquire if I be one of the gentleman
pay for, and appear rather doubtful (as I remember in the
glimpse I have of he) whether to take the money for I or not.
shortly afterwards, we be very high up in a very hot theatre,
look down into a large pit, that seem to I to smoke; the
people with whom it be cram be so indistinct. there be a
great stage, too, look very clean and smooth after the street;
and there be people upon it, talk about something or other,
but not at all intelligibly. there be an abundance of bright
light, and there be music, and there be lady down in the
box, and I donot know what more. the whole building look to I
as if it be learn to swim; it conduct itself in such an
unaccountable manner, when I try to steady it.
on somebody's motion, we resolve to go downstairs to the
dress-box, where the lady be. a gentleman lounge, full
dress, on a sofa, with an opera-glass in his hand, pass before
my view, and also my own figure at full length in a glass. then I
be be usher into one of these box, and find myself say
something as I sit down, and people about I cry 'silence!' to
somebody, and lady cast indignant glance at I, and - what!
yes! - Agnes, sit on the seat before I, in the same box, with
a lady and gentleman beside she, whom I donot know. I see she
face now, well than I do then, I dare say, with its indelible
look of regret and wonder turn upon I.
'Agnes!' I say, thickly, 'Lorblessmer! Agnes!'
'hush! pray!' she answer, I could not conceive why. 'you
disturb the company. look at the stage!'
I try, on her injunction, to fix it, and to hear something of
what be go on there, but quite in vain. I look at she again
by and by, and see her shrink into her corner, and put she gloved
hand to her forehead.
'Agnes!' I say. 'i'mafraidyou'renorwell.'
'yes, yes. do not mind I, Trotwood,' she return. 'listen! be
you go away soon?'
'Amigoarawaysoo?' I repeat.
'yes.'
I have a stupid intention of reply that I be go to wait, to
hand she downstair. I suppose I express it, somehow; for after
she have look at I attentively for a little while, she appear
to understand, and reply in a low tone:
'I know you will do as I ask you, if I tell you I be very earnest
in it. go away now, Trotwood, for my sake, and ask your friend to
take you home.'
she have so far improve I, for the time, that though I be angry
with she, I feel ashamed, and with a short 'goori!' (which I
intend for 'good night!') get up and go away. they follow,
and I step at once out of the box-door into my bedroom, where
only Steerforth be with I, help I to undress, and where I be
by turn tell he that Agnes be my sister, and adjure he to
bring the corkscrew, that I might open another bottle of wine.
how somebody, lie in my bed, lie say and do all this over
again, at cross purpose, in a feverish dream all night - the bed
a rock sea that be never still! how, as that somebody slowly
settle down into myself, do I begin to parch, and feel as if my
outer covering of skin be a hard board; my tongue the bottom of
an empty kettle, fur with long service, and burn up over a
slow fire; the palm of my hand, hot plate of metal which no ice
could cool!
but the agony of mind, the remorse, and shame I feel when I become
conscious next day! my horror of have commit a thousand
offence I have forget, and which nothing could ever expiate - my
recollection of that indelible look which Agnes have give I - the
torture impossibility of communicate with she, not know,
Beast that I be, how she come to be in London, or where she stay
- my disgust of the very sight of the room where the revel have be
hold - my rack head - the smell of smoke, the sight of glass,
the impossibility of go out, or even get up! oh, what a day
it be!
oh, what an evening, when I sit down by my fire to a basin of
mutton broth, dimple all over with fat, and think I be go
the way of my predecessor, and should succeed to his dismal story
as well as to his chamber, and have half a mind to rush express to
Dover and reveal all! what an evening, when Mrs. Crupp, come in
to take away the broth-basin, produce one kidney on a cheese-plate
as the entire remain of yesterday's feast, and I be really
inclined to fall upon her nankeen breast and say, in heartfelt
penitence, 'oh, Mrs. Crupp, Mrs. Crupp, never mind the break
meat! I be very miserable!' - only that I doubt, even at that
pass, if Mrs. Crupp be quite the sort of woman to confide in!
CHAPTER 25
good and bad angel
I be go out at my door on the morning after that deplorable day
of headache, sickness, and repentance, with an odd confusion in my
mind relative to the date of my dinner-party, as if a body of
Titans have take an enormous lever and push the day before
yesterday some month back, when I see a ticket-porter come
upstairs, with a letter in his hand. he be take his time about
his errand, then; but when he see I on the top of the staircase,
look at he over the banister, he swing into a trot, and come
up pant as if he have run himself into a state of exhaustion.
'T. Copperfield, Esquire,' say the ticket-porter, touch his hat
with his little cane.
I could scarcely lay claim to the name: I be so disturbed by the
conviction that the letter come from Agnes. however, I tell he I
be T. Copperfield, Esquire, and he believe it, and give I the
letter, which he say require an answer. I shut he out on the
landing to wait for the answer, and go into my chamber again, in
such a nervous state that I be fain to lay the letter down on my
breakfast table, and familiarize myself with the outside of it a
little, before I could resolve to break the seal.
I find, when I do open it, that it be a very kind note,
contain no reference to my condition at the theatre. all it
say be, 'my dear Trotwood. I be stay at the house of papa's
agent, Mr. Waterbrook, in Ely Place, Holborn. will you come and
see I today, at any time you like to appoint? ever your
affectionately, AGNES.'
it take I such a long time to write an answer at all to my
satisfaction, that I donot know what the ticket-porter can have
think, unless he think I be learn to write. I must have
write half-a-dozen answer at least. I begin one, 'how can I
ever hope, my dear Agnes, to efface from your remembrance the
disgusting impression' - there I donot like it, and then I tear it
up. I begin another, 'shakespeare have observe, my dear Agnes, how
strange it be that a man should put an enemy into his mouth' - that
remind I of Markham, and it get no far. I even try
poetry. I begin one note, in a six-syllable line, 'oh, do not
remember' - but that associate itself with the fifth of November,
and become an absurdity. after many attempt, I write, 'my dear
Agnes. your letter be like you, and what could I say of it that
would be high praise than that? I will come at four o'clock.
affectionately and sorrowfully, T.C.' with this missive (which I
be in twenty mind at once about recall, as soon as it be out
of my hand), the ticket-porter at last depart.
if the day be half as tremendous to any other professional
gentleman in doctor' Commons as it be to I, I sincerely believe
he make some expiation for his share in that rotten old
ecclesiastical cheese. although I leave the office at half past
three, and be prowl about the place of appointment within a few
minute afterwards, the appoint time be exceed by a full
quarter of an hour, accord to the clock of St. Andrew's,
Holborn, before I could muster up sufficient desperation to pull
the private bell-handle let into the left-hand door-post of Mr.
Waterbrook's house.
the professional business of Mr. Waterbrook's establishment be
do on the ground-floor, and the genteel business (of which there
be a good deal) in the upper part of the building. I be show
into a pretty but rather close drawing-room, and there sit Agnes,
net a purse.
she look so quiet and good, and remind I so strongly of my
airy fresh school day at Canterbury, and the sodden, smoky, stupid
wretch I have be the other night, that, nobody be by, I yield
to my self-reproach and shame, and - in short, make a fool of
myself. I cannot deny that I shed tear. to this hour I be
undecided whether it be upon the whole the wise thing I could
have do, or the most ridiculous.
'if it have be anyone but you, Agnes,' say I, turn away my
head, 'I should not have mind it half so much. but that it
should have be you who see I! I almost wish I have be dead,
first.'
she put her hand - its touch be like no other hand - upon my arm
for a moment; and I feel so befriended and comfort, that I could
not help move it to my lip, and gratefully kiss it.
'sit down,' say Agnes, cheerfully. 'donot be unhappy, Trotwood.
if you cannot confidently trust I, whom will you trust?'
'ah, Agnes!' I return. 'you be my good angel!'
she smile rather sadly, I think, and shake her head.
'yes, Agnes, my good Angel! always my good Angel!'
'if I be, indeed, Trotwood,' she return, 'there be one thing
that I should set my heart on very much.'
I look at she inquiringly; but already with a foreknowledge of
her meaning.
'on warn you,' say Agnes, with a steady glance, 'against your
bad Angel.'
'my dear Agnes,' I begin, 'if you mean Steerforth -'
'I do, Trotwood,' she return.
'then, Agnes, you wrong he very much. he my bad Angel, or
anyone's! he, anything but a guide, a support, and a friend to I!
my dear Agnes! now, be it not unjust, and unlike you, to judge he
from what you see of I the other night?'
'I do not judge he from what I see of you the other night,' she
quietly reply.
'from what, then?'
'from many thing - trifle in themselves, but they do not seem to
I to be so, when they be put together. I judge he, partly from
your account of he, Trotwood, and your character, and the
influence he have over you.'
there be always something in her modest voice that seem to touch
a chord within I, answer to that sound alone. it be always
earnest; but when it be very earnest, as it be now, there be a
thrill in it that quite subdue I. I sit look at she as she
cast her eye down on her work; I sit seem still to listen to
she; and Steerforth, in spite of all my attachment to he, darken
in that tone.
'it be very bold in I,' say Agnes, look up again, 'who have
live in such seclusion, and can know so little of the world, to
give you my advice so confidently, or even to have this strong
opinion. but I know in what it be engender, Trotwood, - in how
true a remembrance of our have grow up together, and in how true
an interest in all relate to you. it be that which make I
bold. I be certain that what I say be right. I be quite sure it
be. I feel as if it be someone else speak to you, and not I,
when I caution you that you have make a dangerous friend.'
again I look at she, again I listen to she after she be
silent, and again his image, though it be still fix in my heart,
darken.
'I be not so unreasonable as to expect,' say Agnes, resume her
usual tone, after a little while, 'that you will, or that you can,
at once, change any sentiment that have become a conviction to you;
least of all a sentiment that be root in your trusting
disposition. you ought not hastily to do that. I only ask you,
Trotwood, if you ever think of I - I mean,' with a quiet smile,
for I be go to interrupt she, and she know why, 'as often as
you think of I - to think of what I have say. do you forgive I
for all this?'
'I will forgive you, Agnes,' I reply, 'when you come to do
Steerforth justice, and to like he as well as I do.'
'not until then?' say Agnes.
I see a pass shadow on her face when I make this mention of he,
but she return my smile, and we be again as unreserve in our
mutual confidence as of old.
'and when, Agnes,' say I, 'will you forgive I the other night?'
'when I recall it,' say Agnes.
she would have dismiss the subject so, but I be too full of it
to allow that, and insist on tell she how it happen that I
have disgrace myself, and what chain of accidental circumstance
have have the theatre for its final link. it be a great relief to
I to do this, and to enlarge on the obligation that I owe to
Steerforth for his care of I when I be unable to take care of
myself.
'you must not forget,' say Agnes, calmly change the conversation
as soon as I have conclude, 'that you be always to tell I, not
only when you fall into trouble, but when you fall in love. who
have succeed to Miss Larkins, Trotwood?'
'no one, Agnes.'
'someone, Trotwood,' say Agnes, laugh, and hold up her
finger.
'no, Agnes, upon my word! there be a lady, certainly, at Mrs.
Steerforth's house, who be very clever, and whom I like to talk to
- Miss Dartle - but I donot adore she.'
Agnes laugh again at her own penetration, and tell I that if I
be faithful to she in my confidence she think she should keep
a little register of my violent attachment, with the date,
duration, and termination of each, like the table of the reign of
the king and queen, in the history of England. then she ask I
if I have see Uriah.
'Uriah Heep?' say I. 'no. be he in London?'
'he come to the office downstairs, every day,' return Agnes.
'he be in London a week before I. I be afraid on disagreeable
business, Trotwood.'
'on some business that make you uneasy, Agnes, I see,' say I.
'what can that be?'
Agnes lay aside her work, and reply, fold her hand upon one
another, and look pensively at I out of those beautiful soft
eye of her:
'I believe he be go to enter into partnership with papa.'
'what? Uriah? that mean, fawn fellow, worm himself into such
promotion!' I cry, indignantly. 'have you make no remonstrance
about it, Agnes? consider what a connexion it be likely to be.
you must speak out. you must not allow your father to take such a
mad step. you must prevent it, Agnes, while therebe time.'
still look at I, Agnes shake her head while I be speak,
with a faint smile at my warmth: and then reply:
'you remember our last conversation about papa? it be not long
after that - not more than two or three day - when he give I the
first intimation of what I tell you. it be sad to see he
struggle between his desire to represent it to I as a matter of
choice on his part, and his inability to conceal that it be force
upon he. I feel very sorry.'
'force upon he, Agnes! who force it upon he?'
'Uriah,' she reply, after a moment's hesitation, 'have make
himself indispensable to papa. he be subtle and watchful. he have
master papa's weakness, foster they, and take advantage of
they, until - to say all that I mean in a word, Trotwood, - until
papa be afraid of he.'
there be more that she might have say; more that she know, or
that she suspect; I clearly see. I could not give her pain by
ask what it be, for I know that she withhold it from I, to
spare her father. it have long be go on to this, I be
sensible: yes, I could not but feel, on the least reflection, that
it have be go on to this for a long time. I remain silent.
'his ascendancy over papa,' say Agnes, 'be very great. he
profess humility and gratitude - with truth, perhaps: I hope so
- but his position be really one of power, and I fear he make a
hard use of his power.'
I say he be a hound, which, at the moment, be a great
satisfaction to I.
'at the time I speak of, as the time when papa speak to I,'
pursue Agnes, 'he have tell papa that he be go away; that he
be very sorry, and unwilling to leave, but that he have well
prospect. Papa be very much depressed then, and more bow down
by care than ever you or I have see he; but he seem relieve by
this expedient of the partnership, though at the same time he
seem hurt by it and ashamed of it.'
'and how do you receive it, Agnes?'
'I do, Trotwood,' she reply, 'what I hope be right. feel
sure that it be necessary for papa's peace that the sacrifice
should be make, I entreat he to make it. I say it would
lighten the load of his life - I hope it will! - and that it would
give I increase opportunity of be his companion. oh,
Trotwood!' cry Agnes, put her hand before her face, as she
tear start on it, 'I almost feel as if I have be papa's enemy,
instead of his love child. for I know how he have alter, in his
devotion to I. I know how he have narrow the circle of his
sympathy and duty, in the concentration of his whole mind upon
I. I know what a multitude of thing he have shut out for my sake,
and how his anxious thought of I have shadow his life, and
weaken his strength and energy, by turn they always upon one
idea. if I could ever set this right! if I could ever work out
his restoration, as I have so innocently be the cause of his
decline!'
I have never before see Agnes cry. I have see tear in her eye
when I have bring new honours home from school, and I have see
they there when we last speak about her father, and I have see she
turn her gentle head aside when we take leave of one another; but
I have never see she grieve like this. it make I so sorry that I
could only say, in a foolish, helpless manner, 'pray, Agnes, donot!
donot, my dear sister!'
but Agnes be too superior to I in character and purpose, as I
know well now, whatever I might know or not know then, to be long
in need of my entreaty. the beautiful, calm manner, which make
she so different in my remembrance from everybody else, come back
again, as if a cloud have pass from a serene sky.
'we be not likely to remain alone much long,' say Agnes, 'and
while I have an opportunity, let I earnestly entreat you,
Trotwood, to be friendly to Uriah. donot repel he. donot resent
(as I think you have a general disposition to do) what may be
uncongenial to you in he. he may not deserve it, for we know no
certain ill of he. in any case, think first of papa and I!'
Agnes have no time to say more, for the room door open, and Mrs.
Waterbrook, who be a large lady - or who wear a large dress: I
donot exactly know which, for I donot know which be dress and
which be lady - come sailing in. I have a dim recollection of
have see she at the theatre, as if I have see she in a pale
magic lantern; but she appear to remember I perfectly, and still
to suspect I of be in a state of intoxication.
finding by degree, however, that I be sober, and (I hope) that I
be a modest young gentleman, Mrs. Waterbrook soften towards I
considerably, and inquire, firstly, if I go much into the park,
and secondly, if I go much into society. on my replying to both
these question in the negative, it occur to I that I fall
again in her good opinion; but she conceal the fact gracefully,
and invite I to dinner next day. I accept the invitation, and
take my leave, make a call on Uriah in the office as I go out,
and leave a card for he in his absence.
when I go to dinner next day, and on the street door be
open, plunge into a vapour-bath of haunch of mutton, I divine
that I be not the only guest, for I immediately identify the
ticket-porter in disguise, assist the family servant, and
wait at the foot of the stair to carry up my name. he look,
to the good of his ability, when he ask I for it confidentially,
as if he have never see I before; but well do I know he, and
well do he know I. Conscience make coward of we both.
I find Mr. Waterbrook to be a middle-aged gentleman, with a short
throat, and a good deal of shirt-collar, who only want a black
nose to be the portrait of a pug-dog. he tell I he be happy to
have the honour of make my acquaintance; and when I have pay my
homage to Mrs. Waterbrook, present I, with much ceremony, to a
very awful lady in a black velvet dress, and a great black velvet
hat, whom I remember as look like a near relation of Hamlet's -
say his aunt.
Mrs. Henry Spiker be this lady's name; and her husband be there
too: so cold a man, that his head, instead of be grey, seem to
be sprinkle with hoar-frost. immense deference be show to the
Henry Spikers, male and female; which Agnes tell I be on account
of Mr. Henry Spiker be solicitor to something or to Somebody, I
forget what or which, remotely connect with the Treasury.
I find Uriah Heep among the company, in a suit of black, and in
deep humility. he tell I, when I shake hand with he, that he
be proud to be notice by I, and that he really feel oblige to
I for my condescension. I could have wish he have be less
oblige to I, for he hover about I in his gratitude all the
rest of the evening; and whenever I say a word to Agnes, be sure,
with his shadowless eye and cadaverous face, to be look gauntly
down upon we from behind.
there be other guest - all iced for the occasion, as it strike
I, like the wine. but there be one who attract my attention
before he come in, on account of my hearing he announce as Mr.
Traddles! my mind fly back to Salem House; and could it be Tommy,
I think, who use to draw the skeleton!
I look for Mr. Traddles with unusual interest. he be a sober,
steady-look young man of retire manner, with a comic head of
hair, and eye that be rather wide open; and he get into an
obscure corner so soon, that I have some difficulty in make he
out. at length I have a good view of he, and either my vision
deceive I, or it be the old unfortunate Tommy.
I make my way to Mr. Waterbrook, and say, that I believe I have
the pleasure of see an old schoolfellow there.
'indeed!' say Mr. Waterbrook, surprised. 'you be too young to
have be at school with Mr. Henry Spiker?'
'oh, I donot mean he!' I return. 'I mean the gentleman name
traddle.'
'oh! aye, aye! indeed!' say my host, with much diminished
interest. 'possibly.'
'if itbe really the same person,' say I, glance towards he, 'it
be at a place call Salem House where we be together, and he
be an excellent fellow.'
'oh yes. traddle be a good fellow,' return my host nod his
head with an air of toleration. 'traddle be quite a good fellow.'
'itbe a curious coincidence,' say I.
'it be really,' return my host, 'quite a coincidence, that
traddle should be here at all: as traddle be only invite this
morning, when the place at table, intend to be occupy by Mrs.
Henry Spiker's brother, become vacant, in consequence of his
indisposition. a very gentlemanly man, Mrs. Henry Spiker's
brother, Mr. Copperfield.'
I murmur an assent, which be full of feeling, consider that
I know nothing at all about he; and I inquire what Mr. Traddles
be by profession.
'traddle,' return Mr. Waterbrook, 'be a young man read for
the bar. yes. he be quite a good fellow - nobody's enemy but his
own.'
'be he his own enemy?' say I, sorry to hear this.
'well,' return Mr. Waterbrook, purse up his mouth, and play
with his watch-chain, in a comfortable, prosperous sort of way. 'I
should say he be one of those man who stand in their own light.
yes, I should say he would never, for example, be worth five
hundred pound. traddle be recommend to I by a professional
friend. oh yes. yes. he have a kind of talent for draw brief,
and state a case in writing, plainly. I be able to throw
something in Traddles's way, in the course of the year; something
- for he - considerable. oh yes. yes.'
I be much impressed by the extremely comfortable and satisfied
manner in which Mr. Waterbrook deliver himself of this little
word 'yes', every now and then. there be wonderful expression in
it. it completely convey the idea of a man who have be bear,
not to say with a silver spoon, but with a scaling-ladder, and have
go on mount all the height of life one after another, until
now he look, from the top of the fortification, with the eye of
a philosopher and a patron, on the people down in the trench.
my reflection on this theme be still in progress when dinner be
announce. Mr. Waterbrook go down with Hamlet's aunt. Mr. Henry
Spiker take Mrs. Waterbrook. Agnes, whom I should have like to
take myself, be give to a simpering fellow with weak leg.
Uriah, Traddles, and I, as the junior part of the company, go
down last, how we could. I be not so vex at lose Agnes as I
might have be, since it give I an opportunity of make myself
know to traddle on the stair, who greet I with great fervour;
while Uriah writhe with such obtrusive satisfaction and
self-abasement, that I could gladly have pitch he over the
banister.
traddle and I be separate at table, be billet in two
remote corner: he in the glare of a red velvet lady; I, in the
gloom of Hamlet's aunt. the dinner be very long, and the
conversation be about the Aristocracy - and Blood. Mrs.
Waterbrook repeatedly tell we, that if she have a weakness, it be
Blood.
it occur to I several time that we should have get on well,
if we have not be quite so genteel. we be so exceedingly
genteel, that our scope be very limited. a Mr. and Mrs. Gulpidge
be of the party, who have something to do at second-hand (at
least, Mr. Gulpidge have) with the law business of the Bank; and
what with the Bank, and what with the Treasury, we be as
exclusive as the Court Circular. to mend the matter, Hamlet's aunt
have the family fail of indulge in soliloquy, and hold forth in
a desultory manner, by herself, on every topic that be introduce.
these be few enough, to be sure; but as we always fall back upon
Blood, she have as wide a field for abstract speculation as she
nephew himself.
we might have be a party of ogre, the conversation assume such
a sanguine complexion.
'I confess I be of Mrs. Waterbrook's opinion,' say Mr. Waterbrook,
with his wine-glass at his eye. 'other thing be all very well in
their way, but give I Blood!'
'oh! there be nothing,' observe Hamlet's aunt, 'so satisfactory
to one! there be nothing that be so much one's beau-ideal of - of
all that sort of thing, speak generally. there be some low
mind (not many, I be happy to believe, but there be some) that
would prefer to do what I should call bow down before idol.
positively Idols! before service, intellect, and so on. but these
be intangible point. blood be not so. we see blood in a nose,
and we know it. we meet with it in a chin, and we say, "there it
be! thatbe blood!" it be an actual matter of fact. we point it
out. it admit of no doubt.'
the simper fellow with the weak leg, who have take Agnes down,
state the question more decisively yet, I think.
'oh, you know, deuce take it,' say this gentleman, look round
the board with an imbecile smile, 'we cannot forego Blood, you know.
we must have blood, you know. some young fellow, you know, may be
a little behind their station, perhaps, in point of education and
behaviour, and may go a little wrong, you know, and get themselves
and other people into a variety of fix - and all that - but deuce
take it, itbe delightful to reflect that theyhave get blood in them!
myself, Iwould rather at any time be knock down by a man who have get
blood in he, than Iwould be pick up by a man who havenot!'
this sentiment, as compress the general question into a
nutshell, give the utmost satisfaction, and bring the gentleman
into great notice until the lady retire. after that, I observe
that Mr. Gulpidge and Mr. Henry Spiker, who have hitherto be very
distant, enter into a defensive alliance against we, the common
enemy, and exchange a mysterious dialogue across the table for our
defeat and overthrow.
'that affair of the first bond for four thousand five hundred
pound have not take the course that be expect, Spiker,' say
Mr. Gulpidge.
'do you mean the D. of A.'s?' say Mr. Spiker.
'the C. of B.'s!' say Mr. Gulpidge.
Mr. Spiker raise his eyebrow, and look much concerned.
'when the question be refer to Lord - I neednot name he,' say
Mr. Gulpidge, check himself -
'I understand,' say Mr. Spiker, 'n.'
Mr. Gulpidge darkly nod - 'be refer to he, his answer be,
"money, or no release."'
'Lord bless my soul!' cry Mr. Spiker.
"'money, or no release,"' repeat Mr. Gulpidge, firmly. 'the next
in reversion - you understand I?'
'k.,' say Mr. Spiker, with an ominous look.
'- K. then positively refuse to sign. he be attend at
Newmarket for that purpose, and he point-blank refuse to do it.'
Mr. Spiker be so interested, that he become quite stony.
'so the matter rest at this hour,' say Mr. Gulpidge, throw
himself back in his chair. 'our friend Waterbrook will excuse I
if I forbear to explain myself generally, on account of the
magnitude of the interest involve.'
Mr. Waterbrook be only too happy, as it appear to I, to have
such interest, and such name, even hint at, across his table.
he assume an expression of gloomy intelligence (though I be
persuade he know no more about the discussion than I do), and
highly approve of the discretion that have be observe. Mr.
Spiker, after the receipt of such a confidence, naturally desire
to favour his friend with a confidence of his own; therefore the
forego dialogue be succeed by another, in which it be Mr.
Gulpidge's turn to be surprised, and that by another in which the
surprise come round to Mr. Spiker's turn again, and so on, turn and
turn about. all this time we, the outsider, remain oppress by
the tremendous interest involve in the conversation; and our host
regard we with pride, as the victim of a salutary awe and
astonishment.
I be very glad indeed to get upstairs to Agnes, and to talk with
she in a corner, and to introduce traddle to she, who be shy, but
agreeable, and the same good-natured creature still. as he be
oblige to leave early, on account of go away next morning for
a month, I have not nearly so much conversation with he as I could
have wish; but we exchange address, and promise ourselves the
pleasure of another meeting when he should come back to town. he
be greatly interested to hear that I know Steerforth, and speak of
he with such warmth that I make he tell Agnes what he think of
he. but Agnes only look at I the while, and very slightly
shake her head when only I observe she.
as she be not among people with whom I believe she could be very
much at home, I be almost glad to hear that she be go away
within a few day, though I be sorry at the prospect of part
from she again so soon. this cause I to remain until all the
company be go. converse with she, and hear her sing, be
such a delightful reminder to I of my happy life in the grave old
house she have make so beautiful, that I could have remain there
half the night; but, have no excuse for stay any long, when
the light of Mr. Waterbrook's society be all snuff out, I take
my leave very much against my inclination. I feel then, more than
ever, that she be my well Angel; and if I think of her sweet
face and placid smile, as though they have shine on I from some
removed being, like an Angel, I hope I think no harm.
I have say that the company be all go; but I ought to have
except Uriah, whom I donot include in that denomination, and who
have never cease to hover near we. he be close behind I when I
go downstairs. he be close beside I, when I walk away from
the house, slowly fit his long skeleton finger into the still
long finger of a great Guy Fawkes pair of glove.
it be in no disposition for Uriah's company, but in remembrance of
the entreaty Agnes have make to I, that I ask he if he would
come home to my room, and have some coffee.
'oh, really, Master Copperfield,' he rejoin - 'I beg your pardon,
Mister Copperfield, but the other come so natural, I donot like
that you should put a constraint upon yourself to ask a numble
person like I to your ouse.'
'there be no constraint in the case,' say I. 'will you come?'
'I should like to, very much,' reply Uriah, with a writhe.
'well, then, come along!' say I.
I could not help be rather short with he, but he appear not
to mind it. we go the near way, without converse much upon
the road; and he be so humble in respect of those scarecrow
glove, that he be still put they on, and seem to have make
no advance in that labour, when we get to my place.
I lead he up the dark stair, to prevent his knock his head
against anything, and really his damp cold hand feel so like a frog
in mine, that I be tempt to drop it and run away. Agnes and
hospitality prevail, however, and I conduct he to my fireside.
when I light my candle, he fall into meek transport with the
room that be reveal to he; and when I heat the coffee in an
unassuming block-tin vessel in which Mrs. Crupp delight to
prepare it (chiefly, I believe, because it be not intend for the
purpose, be a shaving-pot, and because there be a patent
invention of great price mouldering away in the pantry), he
profess so much emotion, that I could joyfully have scald he.
'oh, really, Master Copperfield, - I mean Mister Copperfield,' say
Uriah, 'to see you wait upon I be what I never could have
expect! but, one way and another, so many thing happen to I
which I never could have expect, I be sure, in my umble station,
that it seem to rain blessing on my ed. you have hear
something, I des-say, of a change in my expectation, Master
Copperfield, - I should say, Mister Copperfield?'
as he sit on my sofa, with his long knee draw up under his
coffee-cup, his hat and glove upon the ground close to he, his
spoon go softly round and round, his shadowless red eye, which
look as if they have scorch their lash off, turn towards I
without look at I, the disagreeable dint I have formerly
describe in his nostril come and go with his breath, and a
snaky undulation pervade his frame from his chin to his boot, I
decide in my own mind that I dislike he intensely. it make I
very uncomfortable to have he for a guest, for I be young then,
and unused to disguise what I so strongly feel.
'you have hear something, I des-say, of a change in my
expectation, Master Copperfield, - I should say, Mister
Copperfield?' observe Uriah.
'yes,' say I, 'something.'
'ah! I think Miss Agnes would know of it!' he quietly return.
'Ibe glad to find Miss Agnes know of it. oh, thank you, Master -
Mister Copperfield!'
I could have throw my bootjack at he (it lie ready on the rug),
for have entrap I into the disclosure of anything concern
Agnes, however immaterial. but I only drink my coffee.
'what a prophet you have show yourself, Mister Copperfield!'
pursue Uriah. 'dear I, what a prophet you have prove yourself
to be! donot you remember say to I once, that perhaps I should
be a partner in Mr. Wickfield's business, and perhaps it might be
Wickfield and Heep? you may not recollect it; but when a person be
umble, Master Copperfield, a person treasure such thing up!'
'I recollect talk about it,' say I, 'though I certainly do not
think it very likely then.'
'oh! who would have think it likely, Mister Copperfield!'
return Uriah, enthusiastically. 'I be sure I donot myself. I
recollect say with my own lip that I be much too umble. so I
consider myself really and truly.'
he sit, with that carve grin on his face, look at the fire, as
I look at he.
'but the umblest person, Master Copperfield,' he presently
resume, 'may be the instrument of good. I be glad to think I
have be the instrument of good to Mr. Wickfield, and that I may
be more so. oh what a worthy man he be, Mister Copperfield, but
how imprudent he have be!'
'I be sorry to hear it,' say I. I could not help add, rather
pointedly, 'on all account.'
'decidedly so, Mister Copperfield,' reply Uriah. 'on all
account. Miss Agnes's above all! you donot remember your own
eloquent expression, Master Copperfield; but I remember how you
say one day that everybody must admire she, and how I thank you
for it! you have forget that, I have no doubt, Master
Copperfield?'
'no,' say I, drily.
'oh how glad I be you have not!' exclaim Uriah. 'to think that
you should be the first to kindle the spark of ambition in my
umble breast, and that youhave not forget it! oh! - would you
excuse I ask for a cup more coffee?'
something in the emphasis he lay upon the kindling of those
spark, and something in the glance he direct at I as he say
it, have make I start as if I have see he illuminate by a blaze
of light. recall by his request, prefer in quite another tone
of voice, I do the honour of the shaving-pot; but I do they with
an unsteadiness of hand, a sudden sense of be no match for he,
and a perplexed suspicious anxiety as to what he might be go to
say next, which I feel could not escape his observation.
he say nothing at all. he stir his coffee round and round, he
sip it, he feel his chin softly with his grisly hand, he look
at the fire, he look about the room, he gasp rather than smile
at I, he writhe and undulate about, in his deferential
servility, he stir and sip again, but he leave the renewal of
the conversation to I.
'so, Mr. Wickfield,' say I, at last, 'who be worth five hundred of
you - or I'; for my life, I think, I could not have help
divide that part of the sentence with an awkward jerk; 'have be
imprudent, have he, Mr. Heep?'
'oh, very imprudent indeed, Master Copperfield,' return Uriah,
sigh modestly. 'oh, very much so! but I wish youwould call I
Uriah, if you please. itbe like old time.'
'well! Uriah,' say I, bolt it out with some difficulty.
'thank you,' he return, with fervour. 'thank you, Master
Copperfield! itbe like the blowing of old breeze or the ringing
of old bellse to hear you say Uriah. I beg your pardon. be I
make any observation?'
'about Mr. Wickfield,' I suggest.
'oh! yes, truly,' say Uriah. 'ah! great imprudence, Master
Copperfield. itbe a topic that I wouldnot touch upon, to any soul
but you. even to you I can only touch upon it, and no more. if
anyone else have be in my place during the last few year, by this
time he would have have Mr. Wickfield (oh, what a worthy man he be,
Master Copperfield, too!) under his thumb. Un--der--his thumb,'
say Uriah, very slowly, as he stretch out his cruel-look hand
above my table, and press his own thumb upon it, until it shake,
and shake the room.
if I have be oblige to look at he with he splay foot on Mr.
Wickfield's head, I think I could scarcely have hat he more.
'oh, dear, yes, Master Copperfield,' he proceed, in a soft voice,
most remarkably contrast with the action of his thumb, which do
not diminish its hard pressure in the least degree, 'therebe no
doubt of it. there would have be loss, disgrace, I donot know
what at all. Mr. Wickfield know it. I be the umble instrument of
umbly serve he, and he put I on an eminence I hardly could
have hop to reach. how thankful should I be!' with his face
turn towards I, as he finish, but without look at I, he
take his crooked thumb off the spot where he have plant it, and
slowly and thoughtfully scrap his lank jaw with it, as if he be
shave himself.
I recollect well how indignantly my heart beat, as I see his crafty
face, with the appropriately red light of the fire upon it,
prepare for something else.
'Master Copperfield,' he begin - 'but be I keep you up?'
'you be not keep I up. I generally go to bed late.'
'thank you, Master Copperfield! I have rise from my umble station
since first you use to address I, it be true; but I be umble
still. I hope I never shall be otherwise than umble. you will not
think the bad of my umbleness, if I make a little confidence to
you, Master Copperfield? will you?'
'oh no,' say I, with an effort.
'thank you!' he take out his pocket-handkerchief, and begin wipe
the palm of his hand. 'Miss Agnes, Master Copperfield -'
'well, Uriah?'
'oh, how pleasant to be call Uriah, spontaneously!' he cry; and
give himself a jerk, like a convulsive fish. 'you think she
look very beautiful tonight, Master Copperfield?'
'I think she look as she always do: superior, in all
respect, to everyone around she,' I return.
'oh, thank you! itbe so true!' he cry. 'oh, thank you very much
for that!'
'not at all,' I say, loftily. 'there be no reason why you should
thank I.'
'why that, Master Copperfield,' say Uriah, 'be, in fact, the
confidence that I be go to take the liberty of repose. umble
as I be,' he wipe his hand hard, and look at they and at the
fire by turn, 'umble as my mother be, and lowly as our poor but
honest roof have ever be, the image of Miss Agnes (I donot mind
trust you with my secret, Master Copperfield, for I have always
overflow towards you since the first moment I have the pleasure of
behold you in a pony-shay) have be in my breast for year. oh,
Master Copperfield, with what a pure affection do I love the ground
my Agnes walk on!'
I believe I have a delirious idea of seize the red-hot poker out
of the fire, and run he through with it. it go from I with
a shock, like a ball fire from a rifle: but the image of Agnes,
outrage by so much as a thought of this red-headed animal's,
remain in my mind when I look at he, sit all awry as if
his mean soul grip his body, and make I giddy. he seem to
swell and grow before my eye; the room seem full of the echo
of his voice; and the strange feeling (to which, perhaps, no one be
quite a stranger) that all this have occur before, at some
indefinite time, and that I know what he be go to say next,
take possession of I.
a timely observation of the sense of power that there be in his
face, do more to bring back to my remembrance the entreaty of
Agnes, in its full force, than any effort I could have make. I
ask he, with a well appearance of composure than I could have
think possible a minute before, whether he have make his feeling
know to Agnes.
'oh no, Master Copperfield!' he return; 'oh dear, no! not to
anyone but you. you see I be only just emerge from my lowly
station. I rest a good deal of hope on she observe how useful I
be to her father (for I trust to be very useful to he indeed,
Master Copperfield), and how I smooth the way for he, and keep he
straight. shebe so much attach to her father, Master Copperfield
(oh, what a lovely thing it be in a daughter!), that I think she
may come, on his account, to be kind to I.'
I fathom the depth of the rascal's whole scheme, and understand
why he lay it bare.
'if youwill have the goodness to keep my secret, Master
Copperfield,' he pursue, 'and not, in general, to go against I,
I shall take it as a particular favour. you wouldnot wish to make
unpleasantness. I know what a friendly heart youhave get; but
have only know I on my umble footing (on my umblest I should
say, for I be very umble still), you might, unbeknown, go against
I rather, with my Agnes. I call her mine, you see, Master
Copperfield. therebe a song that say, "Iwould crown resign, to call
her mine!" I hope to do it, one of these day.'
Dear Agnes! so much too loving and too good for anyone that I
could think of, be it possible that she be reserve to be the
wife of such a wretch as this!
'therebe no hurry at present, you know, Master Copperfield,' Uriah
proceed, in his slimy way, as I sit gaze at he, with this
thought in my mind. 'my Agnes be very young still; and mother and
I will have to work our way upwards, and make a good many new
arrangement, before it would be quite convenient. so I shall have
time gradually to make she familiar with my hope, as opportunity
offer. oh, Ibe so much oblige to you for this confidence! oh,
itbe such a relief, you cannot think, to know that you understand
our situation, and be certain (as you wouldnot wish to make
unpleasantness in the family) not to go against I!'
he take the hand which I dare not withhold, and have give it a
damp squeeze, refer to his pale-face watch.
'dear I!' he say, 'itbe past one. the moment slip away so, in
the confidence of old time, Master Copperfield, that itbe almost
half past one!'
I answer that I have think it be later. not that I have really
think so, but because my conversational power be effectually
scatter.
'dear I!' he say, consider. 'the ouse that I be stop at
- a sort of a private hotel and boarding ouse, Master Copperfield,
near the New River ed - will have go to bed these two hour.'
'I be sorry,' I return, 'that there be only one bed here, and
that I -'
'oh, donot think of mention bed, Master Copperfield!' he
rejoin ecstatically, draw up one leg. 'but would you have any
objection to my lay down before the fire?'
'if it come to that,' I say, 'pray take my bed, and Iwill lie down
before the fire.'
his repudiation of this offer be almost shrill enough, in the
excess of its surprise and humility, to have penetrate to the ear
of Mrs. Crupp, then sleep, I suppose, in a distant chamber,
situate at about the level of low-water mark, soothe in her
slumber by the ticking of an incorrigible clock, to which she
always refer I when we have any little difference on the score
of punctuality, and which be never less than three-quarter of an
hour too slow, and have always be put right in the morning by the
good authority. as no argument I could urge, in my bewildered
condition, have the least effect upon his modesty in induce he to
accept my bedroom, I be oblige to make the good arrangement I
could, for his repose before the fire. the mattress of the sofa
(which be a great deal too short for his lank figure), the sofa
pillow, a blanket, the table-cover, a clean breakfast-cloth, and
a great-coat, make he a bed and covering, for which he be more
than thankful. have lend he a night-cap, which he put on at
once, and in which he make such an awful figure, that I have never
wear one since, I leave he to his rest.
I never shall forget that night. I never shall forget how I turn
and tumble; how I weary myself with think about Agnes and
this creature; how I consider what could I do, and what ought I
to do; how I could come to no other conclusion than that the good
course for her peace be to do nothing, and to keep to myself what
I have hear. if I go to sleep for a few moment, the image of
Agnes with her tender eye, and of her father look fondly on
she, as I have so often see he look, arise before I with
appeal face, and fill I with vague terror. when I awake,
the recollection that Uriah be lie in the next room, sit heavy
on I like a wake nightmare; and oppress I with a leaden
dread, as if I have have some mean quality of devil for a lodger.
the poker get into my doze thought besides, and wouldnot come
out. I think, between sleep and wake, that it be still red
hot, and I have snatch it out of the fire, and run he through the
body. I be so haunted at last by the idea, though I know there
be nothing in it, that I steal into the next room to look at he.
there I see he, lie on his back, with his leg extend to I
donot know where, gurgling take place in his throat, stoppage
in his nose, and his mouth open like a post-office. he be so much
bad in reality than in my distempered fancy, that afterwards I
be attract to he in very repulsion, and could not help
wander in and out every half-hour or so, and take another look
at he. still, the long, long night seem heavy and hopeless as
ever, and no promise of day be in the murky sky.
when I see he go downstairs early in the morning (for, thank
Heaven! he would not stay to breakfast), it appear to I as if
the night be go away in his person. when I go out to the
Commons, I charge Mrs. Crupp with particular direction to leave
the window open, that my sitting-room might be air, and purge
of his presence.
CHAPTER 26
I fall into CAPTIVITY
I see no more of Uriah Heep, until the day when Agnes leave town.
I be at the coach office to take leave of she and see she go; and
there be he, return to Canterbury by the same conveyance. it
be some small satisfaction to I to observe his spare,
short-waiste, high-shoulder, mulberry-colour great-coat
perch up, in company with an umbrella like a small tent, on the
edge of the back seat on the roof, while Agnes be, of course,
inside; but what I undergo in my effort to be friendly with he,
while Agnes look on, perhaps deserve that little recompense. at
the coach window, as at the dinner-party, he hover about we
without a moment's intermission, like a great vulture: gorge
himself on every syllable that I say to Agnes, or Agnes say to
I.
in the state of trouble into which his disclosure by my fire have
throw I, I have think very much of the word Agnes have use in
reference to the partnership. 'I do what I hope be right.
feel sure that it be necessary for papa's peace that the
sacrifice should be make, I entreat he to make it.' a miserable
foreboding that she would yield to, and sustain herself by, the
same feeling in reference to any sacrifice for his sake, have
oppress I ever since. I know how she love he. I know what
the devotion of her nature be. I know from her own lip that she
regard herself as the innocent cause of his error, and as owe
he a great debt she ardently desire to pay. I have no consolation
in see how different she be from this detestable Rufus with the
mulberry-colour great-coat, for I feel that in the very
difference between they, in the self-denial of her pure soul and
the sordid baseness of his, the great danger lay. all this,
doubtless, he know thoroughly, and have, in his cunning, consider
well.
yet I be so certain that the prospect of such a sacrifice afar
off, must destroy the happiness of Agnes; and I be so sure, from
her manner, of its be unseen by she then, and have cast no
shadow on she yet; that I could as soon have injure she, as give
she any warning of what impend. thus it be that we part
without explanation: she wave her hand and smile farewell from
the coach window; her evil genius writhe on the roof, as if he
have she in his clutch and triumph.
I could not get over this farewell glimpse of they for a long time.
when Agnes write to tell I of her safe arrival, I be as miserable
as when I see she go away. whenever I fall into a thoughtful
state, this subject be sure to present itself, and all my
uneasiness be sure to be redouble. hardly a night pass without
my dreaming of it. it become a part of my life, and as inseparable
from my life as my own head.
I have ample leisure to refine upon my uneasiness: for Steerforth
be at Oxford, as he write to I, and when I be not at the
Commons, I be very much alone. I believe I have at this time some
lurk distrust of Steerforth. I write to he most affectionately
in reply to his, but I think I be glad, upon the whole, that he
could not come to London just then. I suspect the truth to be,
that the influence of Agnes be upon I, undisturbe by the sight
of he; and that it be the more powerful with I, because she have
so large a share in my thought and interest.
in the meantime, day and week slip away. I be article to
Spenlow and Jorkins. I have ninety pound a year (exclusive of my
house-rent and sundry collateral matter) from my aunt. my room
be engage for twelve month certain: and though I still find
they dreary of an evening, and the evening long, I could settle
down into a state of equable low spirit, and resign myself to
coffee; which I seem, on look back, to have take by the gallon
at about this period of my existence. at about this time, too, I
make three discovery: first, that Mrs. Crupp be a martyr to a
curious disorder call 'the spazzum', which be generally
accompany with inflammation of the nose, and require to be
constantly treat with peppermint; secondly, that something
peculiar in the temperature of my pantry, make the brandy-bottle
burst; thirdly, that I be alone in the world, and much give to
record that circumstance in fragment of english versification.
on the day when I be article, no festivity take place, beyond my
have sandwich and sherry into the office for the clerk, and
go alone to the theatre at night. I go to see the Stranger,
as a doctor' Commons sort of play, and be so dreadfully cut up,
that I hardly know myself in my own glass when I get home. Mr.
Spenlow remark, on this occasion, when we conclude our business,
that he should have be happy to have see I at his house at
Norwood to celebrate our become connect, but for his domestic
arrangement be in some disorder, on account of the expect
return of his daughter from finish her education at Paris. but,
he intimate that when she come home he should hope to have the
pleasure of entertain I. I know that he be a widower with one
daughter, and express my acknowledgement.
Mr. Spenlow be as good as his word. in a week or two, he refer
to this engagement, and say, that if I would do he the favour to
come down next Saturday, and stay till Monday, he would be
extremely happy. of course I say I would do he the favour; and
he be to drive I down in his phaeton, and to bring I back.
when the day arrive, my very carpet-bag be an object of
veneration to the stipendiary clerk, to whom the house at Norwood
be a sacred mystery. one of they inform I that he have hear
that Mr. Spenlow eat entirely off plate and china; and another
hint at champagne be constantly on draught, after the usual
custom of table-beer. the old clerk with the wig, whose name be
Mr. Tiffey, have be down on business several time in the course
of his career, and have on each occasion penetrate to the
breakfast-parlour. he describe it as an apartment of the most
sumptuous nature, and say that he have drunk brown East India
sherry there, of a quality so precious as to make a man wink. we
have an adjourned cause in the Consistory that day - about
excommunicate a baker who have be object in a vestry to a
pave-rate - and as the evidence be just twice the length of
Robinson Crusoe, accord to a calculation I make, it be rather
late in the day before we finish. however, we get he
excommunicate for six week, and sentence in no end of cost; and
then the baker's proctor, and the judge, and the advocate on both
side (who be all nearly related), go out of town together, and
Mr. Spenlow and I drive away in the phaeton.
the phaeton be a very handsome affair; the horse arch their
neck and lift up their leg as if they know they belong to
doctor' Commons. there be a good deal of competition in the
Commons on all point of display, and it turn out some very
choice equipage then; though I always have consider, and always
shall consider, that in my time the great article of competition
there be starch: which I think be wear among the proctor to as
great an extent as it be in the nature of man to bear.
we be very pleasant, go down, and Mr. Spenlow give I some
hint in reference to my profession. he say it be the genteelest
profession in the world, and must on no account be confound with
the profession of a solicitor: be quite another sort of thing,
infinitely more exclusive, less mechanical, and more profitable.
we take thing much more easily in the Commons than they could be
take anywhere else, he observe, and that set we, as a privileged
class, apart. he say it be impossible to conceal the
disagreeable fact, that we be chiefly employ by solicitor; but
he give I to understand that they be an inferior race of man,
universally look down upon by all proctor of any pretension.
I ask Mr. Spenlow what he consider the good sort of
professional business? he reply, that a good case of a disputed
will, where there be a neat little estate of thirty or forty
thousand pound, be, perhaps, the good of all. in such a case, he
say, not only be there very pretty picking, in the way of
argument at every stage of the proceeding, and mountain upon
mountain of evidence on interrogatory and counter-interrogatory
(to say nothing of an appeal lying, first to the Delegates, and
then to the Lords), but, the cost be pretty sure to come out of
the estate at last, both side go at it in a lively and spirited
manner, and expense be no consideration. then, he launch into
a general eulogium on the Commons. what be to be particularly
admire (he say) in the Commons, be its compactness. it be the
most conveniently organize place in the world. it be the
complete idea of snugness. it lie in a nutshell. for example: you
bring a divorce case, or a restitution case, into the Consistory.
very good. you try it in the Consistory. you make a quiet
little round game of it, among a family group, and you play it
out at leisure. suppose you be not satisfied with the
Consistory, what do you do then? why, you go into the Arches.
what be the Arches? the same court, in the same room, with the
same bar, and the same practitioner, but another judge, for there
the consistory judge could plead any court-day as an advocate.
well, you play your round game out again. still you be not
satisfied. very good. what do you do then? why, you go to the
Delegates. who be the delegate? why, the Ecclesiastical
Delegates be the advocate without any business, who have look
on at the round game when it be play in both court, and have
see the card shuffle, and cut, and play, and have talk to all
the player about it, and now come fresh, as judge, to settle the
matter to the satisfaction of everybody! discontent people might
talk of corruption in the Commons, closeness in the Commons, and
the necessity of reform the Commons, say Mr. Spenlow solemnly,
in conclusion; but when the price of wheat per bushel have be
high, the Commons have be busy; and a man might lay his hand
upon his heart, and say this to the whole world, - 'touch the
Commons, and down come the country!'
I listen to all this with attention; and though, I must say, I
have my doubt whether the country be quite as much oblige to the
Commons as Mr. Spenlow make out, I respectfully defer to his
opinion. that about the price of wheat per bushel, I modestly feel
be too much for my strength, and quite settle the question. I
have never, to this hour, get the well of that bushel of wheat.
it have reappear to annihilate I, all through my life, in
connexion with all kind of subject. I donot know now, exactly,
what it have to do with I, or what right it have to crush I, on an
infinite variety of occasion; but whenever I see my old friend the
bushel bring in by the head and shoulder (as he always be, I
observe), I give up a subject for lost.
this be a digression. I be not the man to touch the Commons, and
bring down the country. I submissively express, by my silence,
my acquiescence in all I have hear from my superior in year and
knowledge; and we talk about the Stranger and the Drama, and the
pair of horse, until we come to Mr. Spenlow's gate.
there be a lovely garden to Mr. Spenlow's house; and though that
be not the good time of the year for see a garden, it be so
beautifully keep, that I be quite enchant. there be a charming
lawn, there be cluster of tree, and there be perspective
walk that I could just distinguish in the dark, arch over with
trelli-work, on which shrub and flower grow in the grow
season. 'here Miss Spenlow walk by herself,' I think. 'dear
I!'
we go into the house, which be cheerfully light up, and into
a hall where there be all sort of hat, cap, great-coat,
plaid, glove, whip, and walking-stick. 'where be Miss Dora?'
say Mr. Spenlow to the servant. 'Dora!' I think. 'what a
beautiful name!'
we turn into a room near at hand (I think it be the identical
breakfast-room, make memorable by the brown East Indian sherry),
and I hear a voice say, 'Mr. Copperfield, my daughter Dora, and my
daughter Dora's confidential friend!' it be, no doubt, Mr.
Spenlow's voice, but I donot know it, and I donot care whose it
be. all be over in a moment. I have fulfil my destiny. I be
a captive and a slave. I love Dora Spenlow to distraction!
she be more than human to I. she be a Fairy, a Sylph, I donot
know what she be - anything that no one ever see, and everything
that everybody ever want. I be swallow up in an abyss of love
in an instant. there be no pausing on the brink; no look down,
or look back; I be go, headlong, before I have sense to say a
word to she.
'I,' observe a well-remember voice, when I have bow and
murmur something, 'have see Mr. Copperfield before.'
the speaker be not Dora. no; the confidential friend, Miss
Murdstone!
I donot think I be much astonish. to the good of my judgement,
no capacity of astonishment be leave in I. there be nothing
worth mention in the material world, but Dora Spenlow, to be
astonish about. I say, 'how do you do, Miss Murdstone? I hope
you be well.' she answer, 'very well.' I say, 'how be Mr.
Murdstone?' she reply, 'my brother be robust, I be oblige to
you.'
Mr. Spenlow, who, I suppose, have be surprised to see we recognize
each other, then put in his word.
'I be glad to find,' he say, 'Copperfield, that you and Miss
Murdstone be already acquaint.'
'Mr. Copperfield and myself,' say Miss Murdstone, with severe
composure, 'be connexion. we be once slightly acquaint. it
be in his childish day. circumstance have separate we since.
I should not have know he.'
I reply that I should have know she, anywhere. which be true
enough.
'Miss Murdstone have have the goodness,' say Mr. Spenlow to I, 'to
accept the office - if I may so describe it - of my daughter Dora's
confidential friend. my daughter Dora having, unhappily, no
mother, Miss Murdstone be oblige enough to become her companion
and protector.'
a pass thought occur to I that Miss Murdstone, like the
pocket instrument call a life-preserver, be not so much design
for purpose of protection as of assault. but as I have none but
pass thought for any subject save Dora, I glance at she,
directly afterwards, and be think that I see, in her prettily
pettish manner, that she be not very much inclined to be
particularly confidential to her companion and protector, when a
bell rang, which Mr. Spenlow say be the first dinner-bell, and so
carry I off to dress.
the idea of dress one's self, or do anything in the way of
action, in that state of love, be a little too ridiculous. I
could only sit down before my fire, bite the key of my
carpet-bag, and think of the captivating, girlish, bright-eye
lovely Dora. what a form she have, what a face she have, what a
graceful, variable, enchant manner!
the bell ring again so soon that I make a mere scramble of my
dressing, instead of the careful operation I could have wish
under the circumstance, and go downstairs. there be some
company. Dora be talk to an old gentleman with a grey head.
Grey as he be - and a great-grandfather into the bargain, for he
say so - I be madly jealous of he.
what a state of mind I be in! I be jealous of everybody. I
couldnot bear the idea of anybody know Mr. Spenlow well than
I do. it be torture to I to hear they talk of occurrence in
which I have have no share. when a most amiable person, with a
highly polished bald head, ask I across the dinner table, if
that be the first occasion of my see the ground, I could have
do anything to he that be savage and revengeful.
I donot remember who be there, except Dora. I have not the least
idea what we have for dinner, besides Dora. my impression be, that
I din off Dora, entirely, and send away half-a-dozen plate
untouched. I sit next to she. I talk to she. she have the most
delightful little voice, the gay little laugh, the pleasantest
and most fascinating little way, that ever lead a lost youth into
hopeless slavery. she be rather diminutive altogether. so much
the more precious, I think.
when she go out of the room with Miss Murdstone (no other lady
be of the party), I fall into a reverie, only disturb by the
cruel apprehension that Miss Murdstone would disparage I to she.
the amiable creature with the polished head tell I a long story,
which I think be about gardening. I think I hear he say, 'my
gardener', several time. I seem to pay the deep attention to
he, but I be wander in a garden of Eden all the while, with
Dora.
my apprehension of be disparage to the object of my engrossing
affection be revive when we go into the drawing-room, by the
grim and distant aspect of Miss Murdstone. but I be relieve of
they in an unexpected manner.
'David Copperfield,' say Miss Murdstone, beckon I aside into
a window. 'a word.'
I confront Miss Murdstone alone.
'David Copperfield,' say Miss Murdstone, 'I need not enlarge upon
family circumstance. they be not a tempting subject.'
'far from it, ma'am,' I return.
'far from it,' assent Miss Murdstone. 'I do not wish to revive
the memory of past difference, or of past outrage. I have
receive outrage from a person - a female I be sorry to say, for
the credit of my sex - who be not to be mention without scorn and
disgust; and therefore I would rather not mention she.'
I feel very fiery on my aunt's account; but I say it would
certainly be well, if Miss Murdstone please, not to mention she.
I could not hear she disrespectfully mention, I add, without
express my opinion in a decided tone.
Miss Murdstone shut her eye, and disdainfully incline her head;
then, slowly open her eye, resume:
'David Copperfield, I shall not attempt to disguise the fact, that
I form an unfavourable opinion of you in your childhood. it may
have be a mistaken one, or you may have cease to justify it.
that be not in question between we now. I belong to a family
remarkable, I believe, for some firmness; and I be not the creature
of circumstance or change. I may have my opinion of you. you may
have your opinion of I.'
I incline my head, in my turn.
'but it be not necessary,' say Miss Murdstone, 'that these
opinion should come into collision here. under exist
circumstance, it be as well on all account that they should not.
as the chance of life have bring we together again, and may
bring we together on other occasion, I would say, let we meet here
as distant acquaintance. family circumstance be a sufficient
reason for our only meeting on that footing, and it be quite
unnecessary that either of we should make the other the subject of
remark. do you approve of this?'
'Miss Murdstone,' I return, 'I think you and Mr. Murdstone use
I very cruelly, and treat my mother with great unkindness. I
shall always think so, as long as I live. but I quite agree in
what you propose.'
Miss Murdstone shut her eye again, and bent her head. then, just
touch the back of my hand with the tip of her cold, stiff
finger, she walk away, arrange the little fetter on her
wrist and round her neck; which seem to be the same set, in
exactly the same state, as when I have see she last. these
remind I, in reference to Miss Murdstone's nature, of the
fetter over a jail door; suggest on the outside, to all
beholder, what be to be expect within.
all I know of the rest of the evening be, that I hear the empress
of my heart sing enchant ballad in the french language,
generally to the effect that, whatever be the matter, we ought
always to dance, Ta ra la, Ta ra la! accompany herself on a
glorify instrument, resemble a guitar. that I be lose in
blissful delirium. that I refuse refreshment. that my soul
recoil from punch particularly. that when Miss Murdstone take
she into custody and lead she away, she smile and give I her
delicious hand. that I catch a view of myself in a mirror,
look perfectly imbecile and idiotic. that I retire to bed in
a most maudlin state of mind, and get up in a crisis of feeble
infatuation.
it be a fine morning, and early, and I think I would go and take
a stroll down one of those wire-arch walk, and indulge my
passion by dwell on her image. on my way through the hall, I
encounter her little dog, who be call Jip - short for Gipsy.
I approach he tenderly, for I love even he; but he show his
whole set of tooth, get under a chair expressly to snarl, and
wouldnot hear of the least familiarity.
the garden be cool and solitary. I walk about, wonder what
my feeling of happiness would be, if I could ever become engaged
to this dear wonder. as to marriage, and fortune, and all that, I
believe I be almost as innocently undesigne then, as when I
love little Em'ly. to be allow to call she 'Dora', to write to
she, to dote upon and worship she, to have reason to think that
when she be with other people she be yet mindful of I, seem to
I the summit of human ambition - I be sure it be the summit of
mine. there be no doubt whatever that I be a lackadaisical young
spooney; but there be a purity of heart in all this, that prevent
my have quite a contemptuous recollection of it, let I laugh as
I may.
I have not be walk long, when I turn a corner, and meet she.
I tingle again from head to foot as my recollection turn that
corner, and my pen shake in my hand.
'you - be - out early, Miss Spenlow,' say I.
'itbe so stupid at home,' she reply, 'and Miss Murdstone be so
absurd! she talk such nonsense about its be necessary for the
day to be air, before I come out. air!' (she laugh, here, in
the most melodious manner.) 'on a Sunday morning, when I donot
practise, I must do something. so I tell papa last night I must
come out. besides, itbe the bright time of the whole day.
donot you think so?'
I hazard a bold flight, and say (not without stammer) that it
be very bright to I then, though it have be very dark to I a
minute before.
'do you mean a compliment?' say Dora, 'or that the weather have
really change?'
I stammer bad than before, in reply that I mean no
compliment, but the plain truth; though I be not aware of any
change have take place in the weather. it be in the state of
my own feeling, I add bashfully: to clench the explanation.
I never see such curl - how could I, for there never be such
curl! - as those she shake out to hide her blush. as to the
straw hat and blue ribbon which be on the top of the curl, if I
could only have hang it up in my room in Buckingham Street, what a
priceless possession it would have be!
'you have just come home from Paris,' say I.
'yes,' say she. 'have you ever be there?'
'no.'
'oh! I hope youwill go soon! you would like it so much!'
trace of deep-seat anguish appear in my countenance. that she
should hope I would go, that she should think it possible I could
go, be insupportable. I depreciate Paris; I depreciate France.
I say I wouldnot leave England, under exist circumstance, for
any earthly consideration. nothing should induce I. in short,
she be shake the curl again, when the little dog come run
along the walk to our relief.
he be mortally jealous of I, and persist in bark at I. she
take he up in her arm - oh my goodness! - and caress he, but
he persist upon bark still. he wouldnot let I touch he,
when I try; and then she beat he. it increase my suffering
greatly to see the pat she give he for punishment on the bridge
of his blunt nose, while he wink his eye, and lick her hand,
and still growl within himself like a little double-bass. at
length he be quiet - well he might be with her dimpled chin upon
his head! - and we walk away to look at a greenhouse.
'you be not very intimate with Miss Murdstone, be you?' say
Dora. -'My pet.'
(the two last word be to the dog. oh, if they have only be to
I!)
'no,' I reply. 'not at all so.'
'she be a tiresome creature,' say Dora, pouting. 'I cannot think
what papa can have be about, when he choose such a vexatious thing
to be my companion. who want a protector? I be sure I donot want
a protector. Jip can protect I a great deal well than Miss
Murdstone, - cannot you, Jip, dear?'
he only wink lazily, when she kiss his ball of a head.
'papa call she my confidential friend, but I be sure she be no
such thing - be she, Jip? we be not go to confide in any such
cross people, Jip and I. we mean to bestow our confidence where we
like, and to find out our own friend, instead of have they find
out for we - donot we, Jip?'
Jip make a comfortable noise, in answer, a little like a tea-kettle
when it sing. as for I, every word be a new heap of fetter,
rivet above the last.
'it be very hard, because we have not a kind Mama, that we be to
have, instead, a sulky, gloomy old thing like Miss Murdstone,
always follow we about - benot it, Jip? never mind, Jip. we
willnot be confidential, and wewill make ourselves as happy as we can
in spite of she, and wewill tease she, and not please she - willnot
we, Jip?'
if it have last any long, I think I must have go down on my
knee on the gravel, with the probability before I of graze
they, and of be presently eject from the premise besides.
but, by good fortune the greenhouse be not far off, and these
word bring we to it.
it contain quite a show of beautiful geranium. we loiter
along in front of they, and Dora often stop to admire this one
or that one, and I stop to admire the same one, and Dora,
laughing, hold the dog up childishly, to smell the flower; and if
we be not all three in Fairyland, certainly I be. the scent of
a geranium leaf, at this day, strike I with a half comical half
serious wonder as to what change have come over I in a moment; and
then I see a straw hat and blue ribbon, and a quantity of curl,
and a little black dog be hold up, in two slender arm, against
a bank of blossom and bright leaf.
Miss Murdstone have be look for we. she find we here; and
present her uncongenial cheek, the little wrinkle in it fill
with hair powder, to Dora to be kiss. then she take Dora's arm
in her, and march we into breakfast as if it be a soldier's
funeral.
how many cup of tea I drank, because Dora make it, I donot know.
but, I perfectly remember that I sit swill tea until my whole
nervous system, if I have have any in those day, must have go by
the board. by and by we go to church. Miss Murdstone be
between Dora and I in the pew; but I hear her sing, and the
congregation vanish. a sermon be deliver - about Dora, of
course - and I be afraid that be all I know of the service.
we have a quiet day. no company, a walk, a family dinner of four,
and an evening of look over book and picture; Miss Murdstone
with a homily before she, and her eye upon we, keep guard
vigilantly. ah! little do Mr. Spenlow imagine, when he sit
opposite to I after dinner that day, with his pocket-handkerchief
over his head, how fervently I be embrace he, in my fancy, as
his son-in-law! little do he think, when I take leave of he at
night, that he have just give his full consent to my be engage
to Dora, and that I be invoke blessing on his head!
we depart early in the morning, for we have a salvage case come
on in the Admiralty Court, require a rather accurate knowledge of
the whole science of navigation, in which (as we couldnot be
expect to know much about those matter in the Commons) the judge
have entreat two old Trinity Masters, for charity's sake, to come
and help he out. Dora be at the breakfast-table to make the tea
again, however; and I have the melancholy pleasure of take off my
hat to she in the phaeton, as she stand on the door-step with Jip
in her arm.
what the Admiralty be to I that day; what nonsense I make of our
case in my mind, as I listen to it; how I see 'DORA' engrave
upon the blade of the silver oar which they lie upon the table, as
the emblem of that high jurisdiction; and how I feel when Mr.
Spenlow go home without I (I have have an insane hope that he
might take I back again), as if I be a mariner myself, and the
ship to which I belong have sail away and leave I on a desert
island; I shall make no fruitless effort to describe. if that
sleepy old court could rouse itself, and present in any visible
form the daydream I have have in it about Dora, it would reveal my
truth.
I donot mean the dream that I dream on that day alone, but day
after day, from week to week, and term to term. I go there, not
to attend to what be go on, but to think about Dora. if ever
I bestow a thought upon the case, as they drag their slow
length before I, it be only to wonder, in the matrimonial case
(remember Dora), how it be that married people could ever be
otherwise than happy; and, in the Prerogative case, to consider,
if the money in question have be leave to I, what be the
foremost step I should immediately have take in regard to Dora.
within the first week of my passion, I buy four sumptuous
waistcoat - not for myself; I have no pride in they; for Dora - and
take to wear straw-coloured kid glove in the street, and lay
the foundation of all the corn I have ever have. if the boot I
wear at that period could only be produce and compare with the
natural size of my foot, they would show what the state of my heart
be, in a most affect manner.
and yet, wretche cripple as I make myself by this act of homage to
Dora, I walk mile upon mile daily in the hope of see she.
not only be I soon as well know on the Norwood Road as the
postman on that beat, but I pervade London likewise. I walk
about the street where the good shop for lady be, I haunt
the Bazaar like an unquiet spirit, I fag through the Park again
and again, long after I be quite knock up. sometimes, at long
interval and on rare occasion, I see she. perhaps I see she
glove wave in a carriage window; perhaps I meet she, walk with
she and Miss Murdstone a little way, and speak to she. in the
latter case I be always very miserable afterwards, to think that
I have say nothing to the purpose; or that she have no idea of the
extent of my devotion, or that she care nothing about I. I be
always look out, as may be suppose, for another invitation to
Mr. Spenlow's house. I be always be disappoint, for I get
none.
Mrs. Crupp must have be a woman of penetration; for when this
attachment be but a few week old, and I have not have the courage
to write more explicitly even to Agnes, than that I have be to Mr.
Spenlow's house, 'whose family,' I add, 'consist of one
daughter'; - I say Mrs. Crupp must have be a woman of
penetration, for, even in that early stage, she find it out. she
come up to I one evening, when I be very low, to ask (she be
then afflict with the disorder I have mention) if I could
oblige she with a little tincture of cardamum mix with rhubarb,
and flavour with seven drop of the essence of clove, which be
the good remedy for her complaint; - or, if I have not such a thing
by I, with a little brandy, which be the next good. it be not,
she remark, so palatable to she, but it be the next good. as I
have never even hear of the first remedy, and always have the second
in the closet, I give Mrs. Crupp a glass of the second, which (that
I might have no suspicion of its be devoted to any improper use)
she begin to take in my presence.
'cheer up, sir,' say Mrs. Crupp. 'I cannot abear to see you so,
sir: Ibe a mother myself.'
I do not quite perceive the application of this fact to myself,
but I smile on Mrs. Crupp, as benignly as be in my power.
'come, sir,' say Mrs. Crupp. 'excuse I. I know what it be, sir.
therebe a lady in the case.'
'Mrs. Crupp?' I return, redden.
'oh, bless you! keep a good heart, sir!' say Mrs. Crupp, nodding
encouragement. 'never say die, sir! if she donot smile upon you,
therebe a many as will. you be a young gentleman to be smile on,
Mr. Copperfull, and you must learn your walue, sir.'
Mrs. Crupp always call I Mr. Copperfull: firstly, no doubt,
because it be not my name; and secondly, I be inclined to think,
in some indistinct association with a washing-day.
'what make you suppose there be any young lady in the case, Mrs.
Crupp?' say I.
'Mr. Copperfull,' say Mrs. Crupp, with a great deal of feeling,
'Ibe a mother myself.'
for some time Mrs. Crupp could only lay her hand upon her nankeen
bosom, and fortify herself against return pain with sip of her
medicine. at length she speak again.
'when the present set be take for you by your dear aunt, Mr.
Copperfull,' say Mrs. Crupp, 'my remark be, I have now find
summun I could care for. "Thank Ev'in!" be the expression, "I
have now find summun I can care for!" - you donot eat enough, sir,
nor yet drink.'
'be that what you find your supposition on, Mrs. Crupp?' say I.
'Sir,' say Mrs. Crupp, in a tone approach to severity, 'Ihave
laundresse other young gentleman besides yourself. a young
gentleman may be over-careful of himself, or he may be
under-careful of himself. he may brush his hair too regular, or
too un-regular. he may wear his boot much too large for he, or
much too small. that is accord as the young gentleman have his
original character form. but let he go to which extreme he may,
sir, therebe a young lady in both of them.'
Mrs. Crupp shake her head in such a determined manner, that I have
not an inch of vantage-ground leave.
'it be but the gentleman which die here before yourself,' say
Mrs. Crupp, 'that fall in love - with a barmaid - and have his
waistcoat take in directly, though much swell by drink.'
'Mrs. Crupp,' say I, 'I must beg you not to connect the young lady
in my case with a barmaid, or anything of that sort, if you
please.'
'Mr. Copperfull,' return Mrs. Crupp, 'Ibe a mother myself, and
not likely. I ask your pardon, sir, if I intrude. I should never
wish to intrude where I be not welcome. but you be a young
gentleman, Mr. Copperfull, and my adwice to you be, to cheer up,
sir, to keep a good heart, and to know your own walue. if you be
to take to something, sir,' say Mrs. Crupp, 'if you be to take to
skittle, now, which be healthy, you might find it divert your
mind, and do you good.'
with these word, Mrs. Crupp, affect to be very careful of the
brandy - which be all go - thank I with a majestic curtsey,
and retire. as her figure disappear into the gloom of the
entry, this counsel certainly present itself to my mind in the
light of a slight liberty on Mrs. Crupp's part; but, at the same
time, I be content to receive it, in another point of view, as a
word to the wise, and a warning in future to keep my secret well.
CHAPTER 27
TOMMY traddle
it may have be in consequence of Mrs. Crupp's advice, and,
perhaps, for no well reason than because there be a certain
similarity in the sound of the word skittle and traddle, that it
come into my head, next day, to go and look after traddle. the
time he have mention be more than out, and he live in a little
street near the Veterinary College at Camden Town, which be
principally tenant, as one of our clerk who live in that
direction inform I, by gentleman student, who buy live
donkey, and make experiment on those quadruped in their private
apartment. have obtain from this clerk a direction to the
academic grove in question, I set out, the same afternoon, to visit
my old schoolfellow.
I find that the street be not as desirable a one as I could have
wish it to be, for the sake of traddle. the inhabitant
appear to have a propensity to throw any little trifle they be
not in want of, into the road: which not only make it rank and
sloppy, but untidy too, on account of the cabbage-leaf. the
refuse be not wholly vegetable either, for I myself see a shoe, a
double-up saucepan, a black bonnet, and an umbrella, in various
stage of decomposition, as I be look out for the number I
want.
the general air of the place remind I forcibly of the day when
I live with Mr. and Mrs. Micawber. an indescribable character of
fade gentility that attach to the house I seek, and make it
unlike all the other house in the street - though they be all
build on one monotonous pattern, and look like the early copy
of a blundering boy who be learn to make house, and have not
yet get out of his cramp brick-and-mortar pothook - remind I
still more of Mr. and Mrs. Micawber. happen to arrive at the
door as it be open to the afternoon milkman, I be remind of
Mr. and Mrs. Micawber more forcibly yet.
'now,' say the milkman to a very youthful servant girl. 'have that
there little bill of mine be heerd on?'
'oh, master say hewill attend to it immediate,' be the reply.
'because,' say the milkman, go on as if he have receive no
answer, and speak, as I judge from his tone, rather for the
edification of somebody within the house, than of the youthful
servant - an impression which be strengthen by his manner of
glare down the passage - 'because that there little bill have be
run so long, that I begin to believe itbe run away altogether,
and never willnot be heerd of. now, Ibe not a go to stand it, you
know!' say the milkman, still throw his voice into the house,
and glare down the passage.
as to his dealing in the mild article of milk, by the by, there
never be a great anomaly. his deportment would have be fierce
in a butcher or a brandy-merchant.
the voice of the youthful servant become faint, but she seem to
I, from the action of her lip, again to murmur that it would be
attend to immediate.
'I tell you what,' say the milkman, look hard at she for the
first time, and take she by the chin, 'be you fond of milk?'
'yes, I like it,' she reply.
'good,' say the milkman. 'then you willnot have none tomorrow.
D'ye hear? not a fragment of milk you willnot have tomorrow.'
I think she seem, upon the whole, relieve by the prospect of
have any today. the milkman, after shake his head at she
darkly, release her chin, and with anything rather than good-will
open his can, and deposit the usual quantity in the family jug.
this do, he go away, mutter, and utter the cry of his
trade next door, in a vindictive shriek.
'do Mr. Traddles live here?' I then inquire.
a mysterious voice from the end of the passage reply 'yes.' upon
which the youthful servant reply 'yes.'
'be he at home?' say I.
again the mysterious voice reply in the affirmative, and again
the servant echo it. upon this, I walk in, and in pursuance of
the servant's direction walk upstairs; conscious, as I pass
the back parlour-door, that I be survey by a mysterious eye,
probably belong to the mysterious voice.
when I get to the top of the stair - the house be only a story
high above the ground floor - Traddles be on the landing to meet
I. he be delighted to see I, and give I welcome, with great
heartiness, to his little room. it be in the front of the house,
and extremely neat, though sparely furnish. it be his only
room, I see; for there be a sofa-bedstead in it, and his
blacking-brush and blacking be among his book - on the top
shelf, behind a dictionary. his table be cover with paper, and
he be hard at work in an old coat. I look at nothing, that I
know of, but I see everything, even to the prospect of a church
upon his china inkstand, as I sit down - and this, too, be a
faculty confirm in I in the old Micawber time. various
ingenious arrangement he have make, for the disguise of his chest
of drawer, and the accommodation of his boot, his shaving-glass,
and so forth, particularly impress themselves upon I, as
evidence of the same traddle who use to make model of
elephant' den in writing-paper to put fly in; and to comfort
himself under ill usage, with the memorable work of art I have so
often mention.
in a corner of the room be something neatly cover up with a
large white cloth. I could not make out what that be.
'traddle,' say I, shake hand with he again, after I have sit
down, 'I be delighted to see you.'
'I be delighted to see you, Copperfield,' he return. 'I be very
glad indeed to see you. it be because I be thoroughly glad to
see you when we meet in Ely Place, and be sure you be thoroughly
glad to see I, that I give you this address instead of my address
at chamber.'
'oh! you have chamber?' say I.
'why, I have the fourth of a room and a passage, and the fourth of
a clerk,' return traddle. 'three other and myself unite to
have a set of chamber - to look business-like - and we quarter the
clerk too. half-a-crown a week he cost I.'
his old simple character and good temper, and something of his old
unlucky fortune also, I think, smile at I in the smile with
which he make this explanation.
'itbe not because I have the least pride, Copperfield, you
understand,' say traddle, 'that I donot usually give my address
here. itbe only on account of those who come to I, who might not
like to come here. for myself, I be fight my way on in the
world against difficulty, and it would be ridiculous if I make a
pretence of do anything else.'
'you be read for the bar, Mr. Waterbrook inform I?' say I.
'why, yes,' say traddle, rub his hand slowly over one
another. 'I be read for the bar. the fact be, I have just
begin to keep my term, after rather a long delay. itbe some time
since I be article, but the payment of that hundred pound be a
great pull. a great pull!' say traddle, with a wince, as if he
have have a tooth out.
'do you know what I cannot help think of, Traddles, as I sit here
look at you?' I ask he.
'no,' say he.
'that sky-blue suit you use to wear.'
'Lord, to be sure!' cry traddle, laugh. 'tight in the arm
and leg, you know? dear I! well! those be happy time,
benot they?'
'I think our schoolmaster might have make they happy, without
do any harm to any of we, I acknowledge,' I return.
'perhaps he might,' say traddle. 'but dear I, there be a good
deal of fun go on. do you remember the night in the bedroom?
when we use to have the supper? and when you use to tell the
story? ha, ha, ha! and do you remember when I get can for
cry about Mr. Mell? Old Creakle! I should like to see he
again, too!'
'he be a brute to you, traddle,' say I, indignantly; for his
good humour make I feel as if I have see he beat but yesterday.
'do you think so?' return traddle. 'really? perhaps he be
rather. but itbe all over, a long while. Old Creakle!'
'you be bring up by an uncle, then?' say I.
'of course I be!' say traddle. 'the one I be always go to
write to. and always donot, eh! ha, ha, ha! yes, I have an uncle
then. he die soon after I leave school.'
'indeed!'
'yes. he be a retired - what do you call it! - draper -
cloth-merchant - and have make I his heir. but he donot like I
when I grow up.'
'do you really mean that?' say I. he be so composed, that I
fancy he must have some other meaning.
'oh dear, yes, Copperfield! I mean it,' reply traddle. 'it be
an unfortunate thing, but he donot like I at all. he say I
benot at all what he expect, and so he marry his housekeeper.'
'and what do you do?' I ask.
'I donot do anything in particular,' say traddle. 'I live with
they, wait to be put out in the world, until his gout
unfortunately fly to his stomach - and so he die, and so she
marry a young man, and so I benot provide for.'
'do you get nothing, traddle, after all?'
'oh dear, yes!' say traddle. 'I get fifty pound. I have never
be bring up to any profession, and at first I be at a loss
what to do for myself. however, I begin, with the assistance of
the son of a professional man, who have be to Salem House -
Yawler, with his nose on one side. do you recollect he?'
no. he have not be there with I; all the nose be straight in
my day.
'it donot matter,' say traddle. 'I begin, by mean of his
assistance, to copy law writing. that donot answer very well;
and then I begin to state case for they, and make abstract, and
that sort of work. for I be a plod kind of fellow,
Copperfield, and have learn the way of do such thing pithily.
well! that put it in my head to enter myself as a law student; and
that run away with all that be leave of the fifty pound. Yawler
recommend I to one or two other office, however - Mr.
Waterbrook's for one - and I get a good many job. I be fortunate
enough, too, to become acquainted with a person in the publishing
way, who be get up an encyclopaedia, and he set I to work;
and, indeed' (glance at his table), 'I be at work for he at this
minute. I be not a bad compiler, Copperfield,' say Traddles,
preserve the same air of cheerful confidence in all he say, 'but
I have no invention at all; not a particle. I suppose there never
be a young man with less originality than I have.'
as traddle seem to expect that I should assent to this as a
matter of course, I nod; and he go on, with the same sprightly
patience - I can find no well expression - as before.
'so, by little and little, and not live high, I manage to scrape
up the hundred pound at last,' say traddle; 'and thank Heaven
thatbe pay - though it be - though it certainly be,' say
traddle, wince again as if he have have another tooth out, 'a
pull. I be live by the sort of work I have mention, still, and
I hope, one of these day, to get connect with some newspaper:
which would almost be the making of my fortune. now, Copperfield,
you be so exactly what you use to be, with that agreeable face,
and itbe so pleasant to see you, that I sha'n't conceal anything.
therefore you must know that I be engaged.'
engage! oh, Dora!
'she be a curate's daughter,' say traddle; 'one of ten, down in
Devonshire. yes!' for he see I glance, involuntarily, at the
prospect on the inkstand. 'thatbe the church! you come round here
to the left, out of this gate,' trace his finger along the
inkstand, 'and exactly where I hold this pen, there stand the
house - facing, you understand, towards the church.'
the delight with which he enter into these particular, do not
fully present itself to I until afterwards; for my selfish
thought be make a ground-plan of Mr. Spenlow's house and
garden at the same moment.
'she be such a dear girl!' say traddle; 'a little old than I,
but the dear girl! I tell you I be go out of town? I have
be down there. I walk there, and I walk back, and I have the
most delightful time! I dare say ours be likely to be a rather
long engagement, but our motto be "wait and hope!" we always say
that. "wait and hope," we always say. and she would wait,
Copperfield, till she be sixty - any age you can mention - for
I!'
traddle rise from his chair, and, with a triumphant smile, put his
hand upon the white cloth I have observe.
'however,' he say, 'itbe not that we havenot make a beginning
towards housekeeping. no, no; we have begin. we must get on by
degree, but we have begin. here,' draw the cloth off with
great pride and care, 'be two piece of furniture to commence
with. this flower-pot and stand, she buy herself. you put that
in a parlour window,' say traddle, fall a little back from it
to survey it with the great admiration, 'with a plant in it, and
- and there you be! this little round table with the marble top
(itbe two foot ten in circumference), I buy. you want to lay a
book down, you know, or somebody come to see you or your wife, and
want a place to stand a cup of tea upon, and - and there you be
again!' say traddle. 'itbe an admirable piece of workmanship -
firm as a rock!'
I praise they both, highly, and traddle replace the covering as
carefully as he have remove it.
'itbe not a great deal towards the furnishing,' say traddle, 'but
itbe something. the table-cloth, and pillow-case, and article
of that kind, be what discourage I most, Copperfield. so do
the ironmongery - candle-box, and gridiron, and that sort of
necessary - because those thing tell, and mount up. however,
"wait and hope!" and I assure you shebe the dear girl!'
'I be quite certain of it,' say I.
'in the meantime,' say traddle, come back to his chair; 'and
this be the end of my prosing about myself, I get on as well as I
can. I donot make much, but I donot spend much. in general, I
board with the people downstairs, who be very agreeable people
indeed. both Mr. and Mrs. Micawber have see a good deal of life,
and be excellent company.'
'my dear traddle!' I quickly exclaim. 'what be you talk
about?'
traddle look at I, as if he wonder what I be talk about.
'Mr. and Mrs. Micawber!' I repeat. 'why, I be intimately
acquaint with they!'
an opportune double knock at the door, which I know well from old
experience in Windsor Terrace, and which nobody but Mr. Micawber
could ever have knock at that door, resolve any doubt in my mind
as to their be my old friend. I beg traddle to ask his
landlord to walk up. traddle accordingly do so, over the
banister; and Mr. Micawber, not a bit change - his tight, his
stick, his shirt-collar, and his eye-glass, all the same as ever -
come into the room with a genteel and youthful air.
'I beg your pardon, Mr. Traddles,' say Mr. Micawber, with the old
roll in his voice, as he check himself in hum a soft tune.
'I be not aware that there be any individual, alien to this
tenement, in your sanctum.'
Mr. Micawber slightly bow to I, and pull up his shirt-collar.
'how do you do, Mr. Micawber?' say I.
'Sir,' say Mr. Micawber, 'you be exceedingly obliging. I be in
statu quo.'
'and Mrs. Micawber?' I pursue.
'Sir,' say Mr. Micawber, 'she be also, thank God, in statu quo.'
'and the child, Mr. Micawber?'
'Sir,' say Mr. Micawber, 'I rejoice to reply that they be,
likewise, in the enjoyment of salubrity.'
all this time, Mr. Micawber have not know I in the least, though
he have stand face to face with I. but now, see I smile, he
examine my feature with more attention, fall back, cry, 'be it
possible! have I the pleasure of again behold Copperfield!' and
shake I by both hand with the utmost fervour.
'Good Heaven, Mr. Traddles!' say Mr. Micawber, 'to think that I
should find you acquaint with the friend of my youth, the
companion of early day! my dear!' call over the banister to
Mrs. Micawber, while traddle look (with reason) not a little
amazed at this description of I. 'here be a gentleman in Mr.
Traddles's apartment, whom he wish to have the pleasure of
present to you, my love!'
Mr. Micawber immediately reappear, and shake hand with I again.
'and how be our good friend the Doctor, Copperfield?' say Mr.
Micawber, 'and all the circle at Canterbury?'
'I have none but good account of they,' say I.
'I be most delighted to hear it,' say Mr. Micawber. 'it be at
Canterbury where we last meet. within the shadow, I may
figuratively say, of that religious edifice immortalize by
Chaucer, which be anciently the resort of Pilgrims from the
remotest corner of - in short,' say Mr. Micawber, 'in the
immediate neighbourhood of the Cathedral.'
I reply that it be. Mr. Micawber continue talk as volubly
as he could; but not, I think, without show, by some mark of
concern in his countenance, that he be sensible of sound in the
next room, as of Mrs. Micawber wash her hand, and hurriedly
opening and shut drawer that be uneasy in their action.
'you find we, Copperfield,' say Mr. Micawber, with one eye on
traddle, 'at present establish, on what may be designate as a
small and unassuming scale; but, you be aware that I have, in the
course of my career, surmount difficulty, and conquer
obstacle. you be no strange to the fact, that there have be
period of my life, when it have be requisite that I should pause,
until certain expect event should turn up; when it have be
necessary that I should fall back, before make what I trust I
shall not be accuse of presumption in term - a spring. the
present be one of those momentous stage in the life of man. you
find I, fall back, for a spring; and I have every reason to
believe that a vigorous leap will shortly be the result.'
I be express my satisfaction, when Mrs. Micawber come in; a
little more slatternly than she use to be, or so she seem now,
to my unaccustomed eye, but still with some preparation of herself
for company, and with a pair of brown glove on.
'my dear,' say Mr. Micawber, lead she towards I, 'here be a
gentleman of the name of Copperfield, who wish to renew his
acquaintance with you.'
it would have be well, as it turn out, to have lead gently up
to this announcement, for Mrs. Micawber, be in a delicate state
of health, be overcome by it, and be take so unwell, that Mr.
Micawber be oblige, in great trepidation, to run down to the
water-butt in the backyard, and draw a basinful to lave her brow
with. she presently revive, however, and be really pleased to
see I. we have half-an-hour's talk, all together; and I ask she
about the twin, who, she say, be 'grow great creature'; and
after Master and Miss Micawber, whom she describe as 'absolute
giant', but they be not produce on that occasion.
Mr. Micawber be very anxious that I should stay to dinner. I
should not have be averse to do so, but that I imagine I
detect trouble, and calculation relative to the extent of the
cold meat, in Mrs. Micawber's eye. I therefore plead another
engagement; and observe that Mrs. Micawber's spirit be
immediately lighten, I resist all persuasion to forego it.
but I tell Traddles, and Mr. and Mrs. Micawber, that before I could
think of leave, they must appoint a day when they would come and
dine with I. the occupation to which traddle stand pledge,
render it necessary to fix a somewhat distant one; but an
appointment be make for the purpose, that suit we all, and then
I take my leave.
Mr. Micawber, under pretence of show I a near way than that
by which I have come, accompany I to the corner of the street;
be anxious (he explain to I) to say a few word to an old
friend, in confidence.
'my dear copperfield,' say Mr. Micawber, 'I need hardly tell you
that to have beneath our roof, under exist circumstance, a mind
like that which gleam - if I may be allow the expression - which
gleams - in your friend traddle, be an unspeakable comfort. with
a washerwoman, who expose hard-bake for sale in her
parlour-window, dwell next door, and a Bow-street officer
reside over the way, you may imagine that his society be a source
of consolation to myself and to Mrs. Micawber. I be at present, my
dear Copperfield, engage in the sale of corn upon commission. it
be not an avocation of a remunerative description - in other word,
it do not pay - and some temporary embarrassment of a pecuniary
nature have be the consequence. I be, however, delight to add
that I have now an immediate prospect of something turn up (I be
not at liberty to say in what direction), which I trust will enable
I to provide, permanently, both for myself and for your friend
traddle, in whom I have an unaffected interest. you may, perhaps,
be prepared to hear that Mrs. Micawber be in a state of health
which render it not wholly improbable that an addition may be
ultimately make to those pledge of affection which - in short, to
the infantine group. Mrs. Micawber's family have be so good as
to express their dissatisfaction at this state of thing. I have
merely to observe, that I be not aware that it be any business of
theirs, and that I repel that exhibition of feel with scorn, and
with defiance!'
Mr. Micawber then shake hand with I again, and leave I.
CHAPTER 28
Mr. MICAWBER's GAUNTLET
until the day arrive on which I be to entertain my newly-find
old friend, I live principally on Dora and coffee. in my
love-lorn condition, my appetite languish; and I be glad of it,
for I feel as though it would have be an act of perfidy towards
Dora to have a natural relish for my dinner. the quantity of
walk exercise I take, be not in this respect attend with its
usual consequence, as the disappointment counteract the fresh
air. I have my doubt, too, found on the acute experience
acquire at this period of my life, whether a sound enjoyment of
animal food can develop itself freely in any human subject who be
always in torment from tight boot. I think the extremity
require to be at peace before the stomach will conduct itself with
vigour.
on the occasion of this domestic little party, I do not repeat my
former extensive preparation. I merely provide a pair of sol,
a small leg of mutton, and a pigeon-pie. Mrs. Crupp break out into
rebellion on my first bashful hint in reference to the cooking of
the fish and joint, and say, with a dignified sense of injury,
'no! no, sir! you will not ask I sich a thing, for you be
well acquainted with I than to suppose I capable of do what
I cannot do with ampial satisfaction to my own feeling!' but, in
the end, a compromise be effect; and Mrs. Crupp consent to
achieve this feat, on condition that I din from home for a
fortnight afterwards.
and here I may remark, that what I undergo from Mrs. Crupp, in
consequence of the tyranny she establish over I, be dreadful.
I never be so much afraid of anyone. we make a compromise of
everything. if I hesitate, she be take with that wonderful
disorder which be always lie in ambush in her system, ready, at
the short notice, to prey upon her vital. if I ring the bell
impatiently, after half-a-dozen unavaile modest pull, and she
appear at last - which be not by any mean to be rely upon -
she would appear with a reproachful aspect, sink breathless on a
chair near the door, lie her hand upon her nankeen bosom, and
become so ill, that I be glad, at any sacrifice of brandy or
anything else, to get rid of she. if I object to have my bed
make at five o'clock in the afternoon - which I do still think an
uncomfortable arrangement - one motion of her hand towards the same
nankeen region of wounded sensibility be enough to make I falter
an apology. in short, I would have do anything in an honourable
way rather than give Mrs. Crupp offence; and she be the terror of
my life.
I buy a second-hand dumb-waiter for this dinner-party, in
preference to re-engage the handy young man; against whom I have
conceive a prejudice, in consequence of meet he in the Strand,
one Sunday morning, in a waistcoat remarkably like one of mine,
which have be miss since the former occasion. the 'young gal'
be re-engaged; but on the stipulation that she should only bring
in the dish, and then withdraw to the landing-place, beyond the
outer door; where a habit of sniff she have contract would be
lose upon the guest, and where she retire on the plate would be
a physical impossibility.
have lay in the material for a bowl of punch, to be compound
by Mr. Micawber; have provide a bottle of lavender-water, two
wax-candle, a paper of mixed pin, and a pincushion, to assist
Mrs. Micawber in her toilette at my dressing-table; have also
cause the fire in my bedroom to be light for Mrs. Micawber's
convenience; and have lay the cloth with my own hand, I await
the result with composure.
at the appoint time, my three visitor arrive together. Mr.
Micawber with more shirt-collar than usual, and a new ribbon to his
eye-glass; Mrs. Micawber with her cap in a whitey-brown paper
parcel; traddle carry the parcel, and support Mrs. Micawber
on his arm. they be all delighted with my residence. when I
conduct Mrs. Micawber to my dressing-table, and she see the scale
on which it be prepare for she, she be in such rapture, that
she call Mr. Micawber to come in and look.
'my dear copperfield,' say Mr. Micawber, 'this be luxurious. this
be a way of life which remind I of the period when I be myself
in a state of celibacy, and Mrs. Micawber have not yet be
solicit to plight her faith at the Hymeneal altar.'
'he mean, solicit by he, Mr. Copperfield,' say Mrs. Micawber,
archly. 'he cannot answer for other.'
'my dear,' return Mr. Micawber with sudden seriousness, 'I have
no desire to answer for other. I be too well aware that when, in
the inscrutable decree of Fate, you be reserve for I, it be
possible you may have be reserve for one, destine, after a
protract struggle, at length to fall a victim to pecuniary
involvement of a complicated nature. I understand your allusion,
my love. I regret it, but I can bear it.'
'Micawber!' exclaim Mrs. Micawber, in tear. 'have I deserve
this! I, who never have desert you; who never will desert you,
Micawber!'
'my love,' say Mr. Micawber, much affected, 'you will forgive, and
our old and try friend Copperfield will, I be sure, forgive, the
momentary laceration of a wound spirit, make sensitive by a
recent collision with the Minion of Power - in other word, with a
ribald Turncock attach to the water-work - and will pity, not
condemn, its excess.'
Mr. Micawber then embrace Mrs. Micawber, and press my hand;
leave I to infer from this break allusion that his domestic
supply of water have be cut off that afternoon, in consequence of
default in the payment of the company's rate.
to divert his thought from this melancholy subject, I inform Mr.
Micawber that I rely upon he for a bowl of punch, and lead he to
the lemon. his recent despondency, not to say despair, be go
in a moment. I never see a man so thoroughly enjoy himself amid
the fragrance of lemon-peel and sugar, the odour of burn rum,
and the steam of boiling water, as Mr. Micawber do that afternoon.
it be wonderful to see his face shin at we out of a thin cloud
of these delicate fume, as he stir, and mixed, and taste, and
look as if he be make, instead of punch, a fortune for his
family down to the late posterity. as to Mrs. Micawber, I donot
know whether it be the effect of the cap, or the lavender-water,
or the pin, or the fire, or the wax-candle, but she come out of
my room, comparatively speak, lovely. and the lark be never
gayer than that excellent woman.
I suppose - I never venture to inquire, but I suppose - that Mrs.
Crupp, after fry the sol, be take ill. because we break
down at that point. the leg of mutton come up very red within, and
very pale without: besides have a foreign substance of a gritty
nature sprinkle over it, as if if have have a fall into the ash of
that remarkable kitchen fireplace. but we be not in condition to
judge of this fact from the appearance of the gravy, forasmuch as
the 'young gal' have drop it all upon the stair - where it
remain, by the by, in a long train, until it be wear out. the
pigeon-pie be not bad, but it be a delusive pie: the crust be
like a disappointing head, phrenologically speak: full of lump
and bump, with nothing particular underneath. in short, the
banquet be such a failure that I should have be quite unhappy -
about the failure, I mean, for I be always unhappy about Dora - if
I have not be relieve by the great good humour of my company, and
by a bright suggestion from Mr. Micawber.
'my dear friend Copperfield,' say Mr. Micawber, 'accident will
occur in the well-regulate family; and in family not regulate
by that pervading influence which sanctifie while it enhance the
- a - I would say, in short, by the influence of Woman, in the
lofty character of Wife, they may be expect with confidence, and
must be bear with philosophy. if you will allow I to take the
liberty of remark that there be few comestible well, in
their way, than a Devil, and that I believe, with a little division
of labour, we could accomplish a good one if the young person in
attendance could produce a gridiron, I would put it to you, that
this little misfortune may be easily repair.'
there be a gridiron in the pantry, on which my morning rasher of
bacon be cook. we have it in, in a twinkling, and immediately
apply ourselves to carry Mr. Micawber's idea into effect. the
division of labour to which he have refer be this: - traddle
cut the mutton into slice; Mr. Micawber (who could do anything of
this sort to perfection) cover they with pepper, mustard, salt,
and cayenne; I put they on the gridiron, turn they with a fork,
and take they off, under Mr. Micawber's direction; and Mrs.
Micawber heat, and continually stir, some mushroom ketchup in
a little saucepan. when we have slice enough do to begin upon,
we fall-to, with our sleeve still tuck up at the wrist, more
slice sputter and blaze on the fire, and our attention
divide between the mutton on our plate, and the mutton then
prepare.
what with the novelty of this cookery, the excellence of it, the
bustle of it, the frequent starting up to look after it, the
frequent sitting down to dispose of it as the crisp slice come off
the gridiron hot and hot, the be so busy, so flushed with the
fire, so amused, and in the midst of such a tempting noise and
savour, we reduce the leg of mutton to the bone. my own appetite
come back miraculously. I be ashamed to record it, but I really
believe I forgot Dora for a little while. I be satisfied that Mr.
and Mrs. Micawber could not have enjoy the feast more, if they
have sell a bed to provide it. traddle laugh as heartily, almost
the whole time, as he eat and work. indeed we all do, all at
once; and I dare say there be never a great success.
we be at the height of our enjoyment, and be all busily
engage, in our several department, endeavour to bring the last
batch of slice to a state of perfection that should crown the
feast, when I be aware of a strange presence in the room, and my
eye encounter those of the staid Littimer, stand hat in hand
before I.
'whatbe the matter?' I involuntarily ask.
'I beg your pardon, sir, I be direct to come in. be my master
not here, sir?'
'no.'
'have you not see he, sir?'
'no; donot you come from he?'
'not immediately so, sir.'
'do he tell you you would find he here?'
'not exactly so, sir. but I should think he might be here
tomorrow, as he have not be here today.'
'be he come up from Oxford?'
'I beg, sir,' he return respectfully, 'that you will be seat,
and allow I to do this.' with which he take the fork from my
unresisting hand, and bend over the gridiron, as if his whole
attention be concentrate on it.
we should not have be much discompose, I dare say, by the
appearance of Steerforth himself, but we become in a moment the
meek of the meek before his respectable serve-man. Mr.
Micawber, hum a tune, to show that he be quite at ease,
subside into his chair, with the handle of a hastily conceal
fork stick out of the bosom of his coat, as if he have stab
himself. Mrs. Micawber put on her brown glove, and assume a
genteel languor. traddle run his greasy hand through his hair,
and stand it bolt upright, and star in confusion on the
table-cloth. as for I, I be a mere infant at the head of my own
table; and hardly venture to glance at the respectable phenomenon,
who have come from Heaven know where, to put my establishment to
right.
meanwhile he take the mutton off the gridiron, and gravely hand
it round. we all take some, but our appreciation of it be go,
and we merely make a show of eat it. as we severally push
away our plate, he noiselessly remove they, and set on the
cheese. he take that off, too, when it be do with; clear the
table; pile everything on the dumb-waiter; give we our
wine-glass; and, of his own accord, wheel the dumb-waiter into
the pantry. all this be do in a perfect manner, and he never
raise his eye from what he be about. yet his very elbow, when
he have his back towards I, seem to teem with the expression of
his fix opinion that I be extremely young.
'can I do anything more, sir?'
I thank he and say, no; but would he take no dinner himself?
'none, I be oblige to you, sir.'
'be Mr. Steerforth come from Oxford?'
'I beg your pardon, sir?'
'be Mr. Steerforth come from Oxford?'
'I should imagine that he might be here tomorrow, sir. I rather
think he might have be here today, sir. the mistake be mine,
no doubt, sir.'
'if you should see he first -' say I.
'if youwill excuse I, sir, I donot think I shall see he first.'
'in case you do,' say I, 'pray say that I be sorry he be not here
today, as an old schoolfellow of his be here.'
'indeed, sir!' and he divide a bow between I and traddle, with
a glance at the latter.
he be move softly to the door, when, in a forlorn hope of say
something naturally - which I never could, to this man - I say:
'oh! Littimer!'
'Sir!'
'do you remain long at Yarmouth, that time?'
'not particularly so, sir.'
'you see the boat complete?'
'yes, sir. I remain behind on purpose to see the boat
complete.'
'I know!' he raise his eye to mine respectfully.
'Mr. Steerforth have not see it yet, I suppose?'
'I really cannot say, sir. I think - but I really cannot say, sir.
I wish you good night, sir.'
he comprehend everybody present, in the respectful bow with which
he follow these word, and disappear. my visitor seem to
breathe more freely when he be go; but my own relief be very
great, for besides the constraint, arise from that extraordinary
sense of be at a disadvantage which I always have in this man's
presence, my conscience have embarrass I with whisper that I have
mistrust his master, and I could not repress a vague uneasy dread
that he might find it out. how be it, have so little in reality
to conceal, that I always do feel as if this man be find I
out?
Mr. Micawber rouse I from this reflection, which be blend with
a certain remorseful apprehension of see Steerforth himself, by
bestow many encomium on the absent Littimer as a most
respectable fellow, and a thoroughly admirable servant. Mr.
Micawber, I may remark, have take his full share of the general
bow, and have receive it with infinite condescension.
'but punch, my dear copperfield,' say Mr. Micawber, taste it,
'like time and tide, wait for no man. ah! it be at the present
moment in high flavour. my love, will you give I your opinion?'
Mrs. Micawber pronounce it excellent.
'then I will drink,' say Mr. Micawber, 'if my friend Copperfield
will permit I to take that social liberty, to the day when my
friend Copperfield and myself be young, and fight our way in
the world side by side. I may say, of myself and Copperfield, in
word we have sing together before now, that
we twa hae run about the braes
and pu'd the gowan' fine
- in a figurative point of view - on several occasion. I be not
exactly aware,' say Mr. Micawber, with the old roll in his voice,
and the old indescribable air of say something genteel, 'what
gowan may be, but I have no doubt that Copperfield and myself
would frequently have take a pull at they, if it have be
feasible.'
Mr. Micawber, at the then present moment, take a pull at his punch.
so we all do: traddle evidently lose in wonder at what distant
time Mr. Micawber and I could have be comrade in the battle of
the world.
'Ahem!' say Mr. Micawber, clear his throat, and warm with
the punch and with the fire. 'my dear, another glass?'
Mrs. Micawber say it must be very little; but we couldnot allow
that, so it be a glassful.
'as we be quite confidential here, Mr. Copperfield,' say Mrs.
Micawber, sip her punch, 'Mr. Traddles be a part of our
domesticity, I should much like to have your opinion on Mr.
Micawber's prospect. for corn,' say Mrs. Micawber
argumentatively, 'as I have repeatedly say to Mr. Micawber, may be
gentlemanly, but it be not remunerative. Commission to the extent
of two and ninepence in a fortnight cannot, however limit our
idea, be consider remunerative.'
we be all agree upon that.
'then,' say Mrs. Micawber, who pride herself on take a clear
view of thing, and keep Mr. Micawber straight by her woman's
wisdom, when he might otherwise go a little crooked, 'then I ask
myself this question. if corn be not to be rely upon, what be?
be coal to be rely upon? not at all. we have turn our
attention to that experiment, on the suggestion of my family, and
we find it fallacious.'
Mr. Micawber, lean back in his chair with his hand in his
pocket, eye we aside, and nod his head, as much as to say that
the case be very clearly put.
'the article of corn and coal,' say Mrs. Micawber, still more
argumentatively, 'be equally out of the question, Mr.
Copperfield, I naturally look round the world, and say, "what be
there in which a person of Mr. Micawber's talent be likely to
succeed?" and I exclude the do anything on commission, because
commission be not a certainty. what be well suited to a person of
Mr. Micawber's peculiar temperament be, I be convince, a
certainty.'
traddle and I both express, by a feeling murmur, that this great
discovery be no doubt true of Mr. Micawber, and that it do he
much credit.
'I will not conceal from you, my dear Mr. Copperfield,' say Mrs.
Micawber, 'that I have long feel the Brewing business to be
particularly adapt to Mr. Micawber. look at Barclay and Perkins!
look at Truman, Hanbury, and Buxton! it be on that extensive
footing that Mr. Micawber, I know from my own knowledge of he, be
calculate to shine; and the profit, I be tell, be e-nor-mous!
but if Mr. Micawber cannot get into those firm - which decline to
answer his letter, when he offer his service even in an inferior
capacity - what be the use of dwelling upon that idea? none. I
may have a conviction that Mr. Micawber's manner -'
'Hem! really, my dear,' interpose Mr. Micawber.
'my love, be silent,' say Mrs. Micawber, lay her brown glove on
his hand. 'I may have a conviction, Mr. Copperfield, that Mr.
Micawber's manner peculiarly qualify he for the Banking business.
I may argue within myself, that if I have a deposit at a
banking-house, the manner of Mr. Micawber, as represent that
banking-house, would inspire confidence, and must extend the
connexion. but if the various banking-house refuse to avail
themselves of Mr. Micawber's ability, or receive the offer of
they with contumely, what be the use of dwelling upon that idea?
none. as to originate a banking-business, I may know that there
be member of my family who, if they choose to place their money in
Mr. Micawber's hand, might find an establishment of that
description. but if they do not choose to place their money in Mr.
Micawber's hand - which they donot - what be the use of that?
again I contend that we be no far advanced than we be
before.'
I shake my head, and say, 'not a bit.' traddle also shake his
head, and say, 'not a bit.'
'what do I deduce from this?' Mrs. Micawber go on to say, still
with the same air of put a case lucidly. 'what be the
conclusion, my dear Mr. Copperfield, to which I be irresistibly
bring? be I wrong in say, it be clear that we must live?'
I answer 'not at all!' and traddle answer 'not at all!' and I
find myself afterwards sagely add, alone, that a person must
either live or die.
'just so,' return Mrs. Micawber, 'it be precisely that. and the
fact be, my dear Mr. Copperfield, that we can not live without
something widely different from exist circumstance shortly
turn up. now I be convince, myself, and this I have point
out to Mr. Micawber several time of late, that thing cannot be
expect to turn up of themselves. we must, in a measure, assist
to turn they up. I may be wrong, but I have form that opinion.'
both Traddles and I applaud it highly.
'very well,' say Mrs. Micawber. 'then what do I recommend? here
be Mr. Micawber with a variety of qualification - with great
talent -'
'really, my love,' say Mr. Micawber.
'pray, my dear, allow I to conclude. here be Mr. Micawber, with
a variety of qualification, with great talent - I should say, with
genius, but that may be the partiality of a wife -'
traddle and I both murmur 'no.'
'and here be Mr. Micawber without any suitable position or
employment. where do that responsibility rest? clearly on
society. then I would make a fact so disgraceful know, and boldly
challenge society to set it right. it appear to I, my dear Mr.
Copperfield,' say Mrs. Micawber, forcibly, 'that what Mr. Micawber
have to do, be to throw down the gauntlet to society, and say, in
effect, "show I who will take that up. let the party immediately
step forward."'
I venture to ask Mrs. Micawber how this be to be do.
'by advertising,' say Mrs. Micawber - 'in all the paper. it
appear to I, that what Mr. Micawber have to do, in justice to
himself, in justice to his family, and I will even go so far as to
say in justice to society, by which he have be hitherto
overlook, be to advertise in all the paper; to describe himself
plainly as so-and-so, with such and such qualification and to put
it thus: "now employ I, on remunerative term, and address,
post-pay, to W. M., Post Office, Camden Town."'
'this idea of Mrs. Micawber's, my dear copperfield,' say Mr.
Micawber, make his shirt-collar meet in front of his chin, and
glance at I sideways, 'be, in fact, the Leap to which I allude,
when I last have the pleasure of see you.'
'advertising be rather expensive,' I remark, dubiously.
'exactly so!' say Mrs. Micawber, preserve the same logical air.
'quite true, my dear Mr. Copperfield! I have make the identical
observation to Mr. Micawber. it be for that reason especially,
that I think Mr. Micawber ought (as I have already say, in justice
to himself, in justice to his family, and in justice to society) to
raise a certain sum of money - on a bill.'
Mr. Micawber, lean back in his chair, trifle with his eye-glass
and cast his eye up at the ceiling; but I think he observant of
traddle, too, who be look at the fire.
'if no member of my family,' say Mrs. Micawber, 'be possess of
sufficient natural feeling to negotiate that bill - I believe there
be a well business-term to express what I mean -'
Mr. Micawber, with his eye still cast up at the ceiling, suggest
'discount.'
'to discount that bill,' say Mrs. Micawber, 'then my opinion be,
that Mr. Micawber should go into the City, should take that bill
into the Money market, and should dispose of it for what he can
get. if the individual in the Money Market oblige Mr. Micawber to
sustain a great sacrifice, that be between themselves and their
conscience. I view it, steadily, as an investment. I recommend
Mr. Micawber, my dear Mr. Copperfield, to do the same; to regard it
as an investment which be sure of return, and to make up his mind
to any sacrifice.'
I feel, but I be sure I donot know why, that this be self-deny
and devote in Mrs. Micawber, and I utter a murmur to that
effect. traddle, who take his tone from I, do likewise, still
look at the fire.
'I will not,' say Mrs. Micawber, finish her punch, and
gather her scarf about her shoulder, preparatory to her
withdrawal to my bedroom: 'I will not protract these remark on the
subject of Mr. Micawber's pecuniary affair. at your fireside, my
dear Mr. Copperfield, and in the presence of Mr. Traddles, who,
though not so old a friend, be quite one of ourselves, I could not
refrain from make you acquainted with the course I advise Mr.
Micawber to take. I feel that the time be arrive when Mr.
Micawber should exert himself and - I will add - assert himself,
and it appear to I that these be the mean. I be aware that I
be merely a female, and that a masculine judgement be usually
consider more competent to the discussion of such question;
still I must not forget that, when I live at home with my papa and
mama, my papa be in the habit of say, "Emma's form be fragile,
but her grasp of a subject be inferior to none." that my papa be
too partial, I well know; but that he be an observer of character
in some degree, my duty and my reason equally forbid I to doubt.'
with these word, and resist our entreaty that she would grace
the remain circulation of the punch with her presence, Mrs.
Micawber retire to my bedroom. and really I feel that she be a
noble woman - the sort of woman who might have be a roman matron,
and do all manner of heroic thing, in time of public trouble.
in the fervour of this impression, I congratulate Mr. Micawber on
the treasure he possess. so do traddle. Mr. Micawber extend
his hand to each of we in succession, and then cover his face
with his pocket-handkerchief, which I think have more snuff upon it
than he be aware of. he then return to the punch, in the
high state of exhilaration.
he be full of eloquence. he give we to understand that in our
child we live again, and that, under the pressure of pecuniary
difficulty, any accession to their number be doubly welcome. he
say that Mrs. Micawber have latterly have her doubt on this point,
but that he have dispel they, and reassure she. as to her
family, they be totally unworthy of she, and their sentiment
be utterly indifferent to he, and they might - I quote his own
expression - go to the Devil.
Mr. Micawber then deliver a warm eulogy on traddle. he say
traddle's be a character, to the steady virtue of which he (Mr.
Micawber) could lay no claim, but which, he thank Heaven, he
could admire. he feelingly allude to the young lady, unknown,
whom traddle have honour with his affection, and who have
reciprocate that affection by honour and bless traddle with
her affection. Mr. Micawber pledge she. so do I. Traddles
thank we both, by say, with a simplicity and honesty I have
sense enough to be quite charm with, 'I be very much oblige to
you indeed. and I do assure you, shebe the dear girl! -'
Mr. Micawber take an early opportunity, after that, of hinting,
with the utmost delicacy and ceremony, at the state of MY
affection. nothing but the serious assurance of his friend
copperfield to the contrary, he observe, could deprive he of the
impression that his friend Copperfield love and be belove.
after feel very hot and uncomfortable for some time, and after
a good deal of blushing, stammering, and deny, I say, have my
glass in my hand, 'well! I would give they D.!' which so excited
and gratify Mr. Micawber, that he run with a glass of punch into
my bedroom, in order that Mrs. Micawber might drink D., who drink
it with enthusiasm, cry from within, in a shrill voice, 'hear,
hear! my dear Mr. Copperfield, I be delighted. hear!' and tap
at the wall, by way of applause.
our conversation, afterwards, take a more worldly turn; Mr.
Micawber tell we that he find Camden Town inconvenient, and
that the first thing he contemplate doing, when the advertisement
should have be the cause of something satisfactory turn up,
be to move. he mention a terrace at the western end of Oxford
Street, front Hyde Park, on which he have always have his eye, but
which he do not expect to attain immediately, as it would require
a large establishment. there would probably be an interval, he
explain, in which he should content himself with the upper part
of a house, over some respectable place of business - say in
Piccadilly, - which would be a cheerful situation for Mrs.
Micawber; and where, by throw out a bow-window, or carry up
the roof another story, or make some little alteration of that
sort, they might live, comfortably and reputably, for a few year.
whatever be reserve for he, he expressly say, or wherever his
abode might be, we might rely on this - there would always be a
room for traddle, and a knife and fork for I. we acknowledge
his kindness; and he beg we to forgive his have launch into
these practical and business-like detail, and to excuse it as
natural in one who be make entirely new arrangement in life.
Mrs. Micawber, tap at the wall again to know if tea be ready,
break up this particular phase of our friendly conversation. she
make tea for we in a most agreeable manner; and, whenever I go
near she, in handing about the tea-cup and bread-and-butter, ask
I, in a whisper, whether D. be fair, or dark, or whether she be
short, or tall: or something of that kind; which I think I like.
after tea, we discuss a variety of topic before the fire; and
Mrs. Micawber be good enough to sing we (in a small, thin, flat
voice, which I remember to have consider, when I first know
she, the very table-beer of acoustic) the favourite ballad of
'the Dashing White Sergeant', and 'Little Tafflin'. for both of
these song Mrs. Micawber have be famous when she live at home
with her papa and mama. Mr. Micawber tell we, that when he hear
she sing the first one, on the first occasion of his see she
beneath the parental roof, she have attract his attention in an
extraordinary degree; but that when it come to Little Tafflin, he
have resolve to win that woman or perish in the attempt.
it be between ten and eleven o'clock when Mrs. Micawber rise to
replace her cap in the whitey-brown paper parcel, and to put on her
bonnet. Mr. Micawber take the opportunity of traddle put on
his great-coat, to slip a letter into my hand, with a whisper
request that I would read it at my leisure. I also take the
opportunity of my hold a candle over the banister to light they
down, when Mr. Micawber be go first, lead Mrs. Micawber, and
traddle be follow with the cap, to detain traddle for a
moment on the top of the stair.
'traddle,' say I, 'Mr. Micawber donot mean any harm, poor fellow:
but, if I be you, I wouldnot lend he anything.'
'my dear copperfield,' return traddle, smile, 'I havenot get
anything to lend.'
'you have get a name, you know,' say I.
'oh! you call that something to lend?' return traddle, with a
thoughtful look.
'certainly.'
'oh!' say traddle. 'yes, to be sure! I be very much oblige to
you, Copperfield; but - I be afraid I have lend he that already.'
'for the bill that be to be a certain investment?' I inquire.
'no,' say traddle. 'not for that one. this be the first I have
hear of that one. I have be think that he will most likely
propose that one, on the way home. minebe another.'
'I hope there will be nothing wrong about it,' say I.
'I hope not,' say traddle. 'I should think not, though, because
he tell I, only the other day, that it be provide for. that be
Mr. Micawber's expression, "provide for."'
Mr. Micawber look up at this juncture to where we be stand,
I have only time to repeat my caution. traddle thank I, and
descend. but I be much afraid, when I observe the good-natured
manner in which he go down with the cap in his hand, and give
Mrs. Micawber his arm, that he would be carry into the Money
Market neck and heel.
I return to my fireside, and be musing, half gravely and half
laughing, on the character of Mr. Micawber and the old relation
between we, when I hear a quick step ascend the stair. at
first, I think it be traddle come back for something Mrs.
Micawber have leave behind; but as the step approach, I know it,
and feel my heart beat high, and the blood rush to my face, for it
be Steerforth's.
I be never unmindful of Agnes, and she never leave that sanctuary
in my thought - if I may call it so - where I have place she from
the first. but when he enter, and stand before I with his hand
out, the darkness that have fall on he change to light, and I
feel confounded and ashamed of have doubt one I love so
heartily. I love she none the less; I think of she as the same
benignant, gentle angel in my life; I reproach myself, not she,
with have do he an injury; and I would have make he any
atonement if I have know what to make, and how to make it.
'why, Daisy, old boy, dumb-foundered!' laugh Steerforth, shake
my hand heartily, and throw it gaily away. 'have I detect you
in another feast, you sybarite! these doctor' Commons fellow be
the gay man in town, I believe, and beat we sober Oxford people
all to nothing!' his bright glance go merrily round the room, as
he take the seat on the sofa opposite to I, which Mrs. Micawber
have recently vacate, and stir the fire into a blaze.
'I be so surprised at first,' say I, give he welcome with all
the cordiality I feel, 'that I have hardly breath to greet you with,
Steerforth.'
'well, the sight of I be good for sore eye, as the Scotch say,'
reply Steerforth, 'and so be the sight of you, Daisy, in full
bloom. how be you, my Bacchanal?'
'I be very well,' say I; 'and not at all Bacchanalian tonight,
though I confess to another party of three.'
'all of whom I meet in the street, talk loud in your praise,'
return Steerforth. 'whobe our friend in the tight?'
I give he the good idea I could, in a few word, of Mr. Micawber.
he laugh heartily at my feeble portrait of that gentleman, and
say he be a man to know, and he must know he.
'but who do you suppose our other friend be?' say I, in my turn.
'Heaven know,' say Steerforth. 'not a bore, I hope? I think
he look a little like one.'
'traddle!' I reply, triumphantly.
'whobe he?' ask Steerforth, in his careless way.
'donot you remember traddle? traddle in our room at Salem
House?'
'oh! that fellow!' say Steerforth, beat a lump of coal on the
top of the fire, with the poker. 'be he as soft as ever? and
where the deuce do you pick he up?'
I extoll Traddles in reply, as highly as I could; for I feel that
Steerforth rather slight he. Steerforth, dismiss the subject
with a light nod, and a smile, and the remark that he would be glad
to see the old fellow too, for he have always be an odd fish,
inquire if I could give he anything to eat? during most of this
short dialogue, when he have not be speak in a wild vivacious
manner, he have sit idly beat on the lump of coal with the poker.
I observe that he do the same thing while I be get out the
remain of the pigeon-pie, and so forth.
'why, Daisy, herebe a supper for a king!' he exclaim, start
out of his silence with a burst, and take his seat at the table.
'I shall do it justice, for I have come from Yarmouth.'
'I think you come from Oxford?' I return.
'not I,' say Steerforth. 'I have be seafare - well
employ.'
'Littimer be here today, to inquire for you,' I remark, 'and I
understand he that you be at Oxford; though, now I think of it,
he certainly do not say so.'
'Littimer be a great fool than I think he, to have be
inquire for I at all,' say Steerforth, jovially pour out a
glass of wine, and drink to I. 'as to understand he, you
be a cleverer fellow than most of we, Daisy, if you can do that.'
'thatbe true, indeed,' say I, move my chair to the table. 'so
you have be at Yarmouth, Steerforth!' interested to know all
about it. 'have you be there long?'
'no,' he return. 'an escapade of a week or so.'
'and how be they all? of course, little Emily be not married
yet?'
'not yet. go to be, I believe - in so many week, or month, or
something or other. I have not see much of them. by the by'; he
lay down his knife and fork, which he have be use with great
diligence, and begin feel in his pocket; 'I have a letter for
you.'
'from whom?'
'why, from your old nurse,' he return, take some paper out of
his breast pocket. "'J. Steerforth, Esquire, debtor, to the
Willing mind"; thatbe not it. Patience, and wewill find it
presently. Old what's-his-name's in a bad way, and itbe about
that, I believe.'
'Barkis, do you mean?'
'yes!' still feel in his pocket, and look over their
content: 'itbe all over with poor Barkis, I be afraid. I see a
little apothecary there - surgeon, or whatever he be - who bring
your worship into the world. he be mighty learn about the case,
to I; but the upshot of his opinion be, that the carrier be
make his last journey rather fast. - put your hand into the
breast pocket of my great-coat on the chair yonder, and I think
youwill find the letter. be it there?'
'here it be!' say I.
'thatbe right!'
it be from Peggotty; something less legible than usual, and brief.
it inform I of her husband's hopeless state, and hint at his
be 'a little nearer' than heretofore, and consequently more
difficult to manage for his own comfort. it say nothing of she
weariness and watch, and praise he highly. it be write
with a plain, unaffected, homely piety that I know to be genuine,
and end with 'my duty to my ever darling' - mean myself.
while I decipher it, Steerforth continue to eat and drink.
'itbe a bad job,' he say, when I have do; 'but the sun set every
day, and people die every minute, and we mustnot be scar by the
common lot. if we fail to hold our own, because that equal foot
at all man's door be hear knock somewhere, every object in
this world would slip from we. no! ride on! rough-shod if need
be, smooth-shod if that will do, but ride on! ride on over all
obstacle, and win the race!'
'and win what race?' say I.
'the race that one have start in,' say he. 'ride on!'
I notice, I remember, as he pause, look at I with his
handsome head a little throw back, and his glass raise in his
hand, that, though the freshness of the sea-wind be on his face,
and it be ruddy, there be trace in it, make since I last see
it, as if he have apply himself to some habitual strain of the
fervent energy which, when rouse, be so passionately rouse
within he. I have it in my thought to remonstrate with he upon
his desperate way of pursue any fancy that he take - such as this
buffeting of rough sea, and braving of hard weather, for example
- when my mind glance off to the immediate subject of our
conversation again, and pursue that instead.
'I tell you what, Steerforth,' say I, 'if your high spirit will
listen to I -'
'they be potent spirit, and will do whatever you like,' he
answer, move from the table to the fireside again.
'then I tell you what, Steerforth. I think I will go down and see
my old nurse. it be not that I can do she any good, or render she
any real service; but she be so attached to I that my visit will
have as much effect on she, as if I could do both. she will take
it so kindly that it will be a comfort and support to she. it be
no great effort to make, I be sure, for such a friend as she have
be to I. wouldnot you go a day's journey, if you be in my
place?'
his face be thoughtful, and he sit consider a little before he
answer, in a low voice, 'well! go. you can do no harm.'
'you have just come back,' say I, 'and it would be in vain to ask
you to go with I?'
'quite,' he return. 'I be for Highgate tonight. I have not see
my mother this long time, and it lie upon my conscience, for itbe
something to be love as she love her prodigal son. - bah!
nonsense! - you mean to go tomorrow, I suppose?' he say, hold
I out at arm's length, with a hand on each of my shoulder.
'yes, I think so.'
'well, then, donot go till next day. I want you to come and stay
a few day with we. here I be, on purpose to bid you, and you fly
off to Yarmouth!'
'you be a nice fellow to talk of fly off, Steerforth, who be
always run wild on some unknown expedition or other!'
he look at I for a moment without speak, and then rejoin,
still hold I as before, and give I a shake:
'come! say the next day, and pass as much of tomorrow as you can
with we! who know when we may meet again, else? come! say the
next day! I want you to stand between Rosa Dartle and I, and keep
we asunder.'
'would you love each other too much, without I?'
'yes; or hate,' laugh Steerforth; 'no matter which. come! say
the next day!'
I say the next day; and he put on his great-coat and light his
cigar, and set off to walk home. find he in this intention, I
put on my own great-coat (but do not light my own cigar, have
have enough of that for one while) and walk with he as far as the
open road: a dull road, then, at night. he be in great spirit
all the way; and when we part, and I look after he go so
gallantly and airily homeward, I think of his saying, 'ride on
over all obstacle, and win the race!' and wish, for the first
time, that he have some worthy race to run.
I be undressing in my own room, when Mr. Micawber's letter tumble
on the floor. thus remind of it, I break the seal and read as
follow. it be date an hour and a half before dinner. I be not
sure whether I have mention that, when Mr. Micawber be at any
particularly desperate crisis, he use a sort of legal phraseology,
which he seem to think equivalent to wind up his affair.
'SIR - for I dare not say my dear Copperfield,
'it be expedient that I should inform you that the undersigned be
crush. some flicker effort to spare you the premature
knowledge of his calamitous position, you may observe in he this
day; but hope have sink beneath the horizon, and the undersigned be
crush.
'the present communication be pen within the personal range (I
cannot call it the society) of an individual, in a state closely
border on intoxication, employ by a broker. that individual
be in legal possession of the premise, under a distress for rent.
his inventory include, not only the chattel and effect of every
description belong to the undersigned, as yearly tenant of this
habitation, but also those appertain to Mr. Thomas Traddles,
lodger, a member of the Honourable Society of the Inner Temple.
'if any drop of gloom be want in the overflowing cup, which be
now "commend" (in the language of an immortal writer) to the lip
of the undersigned, it would be find in the fact, that a friendly
acceptance grant to the undersigned, by the before-mention Mr.
Thomas Traddles, for the sum of 23l 4s 9 1/2d be over due, and be
not provide for. also, in the fact that the living
responsibility cling to the undersigned will, in the course of
nature, be increase by the sum of one more helpless victim; whose
miserable appearance may be look for - in round number - at the
expiration of a period not exceed six lunar month from the
present date.
'after premise thus much, it would be a work of supererogation to
add, that dust and ash be for ever scatter
'on
'the
'head
'of
'WILKINS MICAWBER.'
poor traddle! I know enough of Mr. Micawber by this time, to
foresee that he might be expect to recover the blow; but my
night's rest be sorely distress by thought of traddle, and of
the curate's daughter, who be one of ten, down in Devonshire, and
who be such a dear girl, and who would wait for Traddles (ominous
praise!) until she be sixty, or any age that could be mention.
CHAPTER 29
I visit steerforth at his home, again
I mention to Mr. Spenlow in the morning, that I want leave of
absence for a short time; and as I be not in the receipt of any
salary, and consequently be not obnoxious to the implacable
jorkin, there be no difficulty about it. I take that
opportunity, with my voice stick in my throat, and my sight
failing as I utter the word, to express my hope that Miss
Spenlow be quite well; to which Mr. Spenlow reply, with no more
emotion than if he have be speak of an ordinary human being,
that he be much oblige to I, and she be very well.
we article clerk, as germ of the patrician order of proctor,
be treat with so much consideration, that I be almost my own
master at all time. as I do not care, however, to get to
Highgate before one or two o'clock in the day, and as we have
another little excommunication case in court that morning, which
be call the office of the judge promote by tipkin against
Bullock for his soul's correction, I pass an hour or two in
attendance on it with Mr. Spenlow very agreeably. it arise out of
a scuffle between two churchwarden, one of whom be allege to
have push the other against a pump; the handle of which pump
project into a school-house, which school-house be under a
gable of the church-roof, make the push an ecclesiastical offence.
it be an amusing case; and send I up to Highgate, on the box of
the stage-coach, think about the Commons, and what Mr. Spenlow
have say about touch the Commons and bring down the country.
Mrs. Steerforth be pleased to see I, and so be Rosa Dartle. I
be agreeably surprised to find that Littimer be not there, and
that we be attend by a modest little parlour-maid, with blue
ribbon in her cap, whose eye it be much more pleasant, and much
less disconcerting, to catch by accident, than the eye of that
respectable man. but what I particularly observe, before I have
be half-an-hour in the house, be the close and attentive watch
Miss Dartle keep upon I; and the lurking manner in which she
seem to compare my face with Steerforth's, and Steerforth's with
mine, and to lie in wait for something to come out between the two.
so surely as I look towards she, do I see that eager visage,
with its gaunt black eye and search brow, intent on mine; or
pass suddenly from mine to Steerforth's; or comprehend both
of we at once. in this lynx-like scrutiny she be so far from
faltering when she see I observe it, that at such a time she only
fix her pierce look upon I with a more intent expression
still. blameless as I be, and know that I be, in reference to
any wrong she could possibly suspect I of, I shrunk before her
strange eye, quite unable to endure their hungry lustre.
all day, she seem to pervade the whole house. if I talk to
Steerforth in his room, I hear her dress rustle in the little
gallery outside. when he and I engage in some of our old
exercise on the lawn behind the house, I see her face pass from
window to window, like a wandering light, until it fix itself in
one, and watch we. when we all four go out walk in the
afternoon, she close her thin hand on my arm like a spring, to
keep I back, while Steerforth and his mother go on out of
hearing: and then speak to I.
'you have be a long time,' she say, 'without come here. be
your profession really so engaging and interesting as to absorb
your whole attention? I ask because I always want to be inform,
when I be ignorant. be it really, though?'
I reply that I like it well enough, but that I certainly could
not claim so much for it.
'oh! I be glad to know that, because I always like to be put right
when I be wrong,' say Rosa Dartle. 'you mean it be a little dry,
perhaps?'
'well,' I reply; 'perhaps it be a little dry.'
'oh! and thatbe a reason why you want relief and change -
excitement and all that?' say she. 'ah! very true! but benot it
a little - eh? - for he; I donot mean you?'
a quick glance of her eye towards the spot where Steerforth be
walk, with his mother lean on his arm, show I whom she
mean; but beyond that, I be quite lost. and I look so, I have
no doubt.
'donot it - I donot say that it do, mind I want to know - donot
it rather engross he? donot it make he, perhaps, a little more
remiss than usual in his visit to his blindly-doting - eh?' with
another quick glance at they, and such a glance at I as seem to
look into my innermost thought.
'Miss Dartle,' I return, 'pray do not think -'
'I donot!' she say. 'oh dear I, donot suppose that I think
anything! I be not suspicious. I only ask a question. I donot
state any opinion. I want to found an opinion on what you tell I.
then, itbe not so? well! I be very glad to know it.'
'it certainly be not the fact,' say I, perplexed, 'that I be
accountable for Steerforth's have be away from home long than
usual - if he have be: which I really donot know at this moment,
unless I understand it from you. I have not see he this long
while, until last night.'
'no?'
'indeed, Miss Dartle, no!'
as she look full at I, I see her face grow sharp and paler,
and the mark of the old wound lengthen out until it cut through
the disfigured lip, and deep into the nether lip, and slant down
the face. there be something positively awful to I in this, and
in the brightness of her eye, as she say, look fixedly at I:
'what be he do?'
I repeat the word, more to myself than she, be so amazed.
'what be he do?' she say, with an eagerness that seem enough
to consume she like a fire. 'in what be that man assist he,
who never look at I without an inscrutable falsehood in his eye?
if you be honourable and faithful, I donot ask you to betray your
friend. I ask you only to tell I, be it anger, be it hatre, be
it pride, be it restlessness, be it some wild fancy, be it love,
what be it, that be lead he?'
'Miss Dartle,' I return, 'how shall I tell you, so that you will
believe I, that I know of nothing in Steerforth different from
what there be when I first come here? I can think of nothing. I
firmly believe there be nothing. I hardly understand even what you
mean.'
as she still stand look fixedly at I, a twitching or throbbing,
from which I could not dissociate the idea of pain, come into that
cruel mark; and lift up the corner of her lip as if with scorn,
or with a pity that despise its object. she put her hand upon it
hurriedly - a hand so thin and delicate, that when I have see she
hold it up before the fire to shade her face, I have compare it in
my thought to fine porcelain - and say, in a quick, fierce,
passionate way, 'I swear you to secrecy about this!' say not a
word more.
Mrs. Steerforth be particularly happy in her son's society, and
Steerforth be, on this occasion, particularly attentive and
respectful to she. it be very interesting to I to see they
together, not only on account of their mutual affection, but
because of the strong personal resemblance between they, and the
manner in which what be haughty or impetuous in he be soften
by age and sex, in she, to a gracious dignity. I think, more
than once, that it be well no serious cause of division have ever
come between they; or two such nature - I ought rather to express
it, two such shade of the same nature - might have be hard to
reconcile than the two extreme opposite in creation. the idea
do not originate in my own discernment, I be bind to confess, but
in a speech of Rosa Dartle's.
she say at dinner:
'oh, but do tell I, though, somebody, because I have be think
about it all day, and I want to know.'
'you want to know what, Rosa?' return Mrs. Steerforth. 'pray,
pray, Rosa, do not be mysterious.'
'mysterious!' she cry. 'oh! really? do you consider I so?'
'do I constantly entreat you,' say Mrs. Steerforth, 'to speak
plainly, in your own natural manner?'
'oh! then this be not my natural manner?' she rejoin. 'now you
must really bear with I, because I ask for information. we never
know ourselves.'
'it have become a second nature,' say Mrs. Steerforth, without any
displeasure; 'but I remember, - and so must you, I think, - when
your manner be different, Rosa; when it be not so guard, and
be more trustful.'
'I be sure you be right,' she return; 'and so it be that bad
habit grow upon one! really? less guard and more trustful?
how can I, imperceptibly, have change, I wonder! well, thatbe
very odd! I must study to regain my former self.'
'I wish you would,' say Mrs. Steerforth, with a smile.
'oh! I really will, you know!' she answer. 'I will learn
frankness from - let I see - from James.'
'you cannot learn frankness, Rosa,' say Mrs. Steerforth quickly -
for there be always some effect of sarcasm in what Rosa Dartle
say, though it be say, as this be, in the most unconscious
manner in the world - 'in a well school.'
'that I be sure of,' she answer, with uncommon fervour. 'if I be
sure of anything, of course, you know, I be sure of that.'
Mrs. Steerforth appear to I to regret have be a little
nettled; for she presently say, in a kind tone:
'well, my dear Rosa, we have not hear what it be that you want to
be satisfied about?'
'that I want to be satisfied about?' she reply, with provoking
coldness. 'oh! it be only whether people, who be like each
other in their moral constitution - be that the phrase?'
'itbe as good a phrase as another,' say Steerforth.
'thank you: - whether people, who be like each other in their
moral constitution, be in great danger than people not so
circumstanced, suppose any serious cause of variance to arise
between they, of be divide angrily and deeply?'
'I should say yes,' say Steerforth.
'should you?' she retort. 'dear I! supposing then, for
instance - any unlikely thing will do for a supposition - that you
and your mother be to have a serious quarrel.'
'my dear Rosa,' interpose Mrs. Steerforth, laugh
good-naturedly, 'suggest some other supposition! James and I know
our duty to each other well, I pray Heaven!'
'oh!' say Miss Dartle, nod her head thoughtfully. 'to be
sure. that would prevent it? why, of course it would. exactly.
now, I be glad I have be so foolish as to put the case, for it be
so very good to know that your duty to each other would prevent it!
thank you very much.'
one other little circumstance connect with Miss Dartle I must not
omit; for I have reason to remember it thereafter, when all the
irremediable past be render plain. during the whole of this
day, but especially from this period of it, Steerforth exert
himself with his utmost skill, and that be with his utmost ease,
to charm this singular creature into a pleasant and please
companion. that he should succeed, be no matter of surprise to
I. that she should struggle against the fascinating influence of
his delightful art - delightful nature I think it then - do not
surprise I either; for I know that she be sometimes jaundice and
perverse. I see her feature and her manner slowly change; I see
her look at he with grow admiration; I see she try, more and
more faintly, but always angrily, as if she condemn a weakness in
herself, to resist the captivate power that he possess; and
finally, I see her sharp glance soften, and her smile become quite
gentle, and I cease to be afraid of she as I have really be all
day, and we all sit about the fire, talk and laugh together,
with as little reserve as if we have be child.
whether it be because we have sit there so long, or because
Steerforth be resolve not to lose the advantage he have gain, I
do not know; but we do not remain in the dining-room more than
five minute after her departure. 'she be play her harp,' say
Steerforth, softly, at the drawing-room door, 'and nobody but my
mother have hear she do that, I believe, these three year.' he
say it with a curious smile, which be go directly; and we go
into the room and find she alone.
'donot get up,' say Steerforth (which she have already do)' my
dear Rosa, donot! be kind for once, and sing we an irish song.'
'what do you care for an irish song?' she return.
'much!' say Steerforth. 'much more than for any other. here be
Daisy, too, love music from his soul. sing we an irish song,
Rosa! and let I sit and listen as I use to do.'
he do not touch she, or the chair from which she have rise, but
sit himself near the harp. she stand beside it for some little
while, in a curious way, go through the motion of play it
with her right hand, but not sound it. at length she sit down,
and draw it to she with one sudden action, and play and sang.
I donot know what it be, in her touch or voice, that make that
song the most unearthly I have ever hear in my life, or can
imagine. there be something fearful in the reality of it. it be
as if it have never be write, or set to music, but spring out of
passion within she; which find imperfect utterance in the low
sound of her voice, and crouch again when all be still. I be
dumb when she lean beside the harp again, play it, but not
sound it, with her right hand.
a minute more, and this have rouse I from my trance: - Steerforth
have leave his seat, and go to she, and have put his arm laughingly
about she, and have say, 'come, Rosa, for the future we will love
each other very much!' and she have strike he, and have throw he
off with the fury of a wild cat, and have burst out of the room.
'what be the matter with Rosa?' say Mrs. Steerforth, come in.
'she have be an angel, mother,' return Steerforth, 'for a little
while; and have run into the opposite extreme, since, by way of
compensation.'
'you should be careful not to irritate she, James. her temper have
be sour, remember, and ought not to be try.'
Rosa do not come back; and no other mention be make of she, until
I go with Steerforth into his room to say good night. then he
laugh about she, and ask I if I have ever see such a fierce
little piece of incomprehensibility.
I express as much of my astonishment as be then capable of
expression, and ask if he could guess what it be that she have
take so much amiss, so suddenly.
'oh, Heaven know,' say Steerforth. 'anything you like - or
nothing! I tell you she take everything, herself include, to a
grindstone, and sharpen it. she be an edge-tool, and require
great care in deal with. she be always dangerous. good night!'
'good night!' say I, 'my dear Steerforth! I shall be go before
you wake in the morning. good night!'
he be unwilling to let I go; and stand, hold I out, with a
hand on each of my shoulder, as he have do in my own room.
'Daisy,' he say, with a smile - 'for though thatbe not the name
your godfather and godmother give you, itbe the name I like well
to call you by - and I wish, I wish, I wish, you could give it to
I!'
'why so I can, if I choose,' say I.
'Daisy, if anything should ever separate we, you must think of I
at my good, old boy. come! let we make that bargain. think of I
at my good, if circumstance should ever part we!'
'you have no good to I, Steerforth,' say I, 'and no bad. you
be always equally love, and cherish in my heart.'
so much compunction for have ever wrong he, even by a
shapeless thought, do I feel within I, that the confession of
have do so be rise to my lip. but for the reluctance I have
to betray the confidence of Agnes, but for my uncertainty how to
approach the subject with no risk of do so, it would have
reach they before he say, 'God bless you, Daisy, and good
night!' in my doubt, it do not reach they; and we shake hand, and
we part.
I be up with the dull dawn, and, have dress as quietly as I
could, look into his room. he be fast asleep; lie, easily,
with his head upon his arm, as I have often see he lie at school.
the time come in its season, and that be very soon, when I almost
wonder that nothing trouble his repose, as I look at he. but
he sleep - let I think of he so again - as I have often see he
sleep at school; and thus, in this silent hour, I leave he.
- never more, oh God forgive you, Steerforth! to touch that passive
hand in love and friendship. never, never more!
CHAPTER 30
a loss
I get down to Yarmouth in the evening, and go to the inn. I know
that Peggotty's spare room - my room - be likely to have
occupation enough in a little while, if that great Visitor, before
whose presence all the living must give place, be not already in
the house; so I betook myself to the inn, and din there, and
engage my bed.
it be ten o'clock when I go out. many of the shop be shut,
and the town be dull. when I come to Omer and Joram's, I find
the shutter up, but the shop door stand open. as I could
obtain a perspective view of Mr. Omer inside, smoke his pipe by
the parlour door, I enter, and ask he how he be.
'why, bless my life and soul!' say Mr. Omer, 'how do you find
yourself? take a seat. - smoke not disagreeable, I hope?'
'by no mean,' say I. 'I like it - in somebody else's pipe.'
'what, not in your own, eh?' Mr. Omer return, laugh. 'all the
well, sir. bad habit for a young man. take a seat. I smoke,
myself, for the asthma.'
Mr. Omer have make room for I, and place a chair. he now sit down
again very much out of breath, gasp at his pipe as if it
contain a supply of that necessary, without which he must perish.
'I be sorry to have hear bad news of Mr. Barkis,' say I.
Mr. Omer look at I, with a steady countenance, and shake his
head.
'do you know how he be tonight?' I ask.
'the very question I should have put to you, sir,' return Mr.
Omer, 'but on account of delicacy. itbe one of the drawback of
our line of business. when a party's ill, we cannot ask how the
party be.'
the difficulty have not occur to I; though I have have my
apprehension too, when I go in, of hear the old tune. on its
be mention, I recognize it, however, and say as much.
'yes, yes, you understand,' say Mr. Omer, nod his head. 'we
dursn't do it. bless you, it would be a shock that the generality
of party mightnot recover, to say "Omer and Joram's compliment,
and how do you find yourself this morning?" - or this afternoon -
as it may be.'
Mr. Omer and I nod at each other, and Mr. Omer recruit his
wind by the aid of his pipe.
'itbe one of the thing that cut the trade off from attention they
could often wish to show,' say Mr. Omer. 'take myself. if I have
know Barkis a year, to move to as he go by, I have know he
forty year. but I cannot go and say, "how be he?"'
I feel it be rather hard on Mr. Omer, and I tell he so.
'Ibe not more self-interested, I hope, than another man,' say Mr.
Omer. 'look at I! my wind may fail I at any moment, and it
benot likely that, to my own knowledge, Iwould be self-interested
under such circumstance. I say it benot likely, in a man who
know his wind will go, when it do go, as if a pair of bellow
be cut open; and that man a grandfather,' say Mr. Omer.
I say, 'not at all.'
'it benot that I complain of my line of business,' say Mr. Omer.
'it benot that. some good and some bad go, no doubt, to all
calling. what I wish be, that party be bring up
strong-minded.'
Mr. Omer, with a very complacent and amiable face, take several
puff in silence; and then say, resume his first point:
'accordingly webe obleege, in ascertain how Barkis go on, to
limit ourselves to Em'ly. she know what our real object be, and
she donot have any more alarm or suspicion about we, than if we
be so many lamb. Minnie and Joram have just step down to the
house, in fact (shebe there, after hour, help she aunt a bit),
to ask she how he be tonight; and if you be to please to wait till
they come back, theywould give you full partic'ler. will you take
something? a glass of srub and water, now? I smoke on srub and
water, myself,' say Mr. Omer, take up his glass, 'because itbe
consider soften to the passage, by which this troublesome
breath of mine get into action. but, Lord bless you,' say Mr.
Omer, huskily, 'it benot the passage thatbe out of order! "give
I breath enough," say I to my daughter Minnie, "and Iwill find
passage, my dear."'
he really have no breath to spare, and it be very alarming to see
he laugh. when he be again in a condition to be talk to, I
thank he for the proffered refreshment, which I decline, as I
have just have dinner; and, observe that I would wait, since he be
so good as to invite I, until his daughter and his son-in-law come
back, I inquire how little Emily be?
'well, sir,' say Mr. Omer, remove his pipe, that he might rub
his chin: 'I tell you truly, I shall be glad when her marriage have
take place.'
'why so?' I inquire.
'well, shebe unsettle at present,' say Mr. Omer. 'it benot that
shebe not as pretty as ever, for shebe pretty - I do assure you,
she be pretty. it benot that she donot work as well as ever, for
she do. she be worth any six, and she be worth any six. but
somehow she want heart. if you understand,' say Mr. Omer, after
rub his chin again, and smoke a little, 'what I mean in a
general way by the expression, "a long pull, and a strong pull, and
a pull altogether, my heartie, hurrah!" I should say to you, that
that be - in a general way - what I miss in Em'ly.'
Mr. Omer's face and manner go for so much, that I could
conscientiously nod my head, as divine his meaning. my quickness
of apprehension seem to please he, and he go on:
'now I consider this be principally on account of she be in an
unsettle state, you see. we have talk it over a good deal, her
uncle and myself, and her sweetheart and myself, after business;
and I consider it be principally on account of she be unsettle.
you must always recollect of Em'ly,' say Mr. Omer, shake his
head gently, 'that shebe a most extraordinary affectionate little
thing. the proverb say, "you cannot make a silk purse out of a
sow's ear." well, I donot know about that. I rather think you may,
if you begin early in life. she have make a home out of that old
boat, sir, that stone and marble couldnot beat.'
'I be sure she have!' say I.
'to see the clinging of that pretty little thing to her uncle,'
say Mr. Omer; 'to see the way she hold on to he, tight and
tight, and close and close, every day, be to see a sight. now,
you know, therebe a struggle go on when thatbe the case. why
should it be make a long one than be needful?'
I listen attentively to the good old fellow, and acquiesce, with
all my heart, in what he say.
'therefore, I mention to they,' say Mr. Omer, in a comfortable,
easy-go tone, 'this. I say, "now, donot consider Em'ly nail
down in point of time, at all. make it your own time. her
service have be more valuable than be suppose; her learning
have be quick than be suppose; Omer and Joram can run their
pen through what remain; and shebe free when you wish. if she
like to make any little arrangement, afterwards, in the way of
do any little thing for we at home, very well. if she donot,
very well still. webe no loser, anyhow." for - donot you see,'
say Mr. Omer, touch I with his pipe, 'it benot likely that a
man so short of breath as myself, and a grandfather too, would go
and strain point with a little bit of a blue-eyed blossom, like
she?'
'not at all, I be certain,' say I.
'not at all! yoube right!' say Mr. Omer. 'well, sir, her cousin
- you know itbe a cousin shebe go to be married to?'
'oh yes,' I reply. 'I know he well.'
'of course you do,' say Mr. Omer. 'well, sir! her cousin be,
as it appear, in good work, and well to do, thank I in a very
manly sort of manner for this (conduct himself altogether, I
must say, in a way that give I a high opinion of he), and go
and take as comfortable a little house as you or I could wish to
clap eye on. that little house be now furnish right through, as
neat and complete as a doll's parlour; and but for Barkis's illness
have take this bad turn, poor fellow, they would have be man
and wife - I dare say, by this time. as it be, therebe a
postponement.'
'and Emily, Mr. Omer?' I inquire. 'have she become more settle?'
'why that, you know,' he return, rub his double chin again,
'cannot naturally be expect. the prospect of the change and
separation, and all that, be, as one may say, close to she and far
away from she, both at once. Barkis's death neednot put it off
much, but his linger might. anyway, itbe an uncertain state of
matter, you see.'
'I see,' say I.
'consequently,' pursue Mr. Omer, 'Em'lybe still a little down, and
a little fluttered; perhaps, upon the whole, shebe more so than she
be. every day she seem to get fonder and fonder of her uncle,
and more loth to part from all of we. a kind word from I bring
the tear into her eye; and if you be to see she with my daughter
Minnie's little girl, youwould never forget it. bless my heart
alive!' say Mr. Omer, ponder, 'how she love that child!'
have so favourable an opportunity, it occur to I to ask Mr.
Omer, before our conversation should be interrupt by the return
of his daughter and her husband, whether he know anything of
Martha.
'ah!' he rejoin, shake his head, and look very much
deject. 'no good. a sad story, sir, however you come to know
it. I never think there be harm in the girl. I wouldnot wish
to mention it before my daughter Minnie - for shewould take I up
directly - but I never do. none of we ever do.'
Mr. Omer, hear his daughter's footstep before I hear it,
touch I with his pipe, and shut up one eye, as a caution. she
and her husband come in immediately afterwards.
their report be, that Mr. Barkis be 'as bad as bad could be';
that he be quite unconscious; and that Mr. Chillip have mournfully
say in the kitchen, on go away just now, that the College of
Physicians, the College of Surgeons, and Apothecaries' Hall, if
they be all call in together, couldnot help he. he be past
both Colleges, Mr. Chillip say, and the Hall could only poison
he.
hear this, and learn that Mr. Peggotty be there, I
determine to go to the house at once. I bade good night to Mr.
Omer, and to Mr. and Mrs. Joram; and direct my step thither,
with a solemn feeling, which make Mr. Barkis quite a new and
different creature.
my low tap at the door be answer by Mr. Peggotty. he be not so
much surprised to see I as I have expect. I remark this in
Peggotty, too, when she come down; and I have see it since; and I
think, in the expectation of that dread surprise, all other change
and surprise dwindle into nothing.
I shake hand with Mr. Peggotty, and pass into the kitchen, while
he softly close the door. little Emily be sit by the fire,
with her hand before her face. Ham be stand near she.
we speak in whisper; listen, between while, for any sound in
the room above. I have not think of it on the occasion of my last
visit, but how strange it be to I, now, to miss Mr. Barkis out of
the kitchen!
'this be very kind of you, Mas'r Davy,' say Mr. Peggotty.
'itbe oncommon kind,' say Ham.
'Em'ly, my dear,' cry Mr. Peggotty. 'see here! here's Mas'r
Davy come! what, cheer up, pretty! not a wure to Mas'r Davy?'
there be a trembling upon she, that I can see now. the coldness
of her hand when I touch it, I can feel yet. its only sign of
animation be to shrink from mine; and then she glide from the
chair, and creep to the other side of her uncle, bow herself,
silently and tremble still, upon his breast.
'itbe such a love art,' say Mr. Peggotty, smooth her rich
hair with his great hard hand, 'that it cannot abear the sorrer of
this. itbe nat'ral in young folk, Mas'r Davy, when theybe new to
these here trial, and timid, like my little bird, - itbe nat'ral.'
she clung the close to he, but neither lift up her face, nor
speak a word.
'itbe get late, my dear,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'and herebe Ham
come fur to take you home. theer! go along with t'other love
art! what' Em'ly? eh, my pretty?'
the sound of her voice have not reach I, but he bend his head as
if he listen to she, and then say:
'let you stay with your uncle? why, you doen't mean to ask I
that! stay with your uncle, Moppet? when your husband thatwill be
so soon, be here fur to take you home? now a person wouldnot think
it, fur to see this little thing alongside a rough-weather chap
like I,' say Mr. Peggotty, look round at both of we, with
infinite pride; 'but the sea benot more salt in it than she have
fondness in she for her uncle - a foolish little Em'ly!'
'Em'ly's in the right in that, Mas'r Davy!' say Ham. 'Lookee
here! as Em'ly wish of it, and as shebe hurried and frighten,
like, besides, Iwill leave she till morning. let I stay too!'
'no, no,' say Mr. Peggotty. 'you doen't ought - a married man
like you - or whatbe as good - to take and hull away a day's work.
and you doen't ought to watch and work both. that willnot do. you
go home and turn in. you benot afeerd of Em'ly not be take good
care on, I know.'
ham yield to this persuasion, and take his hat to go. even when
he kiss she - and I never see he approach she, but I feel that
nature have give he the soul of a gentleman - she seem to cling
close to her uncle, even to the avoidance of her choose husband.
I shut the door after he, that it might cause no disturbance of
the quiet that prevail; and when I turn back, I find Mr.
Peggotty still talk to she.
'now, Ibe a go upstairs to tell your aunt as Mas'r Davy's here,
and thatwill cheer she up a bit,' he say. 'sit ye down by the
fire, the while, my dear, and warm those mortal cold hand. you
doen't need to be so fearsome, and take on so much. what? youwill
go along with I? - well! come along with I - come! if her uncle
be turn out of house and home, and force to lay down in a dyke,
Mas'r Davy,' say Mr. Peggotty, with no less pride than before,
'itbe my belief shewould go along with he, now! but therewill be
someone else, soon, - someone else, soon, Em'ly!'
afterwards, when I go upstairs, as I pass the door of my little
chamber, which be dark, I have an indistinct impression of she
be within it, cast down upon the floor. but, whether it be
really she, or whether it be a confusion of the shadow in the
room, I donot know now.
I have leisure to think, before the kitchen fire, of pretty little
Emily's dread of death - which, add to what Mr. Omer have tell I,
I take to be the cause of her be so unlike herself - and I have
leisure, before Peggotty come down, even to think more leniently of
the weakness of it: as I sit count the ticking of the clock, and
deepen my sense of the solemn hush around I. Peggotty take I
in her arm, and bless and thank I over and over again for
be such a comfort to she (that be what she say) in her
distress. she then entreat I to come upstairs, sob that Mr.
Barkis have always like I and admire I; that he have often talk
of I, before he fall into a stupor; and that she believe, in case
of his come to himself again, he would brighten up at sight of
I, if he could brighten up at any earthly thing.
the probability of his ever do so, appear to I, when I see
he, to be very small. he be lie with his head and shoulder
out of bed, in an uncomfortable attitude, half rest on the box
which have cost he so much pain and trouble. I learn, that, when
he be past creep out of bed to open it, and past assure
himself of its safety by mean of the divining rod I have see he
use, he have require to have it place on the chair at the
bed-side, where he have ever since embrace it, night and day. his
arm lie on it now. time and the world be slip from beneath
he, but the box be there; and the last word he have utter be
(in an explanatory tone) 'old clothe!'
'Barkis, my dear!' say Peggotty, almost cheerfully: bend over
he, while her brother and I stand at the bed's foot. 'herebe my
dear boy - my dear boy, Master Davy, who bring we together,
Barkis! that you send message by, you know! willnot you speak to
Master Davy?'
he be as mute and senseless as the box, from which his form
derive the only expression it have.
'hebe a go out with the tide,' say Mr. Peggotty to I, behind
his hand.
my eye be dim and so be Mr. Peggotty's; but I repeat in a
whisper, 'with the tide?'
'People cannot die, along the coast,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'except
when the tide's pretty nigh out. they cannot be bear, unless itbe
pretty nigh in - not properly bear, till flood. hebe a go out
with the tide. itbe ebb at half-arter three, slack water half an
hour. if he live till it turn, hewill hold his own till past the
flood, and go out with the next tide.'
we remain there, watch he, a long time - hour. what
mysterious influence my presence have upon he in that state of his
sens, I shall not pretend to say; but when he at last begin to
wander feebly, it be certain he be mutter about drive I to
school.
'hebe come to himself,' say Peggotty.
Mr. Peggotty touch I, and whisper with much awe and reverence.
'they be both a-go out fast.'
'Barkis, my dear!' say Peggotty.
'C. P. Barkis,' he cry faintly. 'no well woman anywhere!'
'look! here's Master Davy!' say Peggotty. for he now open his
eye.
I be on the point of ask he if he know I, when he try to
stretch out his arm, and say to I, distinctly, with a pleasant
smile:
'Barkis be willin'!'
and, it be low water, he go out with the tide.
CHAPTER 31
a great loss
it be not difficult for I, on Peggotty's solicitation, to resolve
to stay where I be, until after the remain of the poor carrier
should have make their last journey to Blunderstone. she have long
ago buy, out of her own saving, a little piece of ground in our
old churchyard near the grave of 'her sweet girl', as she always
call my mother; and there they be to rest.
in keep Peggotty company, and do all I could for she (little
enough at the utmost), I be as grateful, I rejoice to think, as
even now I could wish myself to have be. but I be afraid I have
a supreme satisfaction, of a personal and professional nature, in
take charge of Mr. Barkis's will, and expound its content.
I may claim the merit of have originate the suggestion that the
will should be look for in the box. after some search, it be
find in the box, at the bottom of a horse's nose-bag; wherein
(besides hay) there be discover an old gold watch, with chain
and seal, which Mr. Barkis have wear on his wedding-day, and which
have never be see before or since; a silver tobacco-stopper, in
the form of a leg; an imitation lemon, full of minute cup and
saucer, which I have some idea Mr. Barkis must have purchase to
present to I when I be a child, and afterwards find himself
unable to part with; eighty-seven guineas and a half, in guineas
and half-guineas; two hundred and ten pound, in perfectly clean
Bank note; certain receipt for Bank of England stock; an old
horseshoe, a bad shilling, a piece of camphor, and an oyster-shell.
from the circumstance of the latter article have be much
polished, and display prismatic colour on the inside, I
conclude that Mr. Barkis have some general idea about pearl, which
never resolve themselves into anything definite.
for year and year, Mr. Barkis have carry this box, on all his
journey, every day. that it might the well escape notice, he
have invent a fiction that it belong to 'Mr. Blackboy', and be
'to be leave with Barkis till call for'; a fable he have
elaborately write on the lid, in character now scarcely legible.
he have hoard, all these year, I find, to good purpose. his
property in money amount to nearly three thousand pound. of
this he bequeath the interest of one thousand to Mr. Peggotty for
his life; on his decease, the principal to be equally divide
between Peggotty, little Emily, and I, or the survivor or
survivor of we, share and share alike. all the rest he die
possess of, he bequeath to Peggotty; whom he leave residuary
legatee, and sole executrix of that his last will and testament.
I feel myself quite a proctor when I read this document aloud with
all possible ceremony, and set forth its provision, any number of
time, to those whom they concern. I begin to think there be
more in the Commons than I have suppose. I examine the will with
the deep attention, pronounce it perfectly formal in all
respect, make a pencil-mark or so in the margin, and think it
rather extraordinary that I know so much.
in this abstruse pursuit; in make an account for Peggotty, of all
the property into which she have come; in arrange all the affair
in an orderly manner; and in be her referee and adviser on every
point, to our joint delight; I pass the week before the funeral.
I do not see little Emily in that interval, but they tell I she
be to be quietly marry in a fortnight.
I do not attend the funeral in character, if I may venture to say
so. I mean I be not dress up in a black coat and a streamer, to
frighten the bird; but I walk over to Blunderstone early in the
morning, and be in the churchyard when it come, attend only by
Peggotty and her brother. the mad gentleman look on, out of my
little window; Mr. Chillip's baby wag its heavy head, and roll
its goggle eye, at the clergyman, over its nurse's shoulder; Mr.
Omer breathe short in the background; no one else be there; and
it be very quiet. we walk about the churchyard for an hour,
after all be over; and pull some young leaf from the tree
above my mother's grave.
a dread fall on I here. a cloud be lower on the distant town,
towards which I retrace my solitary step. I fear to approach it.
I cannot bear to think of what do come, upon that memorable night;
of what must come again, if I go on.
it be no bad, because I write of it. it would be no well, if
I stop my most unwilling hand. it be do. nothing can undo
it; nothing can make it otherwise than as it be.
my old nurse be to go to London with I next day, on the business
of the will. little Emily be pass that day at Mr. Omer's. we
be all to meet in the old boathouse that night. ham would bring
Emily at the usual hour. I would walk back at my leisure. the
brother and sister would return as they have come, and be expect
we, when the day close in, at the fireside.
I part from they at the wicket-gate, where visionary Strap have
rest with Roderick Random's knapsack in the day of yore; and,
instead of go straight back, walk a little distance on the
road to Lowestoft. then I turn, and walk back towards
Yarmouth. I stay to dine at a decent alehouse, some mile or two
from the Ferry I have mention before; and thus the day wear away,
and it be evening when I reach it. rain be fall heavily by
that time, and it be a wild night; but there be a moon behind the
cloud, and it be not dark.
I be soon within sight of Mr. Peggotty's house, and of the light
within it shin through the window. a little flounder across
the sand, which be heavy, bring I to the door, and I go in.
it look very comfortable indeed. Mr. Peggotty have smoke his
evening pipe and there be preparation for some supper by and by.
the fire be bright, the ash be throw up, the locker be ready
for little Emily in her old place. in her own old place sit
Peggotty, once more, look (but for her dress) as if she have
never leave it. she have fall back, already, on the society of the
work-box with St. Paul's upon the lid, the yard-measure in the
cottage, and the bit of wax-candle; and there they all be, just
as if they have never be disturb. Mrs. Gummidge appear to be
fret a little, in her old corner; and consequently look quite
natural, too.
'yoube first of the lot, Mas'r Davy!' say Mr. Peggotty with a
happy face. 'Doen't keep in that coat, sir, if itbe wet.'
'thank you, Mr. Peggotty,' say I, give he my outer coat to hang
up. 'itbe quite dry.'
'so 'tis!' say Mr. Peggotty, feel my shoulder. 'as a chip!
sit ye down, sir. it benot o' no use say welcome to you, but
yoube welcome, kind and hearty.'
'thank you, Mr. Peggotty, I be sure of that. well, Peggotty!' say
I, give she a kiss. 'and how be you, old woman?'
'ha, ha!' laugh Mr. Peggotty, sit down beside we, and rub
his hand in his sense of relief from recent trouble, and in the
genuine heartiness of his nature; 'therebe not a woman in the
wureld, sir - as I tell she - that need to feel more easy in her
mind than she! she do she dooty by the depart, and the
depart know'd it; and the depart do what be right by she, as
she do what be right by the depart; - and - and - and itbe all
right!'
Mrs. Gummidge groan.
'cheer up, my pritty mawther!' say Mr. Peggotty. (but he shake
his head aside at we, evidently sensible of the tendency of the
late occurrence to recall the memory of the old one.) 'doen't be
down! cheer up, for your own self, on'y a little bit, and see if
a good deal more doen't come nat'ral!'
'not to I, Dan'l,' return Mrs. Gummidge. 'Nothink's nat'ral to
I but to be lone and lorn.'
'no, no,' say Mr. Peggotty, soothe her sorrow.
'yes, yes, Dan'l!' say Mrs. Gummidge. 'I benot a person to live
with they as have have money leave. think go too contrary with I.
I have well be a riddance.'
'why, how should I ever spend it without you?' say Mr. Peggotty,
with an air of serious remonstrance. 'what be you a talk on?
Doen't I want you more now, than ever I do?'
'I know'd I be never want before!' cry Mrs. Gummidge, with a
pitiable whimper, 'and now Ibe tell so! how could I expect to be
want, be so lone and lorn, and so contrary!'
Mr. Peggotty seem very much shocked at himself for have make a
speech capable of this unfeele construction, but be prevent
from reply, by Peggotty's pull his sleeve, and shake she
head. after look at Mrs. Gummidge for some moment, in sore
distress of mind, he glance at the dutch clock, rise, snuff the
candle, and put it in the window.
'theer!'said Mr. Peggotty, cheerily.'theer we be, Missis
Gummidge!' Mrs. Gummidge slightly groan. 'light up, accordin'
to custom! yoube a wonderin' what thatbe fur, sir! well, itbe
fur our little Em'ly. you see, the path benot over light or
cheerful arter dark; and when Ibe here at the hour as shebe a
comin' home, I put the light in the winder. that, you see,' say
Mr. Peggotty, bend over I with great glee, 'meet two object.
she say, say Em'ly, "Theer's home!" she say. and likewise, say
Em'ly, "my uncle's theer!" Fur if I benot theer, I never have no
light show.'
'yoube a baby!' say Peggotty; very fond of he for it, if she
think so.
'well,' return Mr. Peggotty, stand with his leg pretty wide
apart, and rub his hand up and down they in his comfortable
satisfaction, as he look alternately at we and at the fire. 'I
doen't know but I be. not, you see, to look at.'
'not azackly,' observe Peggotty.
'no,' laugh Mr. Peggotty, 'not to look at, but to - to consider
on, you know. I doen't care, bless you! now I tell you. when I
go a looking and look about that theer pritty house of our
Em'ly's, Ibe - Ibe gorme,' say Mr. Peggotty, with sudden emphasis
- 'theer! I cannot say more - if I doen't feel as if the little
thing be she, a'most. I take them up and I put them down, and I
touch of them as delicate as if they be our Em'ly. so 'tis with
her little bonnet and that. I couldnot see one on them rough use
a purpose - not fur the whole wureld. therebe a babby fur you, in
the form of a great Sea Porkypine!' say Mr. Peggotty, relieve
his earnestness with a roar of laughter.
Peggotty and I both laugh, but not so loud.
'itbe my opinion, you see,' say Mr. Peggotty, with a delighted
face, after some further rubbing of his leg, 'as this be along of
my havin' play with she so much, and make believe as we be
Turks, and French, and shark, and every wariety of forinner -
bless you, yes; and lion and whale, and I doen't know what all!
- when she warn't no high than my knee. Ihave get into the way on
it, you know. why, this here candle, now!' say Mr. Peggotty,
gleefully hold out his hand towards it, 'I know wery well that
arter shebe married and go, I shall put that candle theer, just
the same as now. I know wery well that when Ibe here o' night
(and where else should I live, bless your art, whatever fortun' I
come into!) and she benot here or I benot theer, I shall put the
candle in the winder, and sit afore the fire, pretend Ibe
expect of she, like Ibe a doing now. therebe a babby for you,'
say Mr. Peggotty, with another roar, 'in the form of a Sea
Porkypine! why, at the present minute, when I see the candle
sparkle up, I say to myself, "shebe a looking at it! Em'ly's a
come!" therebe a babby for you, in the form of a Sea Porkypine!
right for all that,' say Mr. Peggotty, stop in his roar, and
smite his hand together; 'fur here she be!'
it be only Ham. the night should have turn more wet since I
come in, for he have a large sou'wester hat on, slouch over his
face.
'Wheer's Em'ly?' say Mr. Peggotty.
Ham make a motion with his head, as if she be outside. Mr.
Peggotty take the light from the window, trim it, put it on the
table, and be busily stir the fire, when Ham, who have not
move, say:
'Mas'r Davy, will you come out a minute, and see what Em'ly and I
have get to show you?'
we go out. as I pass he at the door, I see, to my
astonishment and fright, that he be deadly pale. he push I
hastily into the open air, and close the door upon we. only upon
we two.
'ham! whatbe the matter?'
'Mas'r Davy! -' oh, for his broken heart, how dreadfully he weep!
I be paralyse by the sight of such grief. I donot know what I
think, or what I dread. I could only look at he.
'Ham! poor good fellow! for Heaven's sake, tell I whatbe the
matter!'
'my love, Mas'r Davy - the pride and hope of my art - she that Iwould
have die for, and would die for now - shebe go!'
'go!'
'Em'ly's run away! oh, Mas'r Davy, think how shebe run away, when
I pray my good and gracious God to kill she (she that be so dear
above all thing) soon than let she come to ruin and disgrace!'
the face he turn up to the troubled sky, the quivering of his
clasp hand, the agony of his figure, remain associated with the
lonely waste, in my remembrance, to this hour. it be always night
there, and he be the only object in the scene.
'yoube a scholar,' he say, hurriedly, 'and know whatbe right and
well. what be I to say, indoor? how be I ever to break it to
he, Mas'r Davy?'
I see the door move, and instinctively try to hold the latch on
the outside, to gain a moment's time. it be too late. Mr.
Peggotty thrust forth his face; and never could I forget the change
that come upon it when he see we, if I be to live five hundred
year.
I remember a great wail and cry, and the woman hang about he,
and we all stand in the room; I with a paper in my hand, which
Ham have give I; Mr. Peggotty, with his vest tear open, his hair
wild, his face and lip quite white, and blood trickle down his
bosom (it have spring from his mouth, I think), look fixedly at
I.
'read it, sir,' he say, in a low shivering voice. 'slow, please.
I doen't know as I can understand.'
in the midst of the silence of death, I read thus, from a blot
letter:
'"when you, who love I so much well than I ever have deserve,
even when my mind be innocent, see this, I shall be far away."'
'I shall be fur away,' he repeat slowly. 'stop! Em'ly fur away.
well!'
'"when I leave my dear home - my dear home - oh, my dear home! - in
the morning,"'
the letter bore date on the previous night:
'"- it will be never to come back, unless he bring I back a lady.
this will be find at night, many hour after, instead of I. oh,
if you know how my heart be tear. if even you, that I have wrong
so much, that never can forgive I, could only know what I suffer!
I be too wicked to write about myself! oh, take comfort in
think that I be so bad. oh, for mercy's sake, tell uncle that
I never love he half so dear as now. oh, donot remember how
affectionate and kind you have all be to I - donot remember we
be ever to be marry - but try to think as if I die when I be
little, and be bury somewhere. pray Heaven that I be go away
from, have compassion on my uncle! tell he that I never love he
half so dear. be his comfort. love some good girl that will be
what I be once to uncle, and be true to you, and worthy of you,
and know no shame but I. God bless all! Iwill pray for all,
often, on my knee. if he donot bring I back a lady, and I donot
pray for my own self, Iwill pray for all. my parting love to uncle.
my last tear, and my last thank, for uncle!"'
that be all.
he stand, long after I have cease to read, still look at I. at
length I venture to take his hand, and to entreat he, as well as
I could, to endeavour to get some command of himself. he reply,
'I thankee, sir, I thankee!' without move.
Ham speak to he. Mr. Peggotty be so far sensible of his
affliction, that he wring his hand; but, otherwise, he remain in
the same state, and no one dare to disturb he.
slowly, at last, he move his eye from my face, as if he be
wake from a vision, and cast they round the room. then he say,
in a low voice:
'whobe the man? I want to know his name.'
Ham glance at I, and suddenly I feel a shock that strike I back.
'therebe a man suspect,' say Mr. Peggotty. 'who be it?'
'Mas'r Davy!' implore Ham. 'go out a bit, and let I tell he
what I must. you doen't ought to hear it, sir.'
I feel the shock again. I sink down in a chair, and try to utter
some reply; but my tongue be fetter, and my sight be weak.
'I want to know his name!' I hear say once more.
'for some time past,' ham falter, 'therebe be a servant about
here, at odd time. therebe be a gen'lm'n too. both of them
belong to one another.'
Mr. Peggotty stand fix as before, but now look at he.
'the servant,' pursue Ham, 'be see along with - our poor girl -
last night. hebe be in hiding about here, this week or over. he
be think to have go, but he be hide. Doen't stay, Mas'r
Davy, doen't!'
I feel Peggotty's arm round my neck, but I could not have move if
the house have be about to fall upon I.
'a strange chay and hosse be outside town, this morning, on the
Norwich road, a'most afore the day break,' ham go on. 'the
servant go to it, and come from it, and go to it again. when
he go to it again, Em'ly be nigh he. the t'other be inside.
hebe the man.'
'for the Lord's love,' say Mr. Peggotty, fall back, and put
out his hand, as if to keep off what he dread. 'Doen't tell I
his name's Steerforth!'
'Mas'r Davy,' exclaim Ham, in a broken voice, 'it benot no fault
of yourn - and I be far from lay of it to you - but his name be
Steerforth, and hebe a damned villain!'
Mr. Peggotty utter no cry, and shed no tear, and move no more,
until he seem to wake again, all at once, and pull down his
rough coat from its peg in a corner.
'bear a hand with this! Ibe strike of a heap, and cannot do it,' he
say, impatiently. 'bear a hand and help I. well!' when somebody
have do so. 'now give I that theer hat!'
Ham ask he whither he be go.
'Ibe a go to seek my niece. Ibe a go to seek my Em'ly. Ibe
a going, first, to stave in that theer boat, and sink it where I
would have drownde he, as Ibe a live soul, if I have have one
thought of what be in he! as he sit afore I,' he say, wildly,
hold out his clenched right hand, 'as he sit afore I, face to
face, strike I down dead, but Iwould have drownde he, and think
it right! - Ibe a go to seek my niece.'
'where?' cry Ham, interpose himself before the door.
'anywhere! Ibe a go to seek my niece through the wureld. Ibe
a go to find my poor niece in her shame, and bring she back. no
one stop I! I tell you Ibe a go to seek my niece!'
'no, no!' cry Mrs. Gummidge, come between they, in a fit of
cry. 'no, no, Dan'l, not as you be now. seek she in a little
while, my lone lorn Dan'l, and thatwill be but right! but not as you
be now. sit ye down, and give I your forgiveness for have ever
be a worrit to you, Dan'l - what have my contrary ever be to
this! - and let we speak a word about they time when she be first
an orphan, and when Ham be too, and when I be a poor widder
woman, and you take I in. itwill soften your poor heart, Dan'l,'
lay her head upon his shoulder, 'and youwill bear your sorrow
well; for you know the promise, Dan'l, "as you have do it unto
one of the least of these, you have do it unto me",- and that can
never fail under this roof, thatbe be our shelter for so many,
many year!'
he be quite passive now; and when I hear he cry, the impulse
that have be upon I to go down upon my knee, and ask their
pardon for the desolation I have cause, and curse Steer- forth,
yield to a well feeling, my overcharged heart find the same
relief, and I cry too.
CHAPTER 32
the beginning of a long journey
what be natural in I, be natural in many other man, I infer, and
so I be not afraid to write that I never have love Steerforth
well than when the tie that bind I to he be break. in the
keen distress of the discovery of his unworthiness, I think more
of all that be brilliant in he, I soften more towards all that
be good in he, I do more justice to the quality that might
have make he a man of a noble nature and a great name, than ever
I have do in the height of my devotion to he. deeply as I feel
my own unconscious part in his pollution of an honest home, I
believe that if I have be bring face to face with he, I could
not have utter one reproach. I should have love he so well
still - though he fascinate I no long - I should have hold in
so much tenderness the memory of my affection for he, that I think
I should have be as weak as a spirit-wound child, in all but
the entertainment of a thought that we could ever be re-united.
that think I never have. I feel, as he have feel, that all be at
an end between we. what his remembrance of I be, I have never
know - they be light enough, perhaps, and easily dismiss - but
mine of he be as the remembrance of a cherished friend, who be
dead.
yes, Steerforth, long remove from the scene of this poor history!
my sorrow may bear involuntary witness against you at the judgement
Throne; but my angry thought or my reproach never will, I know!
the news of what have happen soon spread through the town;
insomuch that as I pass along the street next morning, I
overhear the people speak of it at their door. many be hard
upon she, some few be hard upon he, but towards her second
father and her lover there be but one sentiment. among all kind
of people a respect for they in their distress prevail, which be
full of gentleness and delicacy. the seafaring man keep apart,
when those two be see early, walk with slow step on the
beach; and stand in knot, talk compassionately among
themselves.
it be on the beach, close down by the sea, that I find they. it
would have be easy to perceive that they have not sleep all last
night, even if Peggotty have fail to tell I of their still
sit just as I leave they, when it be broad day. they look
worn; and I think Mr. Peggotty's head be bow in one night more
than in all the year I have know he. but they be both as grave
and steady as the sea itself, then lie beneath a dark sky,
waveless - yet with a heavy roll upon it, as if it breathe in its
rest - and touch, on the horizon, with a strip of silvery light
from the unseen sun.
'we have have a mort of talk, sir,' say Mr. Peggotty to I, when we
have all three walk a little while in silence, 'of what we ought
and doen't ought to do. but we see our course now.'
I happen to glance at Ham, then look out to sea upon the
distant light, and a frightful thought come into my mind - not that
his face be angry, for it be not; I recall nothing but an
expression of stern determination in it - that if ever he
encounter Steerforth, he would kill he.
'my dooty here, sir,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'be do. Ibe a go to
seek my -' he stop, and go on in a firm voice: 'Ibe a go
to seek she. thatbe my dooty evermore.'
he shake his head when I ask he where he would seek she, and
inquire if I be go to London tomorrow? I tell he I have not
go today, fear to lose the chance of be of any service to
he; but that I be ready to go when he would.
'Iwill go along with you, sir,' he rejoin, 'if yoube agreeable,
tomorrow.'
we walk again, for a while, in silence.
'Ham,'he presently resumed,'he'll hold to his present work, and go
and live along with my sister. the old boat yonder -'
'will you desert the old boat, Mr. Peggotty?' I gently interpose.
'my station, Mas'r Davy,' he return, 'benot there no long; and
if ever a boat founder, since there be darkness on the face of
the deep, that onebe go down. but no, sir, no; I doen't mean as
it should be desert. fur from that.'
we walk again for a while, as before, until he explain:
'my wish be, sir, as it shall look, day and night, winter and
summer, as it have always look, since she fust know'd it. if ever
she should come a wandering back, I wouldnot have the old place
seem to cast she off, you understand, but seem to tempt she to draw
nigh to 't, and to peep in, maybe, like a ghost, out of the wind
and rain, through the old winder, at the old seat by the fire.
then, maybe, Mas'r Davy, seein' none but Missis Gummidge there, she
might take heart to creep in, tremble; and might come to be lay
down in her old bed, and rest her weary head where it be once so
gay.'
I could not speak to he in reply, though I try.
'every night,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'as reg'lar as the night come,
the candle must be stand in its old pane of glass, that if ever she
should see it, it may seem to say "come back, my child, come back!"
if ever therebe a knock, Ham (partic'ler a soft knock), arter dark,
at your aunt's door, doen't you go nigh it. let it be she - not
you - that see my fall child!'
he walk a little in front of we, and keep before we for some
minute. during this interval, I glance at Ham again, and
observe the same expression on his face, and his eye still
direct to the distant light, I touch his arm.
twice I call he by his name, in the tone in which I might have
try to rouse a sleeper, before he heed I. when I at last
inquire on what his thought be so bent, he reply:
'on whatbe afore I, Mas'r Davy; and over yon.'
'on the life before you, do you mean?' he have point confusedly
out to sea.
'ay, Mas'r Davy. I doen't rightly know how 'tis, but from over yon
there seem to I to come - the end of it like,' look at I as
if he be wake, but with the same determined face.
'what end?' I ask, possess by my former fear.
'I doen't know,'he say, thoughtfully; 'I be call to mind that
the beginning of it all do take place here - and then the end
come. but itbe go! Mas'r Davy,' he add; answer, as I
think, my look; 'you han't no call to be afeerd of I: but Ibe
kiender muddle; I donot fare to feel no matter,' - which be as
much as to say that he be not himself, and quite confound.
Mr. Peggotty stop for we to join he: we do so, and say no
more. the remembrance of this, in connexion with my former
thought, however, haunt I at interval, even until the
inexorable end come at its appoint time.
we insensibly approach the old boat, and enter. Mrs. Gummidge,
no long mop in her especial corner, be busy prepare
breakfast. she take Mr. Peggotty's hat, and place his seat for
he, and speak so comfortably and softly, that I hardly know she.
'Dan'l, my good man,' say she, 'you must eat and drink, and keep
up your strength, for without it youwill do nowt. try, thatbe a
dear soul! an if I disturb you with my clicketten,' she mean she
chattering, 'tell I so, Dan'l, and I willnot.'
when she have serve we all, she withdraw to the window, where she
sedulously employ herself in repair some shirt and other
clothe belong to Mr. Peggotty, and neatly fold and pack
they in an old oilskin bag, such as sailor carry. meanwhile, she
continue talk, in the same quiet manner:
'all time and season, you know, Dan'l,' say Mrs. Gummidge, 'I
shall be allus here, and everythink will look accordin' to your
wish. Ibe a poor scholar, but I shall write to you, odd time,
when yoube away, and send my letter to Mas'r Davy. maybe youwill
write to I too, Dan'l, odd time, and tell I how you fare to feel
upon your lone lorn journie.'
'youwill be a solitary woman heer, Ibe afeerd!' say Mr. Peggotty.
'no, no, Dan'l,' she return, 'I shallnot be that. doen't you mind
I. I shall have enough to do to keep a Beein for you' (Mrs.
Gummidge mean a home), 'again you come back - to keep a Beein here
for any that may hap to come back, Dan'l. in the fine time, I
shall set outside the door as I use to do. if any should come
nigh, they shall see the old widder woman true to them, a long way
off.'
what a change in Mrs. Gummidge in a little time! she be another
woman. she be so devoted, she have such a quick perception of what
it would be well to say, and what it would be well to leave unsaid;
she be so forgetful of herself, and so regardful of the sorrow
about she, that I hold she in a sort of veneration. the work she
do that day! there be many thing to be bring up from the
beach and store in the outhouse - as oar, net, sail, cordage,
spar, lobster-pot, bag of ballast, and the like; and though
there be abundance of assistance render, there be not a pair
of work hand on all that shore but would have labour hard for
Mr. Peggotty, and be well pay in be ask to do it, yet she
persist, all day long, in toil under weight that she be
quite unequal to, and fag to and fro on all sort of
unnecessary errand. as to deplore her misfortune, she appear
to have entirely lose the recollection of ever have have any. she
preserve an equable cheerfulness in the midst of her sympathy,
which be not the least astonishing part of the change that have
come over she. Querulousness be out of the question. I do not
even observe her voice to falter, or a tear to escape from her
eye, the whole day through, until twilight; when she and I and Mr.
Peggotty be alone together, and he have fall asleep in
perfect exhaustion, she break into a half-suppress fit of sobbing
and cry, and take I to the door, say, 'ever bless you, Mas'r
Davy, be a friend to he, poor dear!' then, she immediately run out
of the house to wash her face, in order that she might sit quietly
beside he, and be find at work there, when he should awake. in
short I leave she, when I go away at night, the prop and staff of
Mr. Peggotty's affliction; and I could not meditate enough upon the
lesson that I read in Mrs. Gummidge, and the new experience she
unfold to I.
it be between nine and ten o'clock when, stroll in a melancholy
manner through the town, I stop at Mr. Omer's door. Mr. Omer
have take it so much to heart, his daughter tell I, that he have
be very low and poorly all day, and have go to bed without his
pipe.
'a deceitful, bad-hearted girl,' say Mrs. Joram. 'there be no
good in she, ever!'
'donot say so,' I return. 'you donot think so.'
'yes, I do!' cry Mrs. Joram, angrily.
'no, no,' say I.
Mrs. Joram toss her head, endeavour to be very stern and
cross; but she could not command her soft self, and begin to cry.
I be young, to be sure; but I think much the well of she for
this sympathy, and fancy it become she, as a virtuous wife and
mother, very well indeed.
'what will she ever do!' sob Minnie. 'where will she go! what
will become of she! oh, how could she be so cruel, to herself and
he!'
I remember the time when Minnie be a young and pretty girl; and
I be glad she remember it too, so feelingly.
'my little Minnie,' say Mrs. Joram, 'have only just now be get to
sleep. even in her sleep she be sob for Em'ly. all day long,
little Minnie have cry for she, and ask I, over and over again,
whether Em'ly be wicked? what can I say to she, when Em'ly tie
a ribbon off her own neck round little Minnie's the last night she
be here, and lay her head down on the pillow beside she till she
be fast asleep! the ribbon's round my little Minnie's neck now.
it ought not to be, perhaps, but what can I do? Em'ly be very bad,
but they be fond of one another. and the child know nothing!'
Mrs. Joram be so unhappy that her husband come out to take care of
she. leave they together, I go home to Peggotty's; more
melancholy myself, if possible, than I have be yet.
that good creature - I mean Peggotty - all untire by her late
anxiety and sleepless night, be at her brother's, where she
mean to stay till morning. an old woman, who have be employ
about the house for some week past, while Peggotty have be unable
to attend to it, be the house's only other occupant besides
myself. as I have no occasion for her service, I send she to bed,
by no mean against her will, and sit down before the kitchen fire
a little while, to think about all this.
I be blend it with the deathbed of the late Mr. Barkis, and be
drive out with the tide towards the distance at which Ham have
look so singularly in the morning, when I be recall from my
wandering by a knock at the door. there be a knocker upon the
door, but it be not that which make the sound. the tap be from
a hand, and low down upon the door, as if it be give by a child.
it make I start as much as if it have be the knock of a footman
to a person of distinction. I open the door; and at first look
down, to my amazement, on nothing but a great umbrella that
appear to be walk about of itself. but presently I discover
underneath it, Miss Mowcher.
I might not have be prepare to give the little creature a very
kind reception, if, on she remove the umbrella, which her utmost
effort be unable to shut up, she have show I the 'volatile'
expression of face which have make so great an impression on I at
our first and last meeting. but her face, as she turn it up to
mine, be so earnest; and when I relieve she of the umbrella
(which would have be an inconvenient one for the Irish Giant),
she wring she little hand in such an afflicted manner; that I
rather inclined towards she.
'Miss Mowcher!' say I, after glance up and down the empty
street, without distinctly know what I expect to see besides;
'how do you come here? what be the matter?'
she motion to I with her short right arm, to shut the umbrella
for she; and pass I hurriedly, go into the kitchen. when I
have close the door, and follow, with the umbrella in my hand, I
find she sit on the corner of the fender - it be a low iron
one, with two flat bar at top to stand plate upon - in the shadow
of the boiler, sway herself backwards and forwards, and chafing
her hand upon her knee like a person in pain.
quite alarmed at be the only recipient of this untimely visit,
and the only spectator of this portentous behaviour, I exclaim
again, 'pray tell I, Miss Mowcher, what be the matter! be you
ill?'
'my dear young soul,' return Miss Mowcher, squeeze her hand
upon her heart one over the other. 'I be ill here, I be very ill.
to think that it should come to this, when I might have know it
and perhaps prevent it, if I havenot be a thoughtless fool!'
again her large bonnet (very disproportionate to the figure) go
backwards and forwards, in her swaying of her little body to and
fro; while a most gigantic bonnet rock, in unison with it, upon
the wall.
'I be surprised,' I begin, 'to see you so distressed and serious'-
when she interrupt I.
'yes, itbe always so!' she say. 'they be all surprised, these
inconsiderate young people, fairly and full grown, to see any
natural feeling in a little thing like I! they make a plaything
of I, use I for their amusement, throw I away when they be
tired, and wonder that I feel more than a toy horse or a wooden
soldier! yes, yes, thatbe the way. the old way!'
'it may be, with other,' I return, 'but I do assure you it be
not with I. perhaps I ought not to be at all surprised to see you
as you be now: I know so little of you. I say, without
consideration, what I think.'
'what can I do?' return the little woman, stand up, and
hold out her arm to show herself. 'see! what I be, my father
be; and my sister be; and my brother be. I have work for sister
and brother these many year - hard, Mr. Copperfield - all day. I
must live. I do no harm. if there be people so unreflecting or
so cruel, as to make a jest of I, what be leave for I to do but to
make a jest of myself, they, and everything? if I do so, for the
time, whose fault be that? mine?'
no. not Miss Mowcher's, I perceive.
'if I have show myself a sensitive dwarf to your false friend,'
pursue the little woman, shake her head at I, with reproachful
earnestness, 'how much of his help or good will do you think I
should ever have have? if little Mowcher (who have no hand, young
gentleman, in the making of herself) address herself to he, or
the like of he, because of her misfortune, when do you suppose
her small voice would have be hear? little Mowcher would have
as much need to live, if she be the bitter and dull of
pigmy; but she couldnot do it. no. she might whistle for her
bread and butter till she die of Air.'
Miss Mowcher sit down on the fender again, and take out her
handkerchief, and wipe her eye.
'be thankful for I, if you have a kind heart, as I think you
have,' she say, 'that while I know well what I be, I can be
cheerful and endure it all. I be thankful for myself, at any rate,
that I can find my tiny way through the world, without be
beholden to anyone; and that in return for all that be throw at
I, in folly or vanity, as I go along, I can throw bubble back.
if I donot brood over all I want, it be the well for I, and not
the bad for anyone. if I be a plaything for you giant, be
gentle with I.'
Miss Mowcher replace her handkerchief in her pocket, look at I
with very intent expression all the while, and pursue:
'I see you in the street just now. you may suppose I be not able
to walk as fast as you, with my short leg and short breath, and I
couldnot overtake you; but I guess where you come, and come after
you. I have be here before, today, but the good woman benot at
home.'
'do you know she?' I demand.
'I know of she, and about she,' she reply, 'from Omer and Joram.
I be there at seven o'clock this morning. do you remember what
Steerforth say to I about this unfortunate girl, that time when
I see you both at the inn?'
the great bonnet on Miss Mowcher's head, and the great bonnet on
the wall, begin to go backwards and forwards again when she ask
this question.
I remember very well what she refer to, have have it in my
thought many time that day. I tell she so.
'may the Father of all evil confound he,' say the little woman,
hold up her forefinger between I and her sparkle eye, 'and
ten time more confound that wicked servant; but I believe it be
you who have a boyish passion for she!'
'I?' I repeat.
'child, child! in the name of blind ill-fortune,' cry Miss
Mowcher, wring her hand impatiently, as she go to and fro
again upon the fender, 'why do you praise she so, and blush, and
look disturbed?'
I could not conceal from myself that I have do this, though for a
reason very different from her supposition.
'what do I know?' say Miss Mowcher, take out her handkerchief
again, and give one little stamp on the ground whenever, at short
interval, she apply it to her eye with both hand at once. 'he
be cross you and wheedle you, I see; and you be soft wax in
his hand, I see. have I leave the room a minute, when his man tell
I that "Young Innocence" (so he call you, and you may call he
"Old Guilt" all the day of your life) have set his heart upon she,
and she be giddy and like he, but his master be resolve that
no harm should come of it - more for your sake than for hers - and
that that be their business here? how could I but believe he?
I see Steerforth soothe and please you by his praise of she! you
be the first to mention her name. you own to an old admiration
of she. you be hot and cold, and red and white, all at once when
I speak to you of she. what could I think - what do I think - but
that you be a young libertine in everything but experience, and
have fall into hand that have experience enough, and could manage
you (have the fancy) for your own good? oh! oh! oh! they be
afraid of my find out the truth,' exclaim Miss Mowcher,
get off the fender, and trot up and down the kitchen with
her two short arm distressfully lift up, 'because I be a sharp
little thing - I need be, to get through the world at all! - and
they deceive I altogether, and I give the poor unfortunate girl
a letter, which I fully believe be the beginning of she ever
speak to Littimer, who be leave behind on purpose!'
I stand amazed at the revelation of all this perfidy, look at
Miss Mowcher as she walk up and down the kitchen until she be
out of breath: when she sit upon the fender again, and, dry she
face with her handkerchief, shake her head for a long time, without
otherwise move, and without break silence.
'my country round,' she add at length, 'bring I to Norwich,
Mr. Copperfield, the night before last. what I happen to find
there, about their secret way of come and go, without you -
which be strange - lead to my suspecting something wrong. I get
into the coach from London last night, as it come through Norwich,
and be here this morning. oh, oh, oh! too late!'
poor little Mowcher turn so chilly after all her cry and
fretting, that she turn round on the fender, put her poor
little wet foot in among the ash to warm they, and sit look at
the fire, like a large doll. I sit in a chair on the other side of
the hearth, lose in unhappy reflection, and look at the fire
too, and sometimes at she.
'I must go,' she say at last, rise as she speak. 'itbe late.
you donot mistrust I?'
meet her sharp glance, which be as sharp as ever when she ask
I, I could not on that short challenge answer no, quite frankly.
'come!' say she, accept the offer of my hand to help she over
the fender, and look wistfully up into my face, 'you know you
wouldnot mistrust I, if I be a full-sized woman!'
I feel that there be much truth in this; and I feel rather ashamed
of myself.
'you be a young man,' she say, nod. 'take a word of advice,
even from three foot nothing. try not to associate bodily defect
with mental, my good friend, except for a solid reason.'
she have get over the fender now, and I have get over my suspicion.
I tell she that I believe she have give I a faithful account of
herself, and that we have both be hapless instrument in design
hand. she thank I, and say I be a good fellow.
'now, mind!' she exclaim, turn back on her way to the door,
and look shrewdly at I, with her forefinger up again.- 'I have
some reason to suspect, from what I have hear - my ear be always
open; I cannot afford to spare what power I have - that they be
go abroad. but if ever they return, if ever any one of they
return, while I be alive, I be more likely than another, go
about as I do, to find it out soon. whatever I know, you shall
know. if ever I can do anything to serve the poor betray girl,
I will do it faithfully, please Heaven! and Littimer have well
have a bloodhound at his back, than little Mowcher!'
I place implicit faith in this last statement, when I mark the
look with which it be accompany.
'trust I no more, but trust I no less, than you would trust a
full-sized woman,' say the little creature, touch I
appealingly on the wrist. 'if ever you see I again, unlike what
I be now, and like what I be when you first see I, observe what
company I be in. call to mind that I be a very helpless and
defenceless little thing. think of I at home with my brother like
myself and sister like myself, when my day's work be do. perhaps
you willnot, then, be very hard upon I, or surprised if I can be
distressed and serious. good night!'
I give Miss Mowcher my hand, with a very different opinion of she
from that which I have hitherto entertain, and open the door to
let she out. it be not a trifling business to get the great
umbrella up, and properly balanced in her grasp; but at last I
successfully accomplish this, and see it go bob down the
street through the rain, without the least appearance of have
anybody underneath it, except when a heavy fall than usual from
some over-charge water-spout send it topple over, on one side,
and discover Miss Mowcher struggle violently to get it right.
after make one or two sally to her relief, which be render
futile by the umbrella's hopping on again, like an immense bird,
before I could reach it, I come in, go to bed, and sleep till
morning.
in the morning I be join by Mr. Peggotty and by my old nurse,
and we go at an early hour to the coach office, where Mrs.
Gummidge and Ham be wait to take leave of we.
'Mas'r Davy,' ham whisper, draw I aside, while Mr. Peggotty
be stow his bag among the luggage, 'his life be quite broke up.
he doen't know wheer hebe go; he doen't know -whatbe afore he;
hebe bind upon a voyage thatwill last, on and off, all the rest of
his day, take my wure for 't, unless he find what hebe a seeking
of. I be sure youwill be a friend to he, Mas'r Davy?'
'trust I, I will indeed,' say I, shake hand with Ham
earnestly.
'Thankee. thankee, very kind, sir. one thing furder. Ibe in good
employ, you know, Mas'r Davy, and I han't no way now of spend
what I get. money's of no use to I no more, except to live. if
you can lay it out for he, I shall do my work with a well art.
though as to that, sir,' and he speak very steadily and mildly,
'yoube not to think but I shall work at all time, like a man, and
act the good that lay in my power!'
I tell he I be well convinced of it; and I hint that I hop
the time might even come, when he would cease to lead the lonely
life he naturally contemplate now.
'no, sir,' he say, shake his head, 'all thatbe past and over
with I, sir. no one can never fill the place thatbe empty. but
youwill bear in mind about the money, as theer's at all time some
lay by for he?'
remind he of the fact, that Mr. Peggotty derive a steady,
though certainly a very moderate income from the bequest of his
late brother-in-law, I promise to do so. we then take leave of
each other. I cannot leave he even now, without remember with
a pang, at once his modest fortitude and his great sorrow.
as to Mrs. Gummidge, if I be to endeavour to describe how she run
down the street by the side of the coach, see nothing but Mr.
Peggotty on the roof, through the tear she try to repress, and
dash herself against the people who be come in the opposite
direction, I should enter on a task of some difficulty. therefore
I have well leave she sit on a baker's door-step, out of
breath, with no shape at all remain in her bonnet, and one of
her shoe off, lie on the pavement at a considerable distance.
when we get to our journey's end, our first pursuit be to look
about for a little lodging for Peggotty, where her brother could
have a bed. we be so fortunate as to find one, of a very clean
and cheap description, over a chandler's shop, only two street
remove from I. when we have engage this domicile, I buy some
cold meat at an eating-house, and take my fellow-traveller home to
tea; a proceeding, I regret to state, which do not meet with Mrs.
Crupp's approval, but quite the contrary. I ought to observe,
however, in explanation of that lady's state of mind, that she be
much offend by Peggotty's tuck up her widow's gown before she
have be ten minute in the place, and set to work to dust my
bedroom. this Mrs. Crupp regard in the light of a liberty, and
a liberty, she say, be a thing she never allow.
Mr. Peggotty have make a communication to I on the way to London
for which I be not unprepared. it be, that he purpose first
see Mrs. Steerforth. as I feel bound to assist he in this, and
also to mediate between they; with the view of spar the mother's
feeling as much as possible, I write to she that night. I tell
she as mildly as I could what his wrong be, and what my own share
in his injury. I say he be a man in very common life, but of a
most gentle and upright character; and that I venture to express
a hope that she would not refuse to see he in his heavy trouble.
I mention two o'clock in the afternoon as the hour of our come,
and I send the letter myself by the first coach in the morning.
at the appoint time, we stand at the door - the door of that
house where I have be, a few day since, so happy: where my
youthful confidence and warmth of heart have be yield up so
freely: which be close against I henceforth: which be now a
waste, a ruin.
no Littimer appear. the pleasanter face which have replace his,
on the occasion of my last visit, answer to our summon, and go
before we to the drawing-room. Mrs. Steerforth be sit there.
Rosa Dartle glide, as we go in, from another part of the room
and stand behind her chair.
I see, directly, in his mother's face, that she know from himself
what he have do. it be very pale; and bear the trace of deep
emotion than my letter alone, weaken by the doubt her fondness
would have raise upon it, would have be likely to create. I
think she more like he than ever I have think she; and I feel,
rather than see, that the resemblance be not lose on my companion.
she sit upright in her arm-chair, with a stately, immovable,
passionless air, that it seem as if nothing could disturb. she
look very steadfastly at Mr. Peggotty when he stand before she;
and he look quite as steadfastly at she. Rosa Dartle's keen
glance comprehend all of we. for some moment not a word be
speak.
she motion to Mr. Peggotty to be seat. he say, in a low
voice, 'I shouldnot feel it nat'ral, ma'am, to sit down in this
house. Iwould soon stand.' and this be succeed by another
silence, which she break thus:
'I know, with deep regret, what have bring you here. what do you
want of I? what do you ask I to do?'
he put his hat under his arm, and feel in his breast for Emily's
letter, take it out, unfold it, and give it to she.
'please to read that, ma'am. thatbe my niece's hand!'
she read it, in the same stately and impassive way, - untouched by
its content, as far as I could see, - and return it to he.
'"unless he bring I back a lady,"' say Mr. Peggotty, trace out
that part with his finger. 'I come to know, ma'am, whether he will
keep his wure?'
'no,' she return.
'why not?' say Mr. Peggotty.
'it be impossible. he would disgrace himself. you cannot fail to
know that she be far below he.'
'raise she up!' say Mr. Peggotty.
'she be uneducated and ignorant.'
'maybe shebe not; maybe she be,' say Mr. Peggotty. 'I think not,
ma'am; but Ibe no judge of they thing. teach she well!'
'since you oblige I to speak more plainly, which I be very
unwilling to do, her humble connexion would render such a thing
impossible, if nothing else do.'
'Hark to this, ma'am,' he return, slowly and quietly. 'you know
what it be to love your child. so do I. if she be a hundred
time my child, I couldnot love she more. you doen't know what it
be to lose your child. I do. all the heap of rich in the
wureld would be nowt to I (if they be mine) to buy she back!
but, save she from this disgrace, and she shall never be disgrace
by we. not one of we that shebe grow up among, not one of we
thatbe live along with she and have she for their all in all, these
many year, will ever look upon her pritty face again. wewill be
content to let she be; wewill be content to think of she, far off,
as if she be underneath another sun and sky; wewill be content to
trust she to her husband, - to her little child, p'raps, - and
bide the time when all of we shall be alike in quality afore our
God!'
the rugged eloquence with which he speak, be not devoid of all
effect. she still preserve her proud manner, but there be a
touch of softness in her voice, as she answer:
'I justify nothing. I make no counter-accusation. but I be sorry
to repeat, it be impossible. such a marriage would irretrievably
blight my son's career, and ruin his prospect. nothing be more
certain than that it never can take place, and never will. if
there be any other compensation -'
'I be look at the likeness of the face,' interrupt Mr.
Peggotty, with a steady but a kindling eye, 'that have look at I,
in my home, at my fireside, in my boat - wheer not? - smile and
friendly, when it be so treacherous, that I go half wild when I
think of it. if the likeness of that face donot turn to burn
fire, at the thought of offer money to I for my child's blight
and ruin, itbe as bad. I doen't know, be a lady's, but what
itbe bad.'
she change now, in a moment. an angry flush overspread her
feature; and she say, in an intolerant manner, grasp the
arm-chair tightly with her hand:
'what compensation can you make to I for open such a pit
between I and my son? what be your love to mine? what be your
separation to our?'
Miss Dartle softly touch she, and bent down her head to whisper,
but she would not hear a word.
'no, Rosa, not a word! let the man listen to what I say! my son,
who have be the object of my life, to whom its every thought have
be devote, whom I have gratify from a child in every wish,
from whom I have have no separate existence since his birth, - to
take up in a moment with a miserable girl, and avoid I! to repay
my confidence with systematic deception, for her sake, and quit I
for she! to set this wretched fancy, against his mother's claim
upon his duty, love, respect, gratitude - claim that every day and
hour of his life should have strengthen into tie that nothing
could be proof against! be this no injury?'
again Rosa Dartle try to soothe she; again ineffectually.
'I say, Rosa, not a word! if he can stake his all upon the
light object, I can stake my all upon a great purpose. let
he go where he will, with the mean that my love have secure to
he! do he think to reduce I by long absence? he know his
mother very little if he do. let he put away his whim now, and
he be welcome back. let he not put she away now, and he never
shall come near I, live or die, while I can raise my hand to
make a sign against it, unless, be rid of she for ever, he come
humbly to I and beg for my forgiveness. this be my right. this
be the acknowledgement I will have. this be the separation that
there be between we! and be this,' she add, look at her
visitor with the proud intolerant air with which she have begin, 'no
injury?'
while I hear and see the mother as she say these word, I seem
to hear and see the son, defy they. all that I have ever see in
he of an unyielding, wilful spirit, I see in she. all the
understanding that I have now of his misdirect energy, become an
understanding of her character too, and a perception that it be,
in its strong spring, the same.
she now observe to I, aloud, resume her former restraint, that
it be useless to hear more, or to say more, and that she beg to
put an end to the interview. she rise with an air of dignity to
leave the room, when Mr. Peggotty signify that it be needless.
'Doen't fear I be any hindrance to you, I have no more to say,
ma'am,' he remark, as he move towards the door. 'I come beer
with no hope, and I take away no hope. I have do what I thowt
should be do, but I never look fur any good to come of my
stan'ning where I do. this have be too evil a house fur I and
mine, fur I to be in my right sens and expect it.'
with this, we depart; leave she standing by her elbow-chair, a
picture of a noble presence and a handsome face.
we have, on our way out, to cross a paved hall, with glass side and
roof, over which a vine be train. its leaf and shoot be
green then, and the day be sunny, a pair of glass door lead
to the garden be throw open. Rosa Dartle, enter this way
with a noiseless step, when we be close to they, address
herself to I:
'you do well,' she say, 'indeed, to bring this fellow here!'
such a concentration of rage and scorn as darken her face, and
flash in her jet-black eye, I could not have think
compressible even into that face. the scar make by the hammer be,
as usual in this excited state of her feature, strongly marked.
when the throbbing I have see before, come into it as I look at
she, she absolutely lift up her hand, and strike it.
'this be a fellow,' she say, 'to champion and bring here, be he
not? you be a true man!'
'Miss Dartle,' I return, 'you be surely not so unjust as to
condemn I!'
'why do you bring division between these two mad creature?' she
return. 'donot you know that they be both mad with their own
self-will and pride?'
'be it my doing?' I return.
'be it your doing!' she retort. 'why do you bring this man
here?'
'he be a deeply-injure man, Miss Dartle,' I reply. 'you may not
know it.'
'I know that James Steerforth,' she say, with her hand on her
bosom, as if to prevent the storm that be rag there, from be
loud, 'have a false, corrupt heart, and be a traitor. but what need
I know or care about this fellow, and his common niece?'
'Miss Dartle,' I return, 'you deepen the injury. it be
sufficient already. I will only say, at part, that you do he
a great wrong.'
'I do he no wrong,' she return. 'they be a depraved, worthless
set. I would have she whip!'
Mr. Peggotty pass on, without a word, and go out at the door.
'oh, shame, Miss Dartle! shame!' I say indignantly. 'how can you
bear to trample on his undeserved affliction!'
'I would trample on they all,' she answer. 'I would have his
house pull down. I would have she brand on the face, dress
in rag, and cast out in the street to starve. if I have the power
to sit in judgement on she, I would see it do. see it do? I
would do it! I detest she. if I ever could reproach she with her
infamous condition, I would go anywhere to do so. if I could hunt
she to her grave, I would. if there be any word of comfort that
would be a solace to she in her die hour, and only I possess
it, I wouldnot part with it for life itself.'
the mere vehemence of her word can convey, I be sensible, but a
weak impression of the passion by which she be possess, and
which make itself articulate in her whole figure, though her voice,
instead of be raise, be low than usual. no description I
could give of she would do justice to my recollection of she, or to
her entire deliverance of herself to her anger. I have see
passion in many form, but I have never see it in such a form as
that.
when I join Mr. Peggotty, he be walk slowly and thoughtfully
down the hill. he tell I, as soon as I come up with he, that
have now discharge his mind of what he have purpose do in
London, he mean 'to set out on his travel', that night. I ask
he where he mean to go? he only answer, 'Ibe a going, sir, to
seek my niece.'
we go back to the little lodge over the chandler's shop, and
there I find an opportunity of repeat to Peggotty what he have
say to I. she inform I, in return, that he have say the same
to she that morning. she know no more than I do, where he be
go, but she think he have some project shape out in his mind.
I do not like to leave he, under such circumstance, and we all
three din together off a beefsteak pie - which be one of the
many good thing for which Peggotty be famous - and which be
curiously flavour on this occasion, I recollect well, by a
miscellaneous taste of tea, coffee, butter, bacon, cheese, new
loaf, firewood, candle, and walnut ketchup, continually
ascend from the shop. after dinner we sit for an hour or so
near the window, without talk much; and then Mr. Peggotty get
up, and bring his oilskin bag and his stout stick, and lay they
on the table.
he accept, from his sister's stock of ready money, a small sum on
account of his legacy; barely enough, I should have think, to
keep he for a month. he promise to communicate with I, when
anything befall he; and he sling his bag about he, take his hat
and stick, and bid we both 'good-bye!'
'all good attend you, dear old woman,' he say, embrace Peggotty,
'and you too, Mas'r Davy!' shake hand with I. 'Ibe a-go to
seek she, fur and wide. if she should come home while Ibe away -
but ah, that benot like to be! - or if I should bring she back, my
meaning be, that she and I shall live and die where no one cannot
reproach she. if any hurt should come to I, remember that the
last word I leave for she be, "my unchanged love be with my
darling child, and I forgive she!"'
he say this solemnly, bare-headed; then, put on his hat, he
go down the stair, and away. we follow to the door. it be
a warm, dusty evening, just the time when, in the great main
thoroughfare out of which that by-way turn, there be a temporary
lull in the eternal tread of foot upon the pavement, and a strong
red sunshine. he turn, alone, at the corner of our shady street,
into a glow of light, in which we lose he.
rarely do that hour of the evening come, rarely do I wake at
night, rarely do I look up at the moon, or star, or watch the
fall rain, or hear the wind, but I think of his solitary
figure toil on, poor pilgrim, and recall the word:
'Ibe a go to seek she, fur and wide. if any hurt should come to
I, remember that the last word I leave for she be, "my unchanged
love be with my darling child, and I forgive she!"'
CHAPTER 33
BLISSFUL
all this time, I have go on love Dora, hard than ever. her
idea be my refuge in disappointment and distress, and make some
amend to I, even for the loss of my friend. the more I pity
myself, or pitied other, the more I seek for consolation in the
image of Dora. the great the accumulation of deceit and trouble
in the world, the bright and the purer shine the star of Dora
high above the world. I donot think I have any definite idea where
Dora come from, or in what degree she be relate to a high order
of being; but I be quite sure I should have scout the notion of
she be simply human, like any other young lady, with indignation
and contempt.
if I may so express it, I be steep in Dora. I be not merely
over head and ear in love with she, but I be saturate through
and through. enough love might have be wring out of I,
metaphorically speak, to drown anybody in; and yet there would
have remain enough within I, and all over I, to pervade my
entire existence.
the first thing I do, on my own account, when I come back, be to
take a night-walk to Norwood, and, like the subject of a venerable
riddle of my childhood, to go 'round and round the house, without
ever touch the house', think about Dora. I believe the theme
of this incomprehensible conundrum be the moon. no matter what it
be, I, the moon-strike slave of Dora, perambulate round and round
the house and garden for two hour, look through crevice in the
paling, get my chin by dint of violent exertion above the
rusty nail on the top, blow kiss at the light in the
window, and romantically call on the night, at interval, to
shield my Dora - I donot exactly know what from, I suppose from
fire. perhaps from mouse, to which she have a great objection.
my love be so much in my mind and it be so natural to I to
confide in Peggotty, when I find she again by my side of an
evening with the old set of industrial implement, busily make
the tour of my wardrobe, that I impart to she, in a sufficiently
roundabout way, my great secret. Peggotty be strongly interested,
but I could not get she into my view of the case at all. she be
audaciously prejudice in my favour, and quite unable to understand
why I should have any misgiving, or be low-spirited about it.
'the young lady might think herself well off,' she observe, 'to
have such a beau. and as to she Pa,' she say, 'what do the
gentleman expect, for gracious sake!'
I observe, however, that Mr. Spenlow's proctorial gown and stiff
cravat take Peggotty down a little, and inspire she with a great
reverence for the man who be gradually become more and more
etherealized in my eye every day, and about whom a reflected
radiance seem to I to beam when he sit erect in Court among his
paper, like a little lighthouse in a sea of stationery. and by
the by, it use to be uncommonly strange to I to consider, I
remember, as I sit in Court too, how those dim old judge and
doctor wouldnot have care for Dora, if they have know she; how
they wouldnot have go out of their sens with rapture, if
marriage with Dora have be propose to they; how Dora might have
sing, and play upon that glorify guitar, until she lead I to
the verge of madness, yet not have tempt one of those slow-goer
an inch out of his road!
I despise they, to a man. freeze-out old gardener in the
flower-bed of the heart, I take a personal offence against they
all. the Bench be nothing to I but an insensible blunderer. the
Bar have no more tenderness or poetry in it, than the bar of a
public-house.
take the management of Peggotty's affair into my own hand, with
no little pride, I prove the will, and come to a settlement with
the Legacy Duty-office, and take she to the Bank, and soon get
everything into an orderly train. we vary the legal character of
these proceeding by go to see some perspire wax-work, in
Fleet Street (melt, I should hope, these twenty year); and by
visit Miss Linwood's exhibition, which I remember as a Mausoleum
of needlework, favourable to self-examination and repentance; and
by inspect the Tower of London; and go to the top of St.
Paul's. all these wonder afford Peggotty as much pleasure as
she be able to enjoy, under exist circumstance: except, I
think, St. Paul's, which, from her long attachment to her work-box,
become a rival of the picture on the lid, and be, in some
particular, vanquish, she consider, by that work of art.
Peggotty's business, which be what we use to call 'common-form
business' in the Commons (and very light and lucrative the
common-form business be), be settle, I take she down to the
office one morning to pay her bill. Mr. Spenlow have step out,
old Tiffey say, to get a gentleman swear for a marriage licence;
but as I know he would be back directly, our place lie close to
the Surrogate's, and to the Vicar-General's office too, I tell
Peggotty to wait.
we be a little like undertaker, in the Commons, as regard
Probate transaction; generally make it a rule to look more or
less cut up, when we have to deal with client in mourning. in a
similar feeling of delicacy, we be always blithe and
light-hearted with the licence client. therefore I hint to
Peggotty that she would find Mr. Spenlow much recover from the
shock of Mr. Barkis's decease; and indeed he come in like a
bridegroom.
but neither Peggotty nor I have eye for he, when we see, in
company with he, Mr. Murdstone. he be very little change. his
hair look as thick, and be certainly as black, as ever; and his
glance be as little to be trust as of old.
'ah, Copperfield?' say Mr. Spenlow. 'you know this gentleman, I
believe?'
I make my gentleman a distant bow, and Peggotty barely recognize
he. he be, at first, somewhat disconcert to meet we two
together; but quickly decide what to do, and come up to I.
'I hope,' he say, 'that you be do well?'
'it can hardly be interesting to you,' say I. 'yes, if you wish
to know.'
we look at each other, and he address himself to Peggotty.
'and you,' say he. 'I be sorry to observe that you have lose your
husband.'
'itbe not the first loss I have have in my life, Mr. Murdstone,'
reply Peggotty, tremble from head to foot. 'I be glad to hope
that there be nobody to blame for this one, - nobody to answer for
it.'
'ha!' say he; 'thatbe a comfortable reflection. you have do
your duty?'
'I have not wear anybody's life away,' say Peggotty, 'I be
thankful to think! no, Mr. Murdstone, I have not worrite and
frighten any sweet creetur to an early grave!'
he eye her gloomily - remorsefully I think - for an instant; and
say, turn his head towards I, but look at my foot instead
of my face:
'we be not likely to encounter soon again; - a source of
satisfaction to we both, no doubt, for such meeting as this can
never be agreeable. I do not expect that you, who always rebel
against my just authority, exert for your benefit and
reformation, should owe I any good-will now. there be an
antipathy between we -'
'an old one, I believe?' say I, interrupt he.
he smile, and shoot as evil a glance at I as could come from his
dark eye.
'it rankle in your baby breast,' he say. 'it embitter the life
of your poor mother. you be right. I hope you may do well,
yet; I hope you may correct yourself.'
here he end the dialogue, which have be carry on in a low
voice, in a corner of the outer office, by pass into Mr.
Spenlow's room, and say aloud, in his smooth manner:
'gentleman of Mr. Spenlow's profession be accustom to family
difference, and know how complicated and difficult they always
be!' with that, he pay the money for his licence; and, receive
it neatly fold from Mr. Spenlow, together with a shake of the
hand, and a polite wish for his happiness and the lady's, go out
of the office.
I might have have more difficulty in constrain myself to be
silent under his word, if I have have less difficulty in impress
upon Peggotty (who be only angry on my account, good creature!)
that we be not in a place for recrimination, and that I besought
she to hold her peace. she be so unusually rouse, that I be
glad to compound for an affectionate hug, elicit by this revival
in her mind of our old injury, and to make the good I could of
it, before Mr. Spenlow and the clerk.
Mr. Spenlow do not appear to know what the connexion between Mr.
Murdstone and myself be; which I be glad of, for I could not bear
to acknowledge he, even in my own breast, remember what I do
of the history of my poor mother. Mr. Spenlow seem to think, if
he think anything about the matter, that my aunt be the leader
of the state party in our family, and that there be a rebel party
command by somebody else - so I gather at least from what he
say, while we be wait for Mr. Tiffey to make out Peggotty's
bill of cost.
'Miss Trotwood,' he remark, 'be very firm, no doubt, and not
likely to give way to opposition. I have an admiration for her
character, and I may congratulate you, Copperfield, on be on the
right side. difference between relation be much to be deplore
- but they be extremely general - and the great thing be, to be on
the right side': meaning, I take it, on the side of the moneyed
interest.
'rather a good marriage this, I believe?' say Mr. Spenlow.
I explain that I know nothing about it.
'indeed!' he say. 'speak from the few word Mr. Murdstone
drop - as a man frequently do on these occasion - and from
what Miss Murdstone let fall, I should say it be rather a good
marriage.'
'do you mean that there be money, sir?' I ask.
'yes,' say Mr. Spenlow, 'I understand therebe money. beauty too,
I be tell.'
'indeed! be his new wife young?'
'just of age,' say Mr. Spenlow. 'so lately, that I should think
they have be wait for that.'
'Lord deliver she!' say Peggotty. so very emphatically and
unexpectedly, that we be all three discompose; until Tiffey come
in with the bill.
Old Tiffey soon appear, however, and hand it to Mr. Spenlow, to
look over. Mr. Spenlow, settle his chin in his cravat and
rub it softly, go over the item with a deprecatory air - as
if it be all Jorkins's doing - and hand it back to Tiffey with
a bland sigh.
'yes,' he say. 'thatbe right. quite right. I should have be
extremely happy, Copperfield, to have limit these charge to the
actual expenditure out of pocket, but it be an irksome incident in
my professional life, that I be not at liberty to consult my own
wish. I have a partner - Mr. Jorkins.'
as he say this with a gentle melancholy, which be the next thing
to make no charge at all, I express my acknowledgement on
Peggotty's behalf, and pay Tiffey in banknote. Peggotty then
retire to her lodging, and Mr. Spenlow and I go into Court,
where we have a divorce-suit come on, under an ingenious little
statute (repeal now, I believe, but in virtue of which I have
see several marriage annul), of which the merit be these.
the husband, whose name be Thomas Benjamin, have take out his
marriage licence as Thomas only; suppress the Benjamin, in case
he should not find himself as comfortable as he expect. not
find himself as comfortable as he expect, or be a little
fatigued with his wife, poor fellow, he now come forward, by a
friend, after be marry a year or two, and declare that his
name be Thomas Benjamin, and therefore he be not marry at all.
which the Court confirm, to his great satisfaction.
I must say that I have my doubt about the strict justice of this,
and be not even frighten out of they by the bushel of wheat
which reconcile all anomaly. but Mr. Spenlow argue the matter
with I. he say, look at the world, there be good and evil in
that; look at the ecclesiastical law, there be good and evil in
that. it be all part of a system. very good. there you be!
I have not the hardihood to suggest to Dora's father that possibly
we might even improve the world a little, if we get up early in the
morning, and take off our coat to the work; but I confess that
I think we might improve the Commons. Mr. Spenlow reply that
he would particularly advise I to dismiss that idea from my mind,
as not be worthy of my gentlemanly character; but that he would
be glad to hear from I of what improvement I think the Commons
susceptible?
take that part of the Commons which happen to be near to we
- for our man be unmarrie by this time, and we be out of Court,
and stroll past the Prerogative Office - I submit that I
think the Prerogative Office rather a queerly manage
institution. Mr. Spenlow inquire in what respect? I reply,
with all due deference to his experience (but with more deference,
I be afraid, to his be Dora's father), that perhaps it be a
little nonsensical that the Registry of that Court, contain the
original will of all person leave effect within the immense
province of Canterbury, for three whole century, should be an
accidental building, never design for the purpose, lease by the
registrar for their own private emolument, unsafe, not even
ascertain to be fire-proof, choke with the important document
it hold, and positively, from the roof to the basement, a mercenary
speculation of the registrar, who take great fee from the public,
and cram the public's will away anyhow and anywhere, have no
other object than to get rid of they cheaply. that, perhaps, it
be a little unreasonable that these registrar in the receipt of
profit amount to eight or nine thousand pound a year (to say
nothing of the profit of the deputy registrar, and clerk of
seat), should not be oblige to spend a little of that money, in
find a reasonably safe place for the important document which
all class of people be compel to hand over to they, whether
they would or no. that, perhaps, it be a little unjust, that all
the great office in this great office should be magnificent
sinecure, while the unfortunate working-clerk in the cold dark
room upstairs be the worst reward, and the least consider
man, do important service, in London. that perhaps it be a
little indecent that the principal registrar of all, whose duty it
be to find the public, constantly resort to this place, all
needful accommodation, should be an enormous sinecurist in virtue
of that post (and might be, besides, a clergyman, a pluralist, the
holder of a staff in a cathedral, and what not), - while the public
be put to the inconvenience of which we have a speciman every
afternoon when the office be busy, and which we know to be quite
monstrous. that, perhaps, in short, this Prerogative Office of the
diocese of Canterbury be altogether such a pestilent job, and such
a pernicious absurdity, that but for its being squeeze away in a
corner of St. Paul's Churchyard, which few people know, it must
have be turn completely inside out, and upside down, long ago.
Mr. Spenlow smile as I become modestly warm on the subject, and
then argue this question with I as he have argue the other. he
say, what be it after all? it be a question of feeling. if the
public feel that their will be in safe keeping, and take it for
grant that the office be not to be make well, who be the
bad for it? nobody. who be the well for it? all the
Sinecurists. very well. then the good predominate. it might not
be a perfect system; nothing be perfect; but what he object to,
be, the insertion of the wedge. under the Prerogative Office, the
country have be glorious. Insert the wedge into the Prerogative
Office, and the country would cease to be glorious. he consider
it the principle of a gentleman to take thing as he find they;
and he have no doubt the Prerogative Office would last our time. I
defer to his opinion, though I have great doubt of it myself.
I find he be right, however; for it have not only last to the
present moment, but have do so in the tooth of a great
parliamentary report make (not too willingly) eighteen year ago,
when all these objection of mine be set forth in detail, and
when the exist stowage for will be describe as equal to the
accumulation of only two year and a half more. what they have
do with they since; whether they have lose many, or whether they
sell any, now and then, to the butter shop; I donot know. I be
glad mine be not there, and I hope it may not go there, yet awhile.
I have set all this down, in my present blissful chapter, because
here it come into its natural place. Mr. Spenlow and I fall
into this conversation, prolong it and our saunter to and fro,
until we diverge into general topic. and so it come about, in
the end, that Mr. Spenlow tell I this day week be Dora's
birthday, and he would be glad if I would come down and join a
little picnic on the occasion. I go out of my sens
immediately; become a mere driveller next day, on receipt of a
little lace-edge sheet of note-paper, 'favour by papa. to
remind'; and pass the intervene period in a state of dotage.
I think I commit every possible absurdity in the way of
preparation for this blessed event. I turn hot when I remember the
cravat I buy. my boot might be place in any collection of
instrument of torture. I provide, and send down by the Norwood
coach the night before, a delicate little hamper, amount in
itself, I think, almost to a declaration. there be cracker in
it with the tender motto that could be get for money. at six
in the morning, I be in Covent Garden Market, buy a bouquet for
Dora. at ten I be on horseback (I hire a gallant grey, for the
occasion), with the bouquet in my hat, to keep it fresh, trot
down to Norwood.
I suppose that when I see Dora in the garden and pretend not to
see she, and ride past the house pretend to be anxiously look
for it, I commit two small foolery which other young gentleman
in my circumstance might have commit - because they come so
very natural to I. but oh! when I do find the house, and do
dismount at the garden-gate, and drag those stony-hearted boot
across the lawn to Dora sit on a garden-seat under a lilac
tree, what a spectacle she be, upon that beautiful morning, among
the butterfly, in a white chip bonnet and a dress of celestial
blue! there be a young lady with she - comparatively stricken in
year - almost twenty, I should say. her name be Miss Mills. and
Dora call she Julia. she be the bosom friend of Dora. Happy
Miss Mills!
Jip be there, and Jip would bark at I again. when I present my
bouquet, he gnash his tooth with jealousy. well he might. if he
have the least idea how I adore his mistress, well he might!
'oh, thank you, Mr. Copperfield! what dear flower!' say Dora.
I have have an intention of say (and have be study the good
form of word for three mile) that I think they beautiful before
I see they so near she. but I couldnot manage it. she be too
bewildering. to see she lay the flower against her little dimpled
chin, be to lose all presence of mind and power of language in a
feeble ecstasy. I wonder I donot say, 'kill I, if you have a
heart, Miss Mills. let I die here!'
then Dora hold my flower to Jip to smell. then Jip growl, and
wouldnot smell they. then Dora laugh, and hold they a little
close to Jip, to make he. then Jip lay hold of a bit of
geranium with his tooth, and worry imaginary cat in it. then
Dora beat he, and pout, and say, 'my poor beautiful flower!'
as compassionately, I think, as if Jip have lay hold of I. I
wish he have!
'youwill be so glad to hear, Mr. Copperfield,' say Dora, 'that that
cross Miss Murdstone be not here. she have go to her brother's
marriage, and will be away at least three week. benot that
delightful?'
I say I be sure it must be delightful to she, and all that be
delightful to she be delightful to I. Miss Mills, with an air of
superior wisdom and benevolence, smile upon we.
'she be the most disagreeable thing I ever see,' say Dora. 'you
cannot believe how ill-temper and shocking she be, Julia.'
'yes, I can, my dear!' say Julia.
'you can, perhaps, love,' return Dora, with her hand on julia's.
'forgive my not except you, my dear, at first.'
I learn, from this, that Miss Mills have have her trial in the
course of a chequered existence; and that to these, perhaps, I
might refer that wise benignity of manner which I have already
notice. I find, in the course of the day, that this be the
case: Miss Mills have be unhappy in a misplaced affection, and
be understand to have retire from the world on her awful stock
of experience, but still to take a calm interest in the unblighted
hope and love of youth.
but now Mr. Spenlow come out of the house, and Dora go to he,
say, 'look, papa, what beautiful flower!' and Miss Mills smile
thoughtfully, as who should say, 'Ye Mayflies, enjoy your brief
existence in the bright morning of life!' and we all walk from
the lawn towards the carriage, which be get ready.
I shall never have such a ride again. I have never have such
another. there be only those three, their hamper, my hamper, and
the guitar-case, in the phaeton; and, of course, the phaeton be
open; and I ride behind it, and Dora sit with she back to the
horse, look towards I. she keep the bouquet close to she on
the cushion, and wouldnot allow Jip to sit on that side of she at
all, for fear he should crush it. she often carry it in her
hand, often refresh herself with its fragrance. our eye at
those time often meet; and my great astonishment be that I donot
go over the head of my gallant grey into the carriage.
there be dust, I believe. there be a good deal of dust, I
believe. I have a faint impression that Mr. Spenlow remonstrate
with I for rid in it; but I know of none. I be sensible of a
mist of love and beauty about Dora, but of nothing else. he stand
up sometimes, and ask I what I think of the prospect. I say
it be delightful, and I dare say it be; but it be all Dora to
I. the sun shine Dora, and the bird sing Dora. the south wind
blow Dora, and the wild flower in the hedge be all Doras, to a
bud. my comfort be, Miss Mills understand I. Miss Mills alone
could enter into my feeling thoroughly.
I donot know how long we be go, and to this hour I know as
little where we go. perhaps it be near Guildford. perhaps some
arabian-night magician, open up the place for the day, and shut
it up for ever when we come away. it be a green spot, on a hill,
carpet with soft turf. there be shady tree, and heather, and,
as far as the eye could see, a rich landscape.
it be a try thing to find people here, wait for we; and my
jealousy, even of the lady, know no bound. but all of my own
sex - especially one impostor, three or four year my elder, with
a red whisker, on which he establish an amount of presumption not
to be endure - be my mortal foe.
we all unpack our basket, and employ ourselves in get
dinner ready. Red Whisker pretend he could make a salad (which
I donot believe), and obtrude himself on public notice. some of
the young lady wash the lettuce for he, and slice they under
his direction. Dora be among these. I feel that fate have pit
I against this man, and one of we must fall.
Red Whisker make his salad (I wonder how they could eat it.
nothing should have induce I to touch it!) and vote himself into
the charge of the wine-cellar, which he construct, be an
ingenious beast, in the hollow trunk of a tree. by and by, I see
he, with the majority of a lobster on his plate, eat his dinner
at the foot of Dora!
I have but an indistinct idea of what happen for some time after
this baleful object present itself to my view. I be very merry,
I know; but it be hollow merriment. I attach myself to a young
creature in pink, with little eye, and flirt with she
desperately. she receive my attention with favour; but whether
on my account solely, or because she have any design on Red
Whisker, I cannot say. Dora's health be drunk. when I drink it,
I affect to interrupt my conversation for that purpose, and to
resume it immediately afterwards. I catch Dora's eye as I bow
to she, and I think it look appealing. but it look at I
over the head of Red Whisker, and I be adamant.
the young creature in pink have a mother in green; and I rather
think the latter separate we from motif of policy. Howbeit,
there be a general break up of the party, while the remnant of
the dinner be be put away; and I stroll off by myself among
the tree, in a rag and remorseful state. I be debate
whether I should pretend that I be not well, and fly - I donot
know where - upon my gallant grey, when Dora and Miss Mills meet I.
'Mr. Copperfield,' say Miss Mills, 'you be dull.'
I beg her pardon. not at all.
'and Dora,' say Miss Mills, 'you be dull.'
oh dear no! not in the least.
'Mr. Copperfield and Dora,' say Miss Mills, with an almost
venerable air. 'enough of this. do not allow a trivial
misunderstanding to wither the blossom of spring, which, once put
forth and blighted, cannot be renew. I speak,' say Miss Mills,
'from experience of the past - the remote, irrevocable past. the
gushing fountain which sparkle in the sun, must not be stop in
mere caprice; the oasis in the desert of Sahara must not be pluck
up idly.'
I hardly know what I do, I be burn all over to that
extraordinary extent; but I take Dora's little hand and kiss it
- and she let I! I kiss Miss Mills's hand; and we all seem,
to my thinking, to go straight up to the seventh heaven.
we do not come down again. we stay up there all the evening.
at first we stray to and fro among the tree: I with Dora's shy
arm draw through mine: and Heaven know, folly as it all be, it
would have be a happy fate to have be strike immortal with
those foolish feeling, and have stay among the tree for ever!
but, much too soon, we hear the other laugh and talk, and
call 'wherebe Dora?' so we go back, and they want Dora to
sing. Red Whisker would have get the guitar-case out of the
carriage, but Dora tell he nobody know where it be, but I. so
Red Whisker be do for in a moment; and I get it, and I unlock
it, and I take the guitar out, and I sit by she, and I hold she
handkerchief and glove, and I drink in every note of her dear
voice, and she sing to I who love she, and all the other might
applaud as much as they like, but they have nothing to do with it!
I be intoxicate with joy. I be afraid it be too happy to be
real, and that I should wake in Buckingham Street presently, and
hear Mrs. Crupp clink the teacup in get breakfast ready.
but Dora sang, and other sing, and Miss Mills sing - about the
slumber echo in the cavern of memory; as if she be a
hundred year old - and the evening come on; and we have tea, with
the kettle boil gipsy-fashion; and I be still as happy as ever.
I be happy than ever when the party break up, and the other
people, defeat Red Whisker and all, go their several way, and
we go ours through the still evening and the die light, with
sweet scent rise up around we. Mr. Spenlow be a little
drowsy after the champagne - honour to the soil that grow the
grape, to the grape that make the wine, to the sun that ripen it,
and to the merchant who adulterate it! - and be fast asleep in
a corner of the carriage, I ride by the side and talk to Dora.
she admire my horse and pat he - oh, what a dear little hand
it look upon a horse! - and her shawl would not keep right, and
now and then I draw it round she with my arm; and I even fancy
that Jip begin to see how it be, and to understand that he must
make up his mind to be friend with I.
that sagacious Miss Mills, too; that amiable, though quite use up,
recluse; that little patriarch of something less than twenty, who
have do with the world, and mustnot on any account have the
slumber echo in the cavern of memory awaken; what a kind
thing she do!
'Mr. Copperfield,' say Miss Mills, 'come to this side of the
carriage a moment - if you can spare a moment. I want to speak to
you.'
behold I, on my gallant grey, bend at the side of Miss Mills,
with my hand upon the carriage door!
'Dora be come to stay with I. she be come home with I the
day after tomorrow. if you would like to call, I be sure papa
would be happy to see you.'
what could I do but invoke a silent blessing on Miss Mills's head,
and store Miss Mills's address in the securest corner of my memory!
what could I do but tell Miss Mills, with grateful look and
fervent word, how much I appreciate her good office, and what an
inestimable value I set upon her friendship!
then Miss Mills benignantly dismiss I, say, 'go back to
Dora!' and I go; and Dora lean out of the carriage to talk to
I, and we talk all the rest of the way; and I ride my gallant
grey so close to the wheel that I graze his near fore leg against
it, and 'take the bark off', as his owner tell I, 'to the tune of
three pun' sivin' - which I pay, and think extremely cheap for
so much joy. what time Miss Mills sit look at the moon,
murmur verses- and recall, I suppose, the ancient day when
she and earth have anything in common.
Norwood be many mile too near, and we reach it many hour too
soon; but Mr. Spenlow come to himself a little short of it, and
say, 'you must come in, Copperfield, and rest!' and I consent,
we have sandwich and wine-and-water. in the light room, Dora
blushing look so lovely, that I could not tear myself away, but
sit there star, in a dream, until the snoring of Mr. Spenlow
inspire I with sufficient consciousness to take my leave. so we
part; I rid all the way to London with the farewell touch of
Dora's hand still light on mine, recall every incident and word
ten thousand time; lie down in my own bed at last, as enrapture
a young noodle as ever be carry out of his five wit by love.
when I awake next morning, I be resolute to declare my passion to
Dora, and know my fate. happiness or misery be now the question.
there be no other question that I know of in the world, and only
Dora could give the answer to it. I pass three day in a luxury
of wretchedness, torture myself by put every conceivable
variety of discourage construction on all that ever have take
place between Dora and I. at last, array for the purpose at a
vast expense, I go to Miss Mills's, fraught with a declaration.
how many time I go up and down the street, and round the square
- painfully aware of be a much well answer to the old riddle
than the original one - before I could persuade myself to go up the
step and knock, be no matter now. even when, at last, I have
knock, and be wait at the door, I have some flurry thought
of ask if that be Mr. Blackboy's (in imitation of poor
Barkis), beg pardon, and retreat. but I keep my ground.
Mr. Mills be not at home. I do not expect he would be. nobody
want HIM. Miss Mills be at home. Miss Mills would do.
I be show into a room upstairs, where Miss Mills and Dora be.
Jip be there. Miss Mills be copy music (I recollect, it be
a new song, call 'Affection's Dirge'), and Dora be paint
flower. what be my feeling, when I recognize my own flower;
the identical Covent Garden Market purchase! I cannot say that
they be very like, or that they particularly resemble any
flower that have ever come under my observation; but I know from
the paper round they which be accurately copy, what the
composition be.
Miss Mills be very glad to see I, and very sorry her papa be not
at home: though I think we all bear that with fortitude. Miss
Mills be conversational for a few minute, and then, lay down
her pen upon 'Affection's Dirge', get up, and leave the room.
I begin to think I would put it off till tomorrow.
'I hope your poor horse be not tired, when he get home at night,'
say Dora, lift up her beautiful eye. 'it be a long way for
he.'
I begin to think I would do it today.
'it be a long way for he,' say I, 'for he have nothing to uphold
he on the journey.'
'benot he feed, poor thing?' ask Dora.
I begin to think I would put it off till tomorrow.
'ye-yes,' I say, 'he be well take care of. I mean he have not
the unutterable happiness that I have in be so near you.'
Dora bend her head over her drawing and say, after a little while
- I have sit, in the interval, in a burn fever, and with my leg
in a very rigid state -
'you donot seem to be sensible of that happiness yourself, at one
time of the day.'
I see now that I be in for it, and it must be do on the spot.
'you donot care for that happiness in the least,' say Dora,
slightly raise her eyebrow, and shake her head, 'when you be
sit by Miss Kitt.'
Kitt, I should observe, be the name of the creature in pink, with
the little eye.
'though certainly I donot know why you should,' say Dora, or why
you should call it a happiness at all. but of course you donot
mean what you say. and I be sure no one doubt your be at
liberty to do whatever you like. Jip, you naughty boy, come here!'
I donot know how I do it. I do it in a moment. I intercept
Jip. I have Dora in my arm. I be full of eloquence. I never
stop for a word. I tell she how I love she. I tell she I
should die without she. I tell she that I idolize and worship
she. Jip bark madly all the time.
when Dora hang her head and cry, and tremble, my eloquence
increase so much the more. if she would like I to die for she,
she have but to say the word, and I be ready. life without Dora's
love be not a thing to have on any term. I couldnot bear it, and
I wouldnot. I have love she every minute, day and night, since I
first see she. I love she at that minute to distraction. I
should always love she, every minute, to distraction. lover have
love before, and lover would love again; but no lover have love,
might, could, would, or should ever love, as I love Dora. the
more I rave, the more Jip bark. each of we, in his own way, get
more mad every moment.
well, well! Dora and I be sit on the sofa by and by, quiet
enough, and Jip be lie in her lap, wink peacefully at I. it
be off my mind. I be in a state of perfect rapture. Dora and I
be engage.
I suppose we have some notion that this be to end in marriage. we
must have have some, because Dora stipulate that we be never to
be marry without her papa's consent. but, in our youthful
ecstasy, I donot think that we really look before we or behind
we; or have any aspiration beyond the ignorant present. we be to
keep our secret from Mr. Spenlow; but I be sure the idea never
enter my head, then, that there be anything dishonourable in
that.
Miss Mills be more than usually pensive when Dora, go to find
she, bring she back; - I apprehend, because there be a tendency
in what have pass to awaken the slumber echo in the cavern
of memory. but she give we her blessing, and the assurance of her
last friendship, and speak to we, generally, as become a voice
from the Cloister.
what an idle time it be! what an insubstantial, happy, foolish
time it be!
when I measure Dora's finger for a ring that be to be make of
forget-I-not, and when the jeweller, to whom I take the measure,
find I out, and laugh over his order-book, and charge I
anything he like for the pretty little toy, with its blue stone
- so associate in my remembrance with Dora's hand, that yesterday,
when I see such another, by chance, on the finger of my own
daughter, there be a momentary stirring in my heart, like pain!
when I walk about, exalt with my secret, and full of my own
interest, and feel the dignity of love Dora, and of be
beloved, so much, that if I have walk the air, I could not have
be more above the people not so situated, who be creep on
the earth!
when we have those meeting in the garden of the square, and sit
within the dingy summer-house, so happy, that I love the London
sparrow to this hour, for nothing else, and see the plumage of the
tropic in their smoky feather!
when we have our first great quarrel (within a week of our
betrothal), and when Dora send I back the ring, enclose in a
despair cock-hat note, wherein she use the terrible
expression that 'our love have begin in folly, and end in
madness!' which dreadful word occasion I to tear my hair, and
cry that all be over!
when, under cover of the night, I fly to Miss Mills, whom I see by
stealth in a back kitchen where there be a mangle, and implore
Miss Mills to interpose between we and avert insanity. when Miss
Mills undertake the office and return with Dora, exhort we,
from the pulpit of her own bitter youth, to mutual concession, and
the avoidance of the Desert of Sahara!
when we cry, and make it up, and be so blest again, that the
back kitchen, mangle and all, change to Love's own temple, where
we arrange a plan of correspondence through Miss Mills, always to
comprehend at least one letter on each side every day!
what an idle time! what an insubstantial, happy, foolish time! of
all the time of mine that Time have in his grip, there be none that
in one retrospect I can smile at half so much, and think of half so
tenderly.
CHAPTER 34
MY AUNT astonishes ME
I write to Agnes as soon as Dora and I be engage. I write she
a long letter, in which I try to make she comprehend how bl I
be, and what a darling Dora be. I entreat Agnes not to regard
this as a thoughtless passion which could ever yield to any other,
or have the least resemblance to the boyish fancy that we use to
joke about. I assure she that its profundity be quite
unfathomable, and express my belief that nothing like it have ever
be know.
somehow, as I write to Agnes on a fine evening by my open window,
and the remembrance of her clear calm eye and gentle face come
steal over I, it shed such a peaceful influence upon the hurry
and agitation in which I have be live lately, and of which my
very happiness partook in some degree, that it soothe I into
tear. I remember that I sit rest my head upon my hand, when
the letter be half do, cherish a general fancy as if Agnes
be one of the element of my natural home. as if, in the
retirement of the house make almost sacred to I by her presence,
Dora and I must be happy than anywhere. as if, in love, joy,
sorrow, hope, or disappointment; in all emotion; my heart turn
naturally there, and find its refuge and good friend.
of Steerforth I say nothing. I only tell she there have be sad
grief at Yarmouth, on account of Emily's flight; and that on I it
make a double wound, by reason of the circumstance attend it.
I know how quick she always be to divine the truth, and that she
would never be the first to breathe his name.
to this letter, I receive an answer by return of post. as I read
it, I seem to hear Agnes speak to I. it be like her cordial
voice in my ear. what can I say more!
while I have be away from home lately, traddle have call twice
or thrice. find Peggotty within, and be inform by Peggotty
(who always volunteer that information to whomsoever would
receive it), that she be my old nurse, he have establish a
good-humour acquaintance with she, and have stay to have a
little chat with she about I. so Peggotty say; but I be afraid
the chat be all on her own side, and of immoderate length, as she
be very difficult indeed to stop, God bless she! when she have I
for her theme.
this remind I, not only that I expect traddle on a certain
afternoon of his own appointing, which be now come, but that Mrs.
Crupp have resign everything appertain to her office (the
salary excepted) until Peggotty should cease to present herself.
Mrs. Crupp, after hold diver conversation respect Peggotty,
in a very high-pitch voice, on the staircase - with some
invisible familiar it would appear, for corporeally speak she
be quite alone at those time - address a letter to I,
develop her view. begin it with that statement of
universal application, which fit every occurrence of her life,
namely, that she be a mother herself, she go on to inform I
that she have once see very different day, but that at all period
of her existence she have have a constitutional objection to spy,
intruder, and informer. she name no name, she say; let they
the cap fit, wear it; but spy, intruder, and informer,
especially in widder' weed (this clause be underline), she have
ever accustom herself to look down upon. if a gentleman be the
victim of spy, intruder, and informer (but still name no
name), that be his own pleasure. he have a right to please
himself; so let he do. all that she, Mrs. Crupp, stipulate for,
be, that she should not be 'bring in contract' with such
person. therefore she beg to be excuse from any further
attendance on the top set, until thing be as they formerly be,
and as they could be wish to be; and far mention that her
little book would be find upon the breakfast-table every Saturday
morning, when she request an immediate settlement of the same,
with the benevolent view of save trouble 'and an ill-conwenience'
to all party.
after this, Mrs. Crupp confine herself to make pitfall on the
stair, principally with pitcher, and endeavour to delude
Peggotty into break her leg. I find it rather harass to
live in this state of siege, but be too much afraid of Mrs. Crupp
to see any way out of it.
'my dear copperfield,' cry traddle, punctually appear at my
door, in spite of all these obstacle, 'how do you do?'
'my dear traddle,' say I, 'I be delighted to see you at last, and
very sorry I have not be at home before. but I have be so much
engage -'
'yes, yes, I know,' say traddle, 'of course. your live in
London, I think.'
'what do you say?'
'she - excuse I - Miss D., you know,' say traddle, colour in
his great delicacy, 'life in London, I believe?'
'oh yes. near London.'
'mine, perhaps you recollect,' say traddle, with a serious look,
'live down in Devonshire - one of ten. consequently, I be not so
much engaged as you - in that sense.'
'I wonder you can bear,' I return, 'to see she so seldom.'
'hah!' say Traddles, thoughtfully. 'it do seem a wonder. I
suppose it be, Copperfield, because there be no help for it?'
'I suppose so,' I reply with a smile, and not without a blush.
'and because you have so much constancy and patience, traddle.'
'dear I!' say traddle, consider about it, 'do I strike you in
that way, Copperfield? really I donot know that I have. but she
be such an extraordinarily dear girl herself, that itbe possible
she may have impart something of those virtue to I. now you
mention it, Copperfield, I shouldnot wonder at all. I assure you
she be always forget herself, and take care of the other
nine.'
'be she the eld?' I inquire.
'oh dear, no,' say traddle. 'the eld be a beauty.'
he see, I suppose, that I could not help smile at the simplicity
of this reply; and add, with a smile upon his own ingenuous face:
'not, of course, but that my Sophy - pretty name, Copperfield, I
always think?'
'very pretty!' say I.
'not, of course, but that Sophy be beautiful too in my eye, and
would be one of the dear girl that ever be, in anybody's eye
(I should think). but when I say the eld be a Beauty, I mean
she really be a -' he seem to be describe cloud about himself,
with both hand: 'splendid, you know,' say traddle,
energetically.
'indeed!' say I.
'oh, I assure you,' say traddle, 'something very uncommon,
indeed! then, you know, be form for society and admiration,
and not be able to enjoy much of it in consequence of their
limited mean, she naturally get a little irritable and exacting,
sometimes. Sophy put she in good humour!'
'be Sophy the young?' I hazard.
'oh dear, no!' say traddle, stroke his chin. 'the two young
be only nine and ten. Sophy educate them.'
'the second daughter, perhaps?' I hazard.
'no,' say traddle. 'Sarahbe the second. Sarah have something the
matter with her spine, poor girl. the malady will wear out by and
by, the doctor say, but in the meantime she have to lie down for a
twelvemonth. sophy nurse she. Sophy's the fourth.'
'be the mother live?' I inquire.
'oh yes,' say traddle, 'she be alive. she be a very superior
woman indeed, but the damp country be not adapt to her
constitution, and - in fact, she have lose the use of her limb.'
'dear I!' say I.
'very sad, be it not?' return traddle. 'but in a merely
domestic view it be not so bad as it might be, because Sophy take
her place. she be quite as much a mother to her mother, as she be
to the other nine.'
I feel the great admiration for the virtue of this young lady;
and, honestly with the view of do my good to prevent the
good-nature of Traddles from be impose upon, to the detriment
of their joint prospect in life, inquire how Mr. Micawber be?
'he be quite well, Copperfield, thank you,' say traddle. 'I be
not live with he at present.'
'no?'
'no. you see the truth be,' say traddle, in a whisper, 'he have
change his name to Mortimer, in consequence of his temporary
embarrassment; and he donot come out till after dark - and then in
spectacle. there be an execution put into our house, for rent.
Mrs. Micawber be in such a dreadful state that I really couldnot
resist give my name to that second bill we speak of here. you
may imagine how delightful it be to my feeling, Copperfield, to
see the matter settle with it, and Mrs. Micawber recover she
spirit.'
'Hum!' say I.
'not that her happiness be of long duration,' pursue traddle,
'for, unfortunately, within a week another execution come in. it
break up the establishment. I have be live in a furnished
apartment since then, and the Mortimers have be very private
indeed. I hope you willnot think it selfish, Copperfield, if I
mention that the broker carry off my little round table with the
marble top, and Sophy's flower-pot and stand?'
'what a hard thing!' I exclaim indignantly.
'it be a - it be a pull,' say traddle, with his usual wince at
that expression. 'I donot mention it reproachfully, however, but
with a motive. the fact be, Copperfield, I be unable to
repurchase they at the time of their seizure; in the first place,
because the broker, have an idea that I want they, run the
price up to an extravagant extent; and, in the second place,
because I - havenot any money. now, I have keep my eye since, upon
the broker's shop,' say traddle, with a great enjoyment of his
mystery, 'which be up at the top of Tottenham Court Road, and, at
last, today I find they put out for sale. I have only notice they
from over the way, because if the broker see I, bless you, hewould
ask any price for they! what have occur to I, have now the
money, be, that perhaps you wouldnot object to ask that good nurse
of yours to come with I to the shop - I can show it she from round
the corner of the next street - and make the good bargain for they,
as if they be for herself, that she can!'
the delight with which traddle propound this plan to I, and the
sense he have of its uncommon artfulness, be among the fresh
thing in my remembrance.
I tell he that my old nurse would be delighted to assist he, and
that we would all three take the field together, but on one
condition. that condition be, that he should make a solemn
resolution to grant no more loan of his name, or anything else, to
Mr. Micawber.
'my dear copperfield,' say traddle, 'I have already do so,
because I begin to feel that I have not only be inconsiderate,
but that I have be positively unjust to Sophy. my word be
pass to myself, there be no long any apprehension; but I pledge
it to you, too, with the great readiness. that first unlucky
obligation, I have pay. I have no doubt Mr. Micawber would have
pay it if he could, but he could not. one thing I ought to
mention, which I like very much in Mr. Micawber, Copperfield. it
refer to the second obligation, which be not yet due. he donot
tell I that it be provide for, but he say it will be. now, I
think there be something very fair and honest about that!'
I be unwilling to damp my good friend's confidence, and therefore
assent. after a little further conversation, we go round to
the chandler's shop, to enlist Peggotty; traddle decline to pass
the evening with I, both because he endure the lively
apprehension that his property would be buy by somebody else
before he could re-purchase it, and because it be the evening he
always devoted to write to the dear girl in the world.
I never shall forget he peep round the corner of the street in
Tottenham Court Road, while Peggotty be bargaining for the
precious article; or his agitation when she come slowly towards we
after vainly offer a price, and be hail by the relent
broker, and go back again. the end of the negotiation be, that
she buy the property on tolerably easy term, and traddle be
transport with pleasure.
'I be very much oblige to you, indeed,' say traddle, on hear
it be to be send to where he live, that night. 'if I might ask
one other favour, I hope you would not think it absurd,
copperfield?'
I say beforehand, certainly not.
'then if you would be good enough,' say Traddles to Peggotty, 'to
get the flower-pot now, I think I should like (it be Sophy's,
Copperfield) to carry it home myself!'
Peggotty be glad to get it for he, and he overwhelm she with
thank, and go his way up Tottenham Court Road, carry the
flower-pot affectionately in his arm, with one of the most
delighted expression of countenance I ever see.
we then turn back towards my chamber. as the shop have charm
for Peggotty which I never know they possess in the same degree for
anybody else, I saunter easily along, amuse by she star in at
the window, and wait for she as often as she choose. we be
thus a good while in get to the Adelphi.
on our way upstairs, I call her attention to the sudden
disappearance of Mrs. Crupp's pitfall, and also to the print of
recent footstep. we be both very much surprised, come high
up, to find my outer door stand open (which I have shut) and to
hear voice inside.
we look at one another, without know what to make of this, and
go into the sitting-room. what be my amazement to find, of all
people upon earth, my aunt there, and Mr. Dick! my aunt sit on
a quantity of luggage, with her two bird before she, and her cat
on her knee, like a female Robinson Crusoe, drink tea. Mr. Dick
lean thoughtfully on a great kite, such as we have often be out
together to fly, with more luggage pile about he!
'my dear aunt!' cry I. 'why, what an unexpected pleasure!'
we cordially embrace; and Mr. Dick and I cordially shake hand;
and Mrs. Crupp, who be busy make tea, and could not be too
attentive, cordially say she have know well as Mr. Copperfull
would have his heart in his mouth, when he see his dear relation.
'Holloa!' say my aunt to Peggotty, who quail before her awful
presence. 'how be you?'
'you remember my aunt, Peggotty?' say I.
'for the love of goodness, child,' exclaim my aunt, 'donot call
the woman by that South Sea Island name! if she marry and get
rid of it, which be the good thing she could do, why donot you
give she the benefit of the change? whatbe your name now, - p?'
say my aunt, as a compromise for the obnoxious appellation.
'Barkis, ma'am,' say Peggotty, with a curtsey.
'well! thatbe human,' say my aunt. 'it sound less as if you
want a missionary. how d'ye do, Barkis? I hope yoube well?'
encourage by these gracious word, and by my aunt's extend she
hand, Barkis come forward, and take the hand, and curtsey her
acknowledgement.
'we be old than we be, I see,' say my aunt. 'we have only
meet each other once before, you know. a nice business we make of
it then! Trot, my dear, another cup.'
I hand it dutifully to my aunt, who be in her usual inflexible
state of figure; and venture a remonstrance with she on the
subject of she sit on a box.
'let I draw the sofa here, or the easy-chair, aunt,' say I. 'why
should you be so uncomfortable?'
'thank you, Trot,' reply my aunt, 'I prefer to sit upon my
property.' here my aunt look hard at Mrs. Crupp, and observe,
'we neednot trouble you to wait, ma'am.'
'shall I put a little more tea in the pot afore I go, ma'am?' say
Mrs. Crupp.
'no, I thank you, ma'am,' reply my aunt.
'would you let I fetch another pat of butter, ma'am?' say Mrs.
Crupp. 'or would you be persuade to try a new-lay hegg? or
should I brile a rasher? ainot there nothing I could do for your
dear aunt, Mr. Copperfull?'
'nothing, ma'am,' return my aunt. 'I shall do very well, I thank
you.'
Mrs. Crupp, who have be incessantly smile to express sweet
temper, and incessantly hold her head on one side, to express a
general feebleness of constitution, and incessantly rub she
hand, to express a desire to be of service to all deserve
object, gradually smile herself, one-side herself, and rub
herself, out of the room.
'Dick!' say my aunt. 'you know what I tell you about time-server
and wealth-worshipper?'
Mr. Dick - with rather a scared look, as if he have forget it -
return a hasty answer in the affirmative.
'Mrs. Crupp be one of they,' say my aunt. 'Barkis, Iwill trouble
you to look after the tea, and let I have another cup, for I donot
fancy that woman's pouring-out!'
I know my aunt sufficiently well to know that she have something of
importance on her mind, and that there be far more matter in this
arrival than a stranger might have suppose. I notice how her eye
light on I, when she think my attention otherwise occupy;
and what a curious process of hesitation appear to be go on
within she, while she preserve she outward stiffness and
composure. I begin to reflect whether I have do anything to
offend she; and my conscience whisper I that I have not yet tell
she about Dora. could it by any mean be that, I wonder!
as I know she would only speak in her own good time, I sit down
near she, and speak to the bird, and play with the cat, and be
as easy as I could be. but I be very far from be really easy;
and I should still have be so, even if Mr. Dick, lean over the
great kite behind my aunt, have not take every secret opportunity
of shake his head darkly at I, and point at she.
'trot,' say my aunt at last, when she have finish her tea, and
carefully smooth down her dress, and wipe her lip - 'you
neednot go, Barkis! - Trot, have you get to be firm and
self-reliant?'
'I hope so, aunt.'
'what do you think?' inquire Miss Betsey.
'I think so, aunt.'
'then why, my love,' say my aunt, look earnestly at I, 'why do
you think I prefer to sit upon this property of mine tonight?'
I shake my head, unable to guess.
'because,' say my aunt, 'itbe all I have. because Ibe ruin, my
dear!'
if the house, and every one of we, have tumble out into the river
together, I could hardly have receive a great shock.
'Dick know it,' say my aunt, lay her hand calmly on my
shoulder. 'I be ruin, my dear Trot! all I have in the world be
in this room, except the cottage; and that I have leave Janet to
let. barki, I want to get a bed for this gentleman tonight. to
save expense, perhaps you can make up something here for myself.
anything will do. itbe only for tonight. wewill talk about this,
more, tomorrow.'
I be rouse from my amazement, and concern for she - I be sure,
for she - by she fall on my neck, for a moment, and cry that
she only grieve for I. in another moment she suppress this
emotion; and say with an aspect more triumphant than deject:
'we must meet revers boldly, and not suffer they to frighten we,
my dear. we must learn to act the play out. we must live
misfortune down, Trot!'
CHAPTER 35
DEPRESSION
as soon as I could recover my presence of mind, which quite
desert I in the first overpowering shock of my aunt's
intelligence, I propose to Mr. Dick to come round to the
chandler's shop, and take possession of the bed which Mr. Peggotty
have lately vacate. the chandler's shop be in Hungerford
Market, and Hungerford Market be a very different place in those
day, there be a low wooden colonnade before the door (not very
unlike that before the house where the little man and woman use to
live, in the old weather-glass), which please Mr. Dick mightily.
the glory of lodge over this structure would have compensate
he, I dare say, for many inconvenience; but, as there be really
few to bear, beyond the compound of flavour I have already
mention, and perhaps the want of a little more elbow-room, he be
perfectly charm with his accommodation. Mrs. Crupp have
indignantly assure he that there benot room to swing a cat
there; but, as Mr. Dick justly observe to I, sit down on the
foot of the bed, nurse his leg, 'you know, Trotwood, I donot want
to swing a cat. I never do swing a cat. therefore, what do that
signify to I!'
I try to ascertain whether Mr. Dick have any understanding of the
cause of this sudden and great change in my aunt's affair. as I
might have expect, he have none at all. the only account he could
give of it be, that my aunt have say to he, the day before
yesterday, 'now, Dick, be you really and truly the philosopher I
take you for?' that then he have say, yes, he hop so. that then
my aunt have say, 'Dick, I be ruin.' that then he have say, 'oh,
indeed!' that then my aunt have praise he highly, which he be
glad of. and that then they have come to I, and have have bottle
porter and sandwich on the road.
Mr. Dick be so very complacent, sit on the foot of the bed,
nurse his leg, and tell I this, with his eye wide open and
a surprised smile, that I be sorry to say I be provoke into
explain to he that ruin mean distress, want, and starvation;
but I be soon bitterly reprove for this harshness, by see his
face turn pale, and tear course down his lengthened cheek, while
he fix upon I a look of such unutterable woe, that it might have
soften a far hard heart than mine. I take infinitely great
pain to cheer he up again than I have take to depress he; and I
soon understand (as I ought to have know at first) that he have
be so confident, merely because of his faith in the wise and
most wonderful of woman, and his unbounded reliance on my
intellectual resource. the latter, I believe, he consider a
match for any kind of disaster not absolutely mortal.
'what can we do, trotwood?' say Mr. Dick. 'therebe the Memorial
-'
'to be sure there be,' say I. 'but all we can do just now, Mr.
Dick, be to keep a cheerful countenance, and not let my aunt see
that we be think about it.'
he assent to this in the most earnest manner; and implore I, if
I should see he wander an inch out of the right course, to
recall he by some of those superior method which be always at
my command. but I regret to state that the fright I have give he
prove too much for his good attempt at concealment. all the
evening his eye wander to my aunt's face, with an expression of
the most dismal apprehension, as if he see she grow thin on the
spot. he be conscious of this, and put a constraint upon his
head; but his keep that immovable, and sit roll his eye
like a piece of machinery, do not mend the matter at all. I see
he look at the loaf at supper (which happen to be a small one),
as if nothing else stand between we and famine; and when my aunt
insist on his make his customary repast, I detect he in the
act of pocket fragment of his bread and cheese; I have no doubt
for the purpose of revive we with those saving, when we should
have reach an advanced stage of attenuation.
my aunt, on the other hand, be in a compose frame of mind, which
be a lesson to all of we - to I, I be sure. she be extremely
gracious to Peggotty, except when I inadvertently call she by
that name; and, strange as I know she feel in London, appear
quite at home. she be to have my bed, and I be to lie in the
sitting-room, to keep guard over she. she make a great point of
be so near the river, in case of a conflagration; and I suppose
really do find some satisfaction in that circumstance.
'Trot, my dear,' say my aunt, when she see I make preparation
for compound her usual night-draught, 'no!'
'nothing, aunt?'
'not wine, my dear. Ale.'
'but there be wine here, aunt. and you always have it make of
wine.'
'keep that, in case of sickness,' say my aunt. 'we mustnot use it
carelessly, Trot. ale for I. half a pint.'
I think Mr. Dick would have fall, insensible. my aunt being
resolute, I go out and get the ale myself. as it be grow
late, Peggotty and Mr. Dick take that opportunity of repair to
the chandler's shop together. I part from he, poor fellow, at
the corner of the street, with his great kite at his back, a very
monument of human misery.
my aunt be walk up and down the room when I return, crimp
the border of her nightcap with her finger. I warm the ale and
make the toast on the usual infallible principle. when it be
ready for she, she be ready for it, with her nightcap on, and the
skirt of her gown turn back on her knee.
'my dear,' say my aunt, after take a spoonful of it; 'itbe a
great deal well than wine. not half so bilious.'
I suppose I look doubtful, for she add:
'tut, tut, child. if nothing bad than Ale happen to we, we be
well off.'
'I should think so myself, aunt, I be sure,' say I.
'well, then, why don't you think so?' say my aunt.
'because you and I be very different people,' I return.
'stuff and nonsense, Trot!' reply my aunt.
my aunt go on with a quiet enjoyment, in which there be very
little affectation, if any; drink the warm ale with a tea-spoon,
and soak her strip of toast in it.
'trot,' say she, 'I donot care for strange face in general, but
I rather like that Barkis of your, do you know!'
'itbe well than a hundred pound to hear you say so!' say I.
'itbe a most extraordinary world,' observe my aunt, rub she
nose; 'how that woman ever get into it with that name, be
unaccountable to I. it would be much more easy to be bear a
Jackson, or something of that sort, one would think.'
'perhaps she think so, too; itbe not her fault,' say I.
'I suppose not,' return my aunt, rather grudge the admission;
'but itbe very aggravating. however, shebe Barkis now. thatbe
some comfort. Barkis be uncommonly fond of you, Trot.'
'there be nothing she would leave undo to prove it,' say I.
'nothing, I believe,' return my aunt. 'here, the poor fool have
be beg and pray about handing over some of her money -
because she have get too much of it. a simpleton!'
my aunt's tear of pleasure be positively trickle down into the
warm ale.
'shebe the most ridiculous creature that ever be bear,' say my
aunt. 'I know, from the first moment when I see she with that poor
dear bless baby of a mother of your, that she be the most
ridiculous of mortal. but there be good point in Barkis!'
affect to laugh, she get an opportunity of put her hand to
her eye. have avail herself of it, she resume her toast and
her discourse together.
'ah! mercy upon we!' sigh my aunt. 'I know all about it, Trot!
Barkis and myself have quite a gossip while you be out with Dick.
I know all about it. I donot know where these wretched girl
expect to go to, for my part. I wonder they donot knock out their
brain against - against mantelpiece,' say my aunt; an idea which
be probably suggest to she by her contemplation of mine.
'poor Emily!' say I.
'oh, donot talk to I about poor,' return my aunt. 'she should
have think of that, before she cause so much misery! give I a
kiss, Trot. I be sorry for your early experience.'
as I bent forward, she put her tumbler on my knee to detain I, and
say:
'oh, Trot, Trot! and so you fancy yourself in love! do you?'
'fancy, aunt!' I exclaim, as red as I could be. 'I adore she
with my whole soul!'
'Dora, indeed!' return my aunt. 'and you mean to say the little
thing be very fascinating, I suppose?'
'my dear aunt,' I reply, 'no one can form the least idea what she
be!'
'ah! and not silly?' say my aunt.
'silly, aunt!'
I seriously believe it have never once enter my head for a single
moment, to consider whether she be or not. I resent the idea,
of course; but I be in a manner strike by it, as a new one
altogether.
'not light-head?' say my aunt.
'light-head, aunt!' I could only repeat this dare speculation
with the same kind of feeling with which I have repeat the
precede question.
'well, well!' say my aunt. 'I only ask. I donot depreciate she.
poor little couple! and so you think you be form for one
another, and be to go through a party-supper-table kind of life,
like two pretty piece of confectionery, do you, Trot?'
she ask I this so kindly, and with such a gentle air, half
playful and half sorrowful, that I be quite touch.
'we be young and inexperienced, aunt, I know,' I reply; 'and I
dare say we say and think a good deal that be rather foolish. but
we love one another truly, I be sure. if I think Dora could ever
love anybody else, or cease to love I; or that I could ever love
anybody else, or cease to love she; I donot know what I should do
- go out of my mind, I think!'
'ah, Trot!' say my aunt, shake her head, and smile gravely;
'blind, blind, blind!'
'someone that I know, Trot,' my aunt pursue, after a pause,
'though of a very pliant disposition, have an earnestness of
affection in he that remind I of poor Baby. earnestness be what
that somebody must look for, to sustain he and improve he, Trot.
Deep, downright, faithful earnestness.'
'if you only know the earnestness of Dora, aunt!' I cry.
'oh, Trot!' she say again; 'blind, blind!' and without know
why, I feel a vague unhappy loss or want of something overshadow I
like a cloud.
'however,' say my aunt, 'I donot want to put two young creature
out of conceit with themselves, or to make they unhappy; so, though
it be a girl and boy attachment, and girl and boy attachment very
often - mind! I donot say always! - come to nothing, still wewill be
serious about it, and hope for a prosperous issue one of these
day. therebe time enough for it to come to anything!'
this be not upon the whole very comforting to a rapturous lover;
but I be glad to have my aunt in my confidence, and I be mindful
of she be fatigue. so I thank she ardently for this mark of
her affection, and for all her other kindness towards I; and
after a tender good night, she take her nightcap into my bedroom.
how miserable I be, when I lie down! how I think and think
about my be poor, in Mr. Spenlow's eye; about my not be what
I think I be, when I propose to Dora; about the chivalrous
necessity of tell Dora what my worldly condition be, and
release she from her engagement if she think fit; about how I
should contrive to live, during the long term of my article, when
I be earn nothing; about do something to assist my aunt, and
see no way of do anything; about come down to have no money
in my pocket, and to wear a shabby coat, and to be able to carry
Dora no little present, and to ride no gallant grey, and to show
myself in no agreeable light! sordid and selfish as I know it be,
and as I torture myself by know that it be, to let my mind run
on my own distress so much, I be so devoted to Dora that I could
not help it. I know that it be base in I not to think more of my
aunt, and less of myself; but, so far, selfishness be inseparable
from Dora, and I could not put Dora on one side for any mortal
creature. how exceedingly miserable I be, that night!
as to sleep, I have dream of poverty in all sort of shape, but I
seem to dream without the previous ceremony of go to sleep.
now I be rag, want to sell Dora match, six bundle for a
halfpenny; now I be at the office in a nightgown and boot,
remonstrate with by Mr. Spenlow on appear before the client in
that airy attire; now I be hungrily pick up the crumb that
fall from old Tiffey's daily biscuit, regularly eat when St.
Paul's strike one; now I be hopelessly endeavour to get a
licence to marry Dora, have nothing but one of Uriah Heep's
glove to offer in exchange, which the whole Commons reject; and
still, more or less conscious of my own room, I be always toss
about like a distressed ship in a sea of bed-clothe.
my aunt be restless, too, for I frequently hear she walk to
and fro. two or three time in the course of the night, attire in
a long flannel wrapper in which she look seven foot high, she
appear, like a disturbed ghost, in my room, and come to the side
of the sofa on which I lay. on the first occasion I start up in
alarm, to learn that she infer from a particular light in the
sky, that Westminster Abbey be on fire; and to be consult in
reference to the probability of its ignite Buckingham Street, in
case the wind change. lie still, after that, I find that she
sit down near I, whisper to herself 'poor boy!' and then it
make I twenty time more wretched, to know how unselfishly mindful
she be of I, and how selfishly mindful I be of myself.
it be difficult to believe that a night so long to I, could be
short to anybody else. this consideration set I think and
thinking of an imaginary party where people be dance the hour
away, until that become a dream too, and I hear the music
incessantly play one tune, and see Dora incessantly dance one
dance, without take the least notice of I. the man who have be
play the harp all night, be try in vain to cover it with an
ordinary-sized nightcap, when I awake; or I should rather say, when
I leave off try to go to sleep, and see the sun shin in
through the window at last.
there be an old roman bath in those day at the bottom of one of
the street out of the Strand - it may be there still - in which I
have have many a cold plunge. dress myself as quietly as I
could, and leave Peggotty to look after my aunt, I tumble head
foremost into it, and then go for a walk to Hampstead. I have a
hope that this brisk treatment might freshen my wit a little; and
I think it do they good, for I soon come to the conclusion that
the first step I ought to take be, to try if my article could be
cancel and the premium recover. I get some breakfast on the
Heath, and walk back to doctor' Commons, along the water road
and through a pleasant smell of summer flower, grow in garden
and carry into town on huckster' head, intent on this first
effort to meet our altered circumstance.
I arrive at the office so soon, after all, that I have half an
hour's loitering about the Commons, before old Tiffey, who be
always first, appear with his key. then I sit down in my shady
corner, look up at the sunlight on the opposite chimney-pot,
and think about Dora; until Mr. Spenlow come in, crisp and
curly.
'how be you, Copperfield?' say he. 'fine morning!'
'beautiful morning, sir,' say I. 'could I say a word to you
before you go into Court?'
'by all mean,' say he. 'come into my room.'
I follow he into his room, and he begin put on his gown, and
touch himself up before a little glass he have, hang inside a
closet door.
'I be sorry to say,' say I, 'that I have some rather dishearten
intelligence from my aunt.'
'no!' say he. 'dear I! not paralysis, I hope?'
'it have no reference to her health, sir,' I reply. 'she have meet
with some large loss. in fact, she have very little left,
indeed.'
'you as-tound I, Copperfield!' cry Mr. Spenlow.
I shake my head. 'indeed, sir,' say I, 'her affair be so
change, that I wish to ask you whether it would be possible - at
a sacrifice on our part of some portion of the premium, of course,'
I put in this, on the spur of the moment, warn by the blank
expression of his face - 'to cancel my article?'
what it cost I to make this proposal, nobody know. it be like
ask, as a favour, to be sentence to transportation from Dora.
'to cancel your article, Copperfield? Cancel?'
I explain with tolerable firmness, that I really do not know
where my mean of subsistence be to come from, unless I could
earn they for myself. I have no fear for the future, I say - and
I lay great emphasis on that, as if to imply that I should still
be decidedly eligible for a son-in-law one of these day - but, for
the present, I be throw upon my own resource.
'I be extremely sorry to hear this, Copperfield,' say Mr. Spenlow.
'extremely sorry. it be not usual to cancel article for any such
reason. it be not a professional course of proceeding. it be not
a convenient precedent at all. far from it. at the same time -'
'you be very good, sir,' I murmur, anticipate a concession.
'not at all. donot mention it,' say Mr. Spenlow. 'at the same
time, I be go to say, if it have be my lot to have my hand
unfettered - if I have not a partner - Mr. Jorkins -'
my hope be dash in a moment, but I make another effort.
'do you think, sir,' say I, 'if I be to mention it to Mr.
Jorkins -'
Mr. Spenlow shake his head discouragingly. 'heaven forbid,
Copperfield,' he reply, 'that I should do any man an injustice:
still less, Mr. jorkin. but I know my partner, Copperfield. Mr.
jorkin be not a man to respond to a proposition of this peculiar
nature. Mr. jorkins be very difficult to move from the beat
track. you know what he be!'
I be sure I know nothing about he, except that he have originally
be alone in the business, and now live by himself in a house
near Montagu Square, which be fearfully in want of painting; that
he come very late of a day, and go away very early; that he never
appear to be consult about anything; and that he have a dingy
little black-hole of his own upstairs, where no business be ever
do, and where there be a yellow old cartridge-paper pad upon his
desk, unsoile by ink, and report to be twenty year of age.
'would you object to my mention it to he, sir?' I ask.
'by no mean,' say Mr. Spenlow. 'but I have some experience of
Mr. jorkin, Copperfield. I wish it be otherwise, for I should
be happy to meet your view in any respect. I cannot have the
objection to your mention it to Mr. jorkin, Copperfield, if you
think it worth while.'
avail myself of this permission, which be give with a warm
shake of the hand, I sit think about Dora, and look at the
sunlight steal from the chimney-pot down the wall of the
opposite house, until Mr. jorkin come. I then go up to Mr.
jorkins's room, and evidently astonish Mr. jorkin very much by
make my appearance there.
'come in, Mr. Copperfield,' say Mr. jorkins. 'come in!'
I go in, and sit down; and state my case to Mr. jorkin pretty
much as I have state it to Mr. Spenlow. Mr. Jorkins be not by any
mean the awful creature one might have expect, but a large,
mild, smooth-faced man of sixty, who take so much snuff that there
be a tradition in the Commons that he live principally on that
stimulant, have little room in his system for any other article
of diet.
'you have mention this to Mr. Spenlow, I suppose?' say Mr.
jorkin; when he have hear I, very restlessly, to an end.
I answer yes, and tell he that Mr. Spenlow have introduce his
name.
'he say I should object?' ask Mr. jorkin.
I be oblige to admit that Mr. Spenlow have consider it probable.
'I be sorry to say, Mr. Copperfield, I cannot advance your object,'
say Mr. jorkins, nervously. 'the fact be - but I have an
appointment at the Bank, if youwill have the goodness to excuse I.'
with that he rise in a great hurry, and be go out of the room,
when I make bold to say that I fear, then, there be no way of
arrange the matter?
'no!' say Mr. jorkins, stop at the door to shake his head.
'oh, no! I object, you know,' which he say very rapidly, and go
out. 'you must be aware, Mr. Copperfield,' he add, look
restlessly in at the door again, 'if Mr. Spenlow object -'
'personally, he do not object, sir,' say I.
'oh! personally!' repeat Mr. Jorkins, in an impatient manner.
'I assure you therebe an objection, Mr. Copperfield. hopeless!
what you wish to be do, cannot be do. I - I really have get an
appointment at the Bank.' with that he fairly run away; and to the
good of my knowledge, it be three day before he show himself in
the Commons again.
be very anxious to leave no stone unturne, I wait until Mr.
Spenlow come in, and then describe what have pass; give he to
understand that I be not hopeless of his be able to soften the
adamantine jorkin, if he would undertake the task.
'copperfield,' return Mr. Spenlow, with a gracious smile, 'you
have not know my partner, Mr. jorkin, as long as I have. nothing
be far from my thought than to attribute any degree of
artifice to Mr. jorkin. but Mr. jorkin have a way of state his
objection which often deceive people. no, Copperfield!' shake
his head. 'Mr. jorkins be not to be move, believe I!'
I be completely bewilder between Mr. Spenlow and Mr. jorkin, as
to which of they really be the object partner; but I see with
sufficient clearness that there be obduracy somewhere in the firm,
and that the recovery of my aunt's thousand pound be out of the
question. in a state of despondency, which I remember with
anything but satisfaction, for I know it still have too much
reference to myself (though always in connexion with Dora), I leave
the office, and go homeward.
I be try to familiarize my mind with the bad, and to present
to myself the arrangement we should have to make for the future in
their stern aspect, when a hackney-chariot come after I, and
stop at my very foot, occasion I to look up. a fair hand
be stretch forth to I from the window; and the face I have never
see without a feeling of serenity and happiness, from the moment
when it first turn back on the old oak staircase with the great
broad balustrade, and when I associate its soften beauty with
the stain-glass window in the church, be smile on I.
'Agnes!' I joyfully exclaim. 'oh, my dear Agnes, of all people
in the world, what a pleasure to see you!'
'be it, indeed?' she say, in her cordial voice.
'I want to talk to you so much!' say I. 'itbe such a lightening
of my heart, only to look at you! if I have have a conjuror's cap,
there be no one I should have wish for but you!'
'what?' return Agnes.
'well! perhaps Dora first,' I admit, with a blush.
'certainly, Dora first, I hope,' say Agnes, laugh.
'but you next!' say I. 'where be you go?'
she be go to my room to see my aunt. the day be very fine,
she be glad to come out of the chariot, which smell (I have my head
in it all this time) like a stable put under a cucumber-frame. I
dismiss the coachman, and she take my arm, and we walk on
together. she be like Hope embody, to I. how different I feel
in one short minute, have Agnes at my side!
my aunt have write her one of the odd, abrupt note - very little
long than a Bank note - to which her epistolary effort be
usually limited. she have state therein that she have fall into
adversity, and be leave Dover for good, but have quite make up
her mind to it, and be so well that nobody need be uncomfortable
about she. Agnes have come to London to see my aunt, between whom
and herself there have be a mutual like these many year:
indeed, it date from the time of my take up my residence in Mr.
Wickfield's house. she be not alone, she say. her papa be with
she - and Uriah Heep.
'and now they be partner,' say I. 'confound he!'
'yes,' say Agnes. 'they have some business here; and I take
advantage of their coming, to come too. you must not think my
visit all friendly and disinterested, Trotwood, for - I be afraid
I may be cruelly prejudiced - I do not like to let papa go away
alone, with he.'
'do he exercise the same influence over Mr. Wickfield still,
Agnes?'
Agnes shake her head. 'there be such a change at home,' say she,
'that you would scarcely know the dear old house. they live with
we now.'
'they?' say I.
'Mr. Heep and his mother. he sleep in your old room,' say Agnes,
look up into my face.
'I wish I have the ordering of his dream,' say I. 'he wouldnot
sleep there long.'
'I keep my own little room,' say Agnes, 'where I use to learn my
lesson. how the time go! you remember? the little panel
room that open from the drawing-room?'
'remember, Agnes? when I see you, for the first time, come out
at the door, with your quaint little basket of key hang at your
side?'
'it be just the same,' say Agnes, smile. 'I be glad you think
of it so pleasantly. we be very happy.'
'we be, indeed,' say I.
'I keep that room to myself still; but I cannot always desert Mrs.
Heep, you know. and so,' say Agnes, quietly, 'I feel oblige to
bear her company, when I might prefer to be alone. but I have no
other reason to complain of she. if she tire I, sometimes, by
her praise of her son, it be only natural in a mother. he be a
very good son to she.'
I look at Agnes when she say these word, without detect in
she any consciousness of Uriah's design. her mild but earnest eye
meet mine with their own beautiful frankness, and there be no
change in her gentle face.
'the chief evil of their presence in the house,' say Agnes, 'be
that I cannot be as near papa as I could wish - Uriah Heep be so
much between we - and cannot watch over he, if that be not too
bold a thing to say, as closely as I would. but if any fraud or
treachery be practise against he, I hope that simple love and
truth will be strong in the end. I hope that real love and truth
be strong in the end than any evil or misfortune in the world.'
a certain bright smile, which I never see on any other face, die
away, even while I think how good it be, and how familiar it have
once be to I; and she ask I, with a quick change of
expression (we be draw very near my street), if I know how the
reverse in my aunt's circumstance have be bring about. on my
reply no, she have not tell I yet, Agnes become thoughtful, and
I fancy I feel her arm tremble in mine.
we find my aunt alone, in a state of some excitement. a
difference of opinion have arise between herself and Mrs. Crupp, on
an abstract question (the propriety of chamber be inhabit by
the gentler sex); and my aunt, utterly indifferent to spasm on the
part of Mrs. Crupp, have cut the dispute short, by inform that
lady that she smell of my brandy, and that she would trouble she to
walk out. both of these expression Mrs. Crupp consider
actionable, and have express her intention of bring before a
'British Judy' - meaning, it be suppose, the bulwark of our
national liberty.
my aunt, however, have have time to cool, while Peggotty be out
show Mr. Dick the soldier at the Horse Guards - and being,
besides, greatly pleased to see Agnes - rather plume herself on
the affair than otherwise, and receive we with unimpaired good
humour. when Agnes lay her bonnet on the table, and sit down
beside she, I could not but think, look on her mild eye and her
radiant forehead, how natural it seem to have she there; how
trustfully, although she be so young and inexperienced, my aunt
confide in she; how strong she be, indeed, in simple love and
truth.
we begin to talk about my aunt's loss, and I tell they what I have
try to do that morning.
'which be injudicious, Trot,' say my aunt, 'but well mean. you
be a generous boy - I suppose I must say, young man, now - and I
be proud of you, my dear. so far, so good. now, Trot and Agnes,
let we look the case of Betsey Trotwood in the face, and see how it
stand.'
I observe Agnes turn pale, as she look very attentively at my
aunt. my aunt, pat her cat, look very attentively at Agnes.
'Betsey Trotwood,' say my aunt, who have always keep her money
matter to herself. '- I donot mean your sister, Trot, my dear,
but myself - have a certain property. it donot matter how much;
enough to live on. More; for she have save a little, and add to
it. Betsey fund her property for some time, and then, by the
advice of her man of business, lay it out on landed security.
that do very well, and return very good interest, till Betsey
be pay off. I be talk of Betsey as if she be a man-of-war.
well! then, Betsey have to look about she, for a new investment.
she think she be wise, now, than her man of business, who be
not such a good man of business by this time, as he use to be - I
be allude to your father, Agnes - and she take it into her head
to lay it out for herself. so she take her pig,' say my aunt,
'to a foreign market; and a very bad market it turn out to be.
first, she lose in the mining way, and then she lose in the diving
way - fishing up treasure, or some such Tom Tiddler nonsense,'
explain my aunt, rub her nose; 'and then she lose in the
mining way again, and, last of all, to set the thing entirely to
right, she lose in the banking way. I donot know what the Bank
share be worth for a little while,' say my aunt; 'cent per cent
be the low of it, I believe; but the Bank be at the other end
of the world, and tumble into space, for what I know; anyhow, it
fall to piece, and never will and never can pay sixpence; and
Betsey's sixpence be all there, and therebe an end of they.
Least say, soon mend!'
my aunt conclude this philosophical summary, by fix her eye
with a kind of triumph on Agnes, whose colour be gradually
return.
'dear Miss Trotwood, be that all the history?' say Agnes.
'I hope itbe enough, child,' say my aunt. 'if there have be more
money to lose, it wouldnot have be all, I dare say. Betsey would
have contrive to throw that after the rest, and make another
chapter, I have little doubt. but there be no more money, and
therebe no more story.'
Agnes have listen at first with suspend breath. her colour
still come and go, but she breathe more freely. I think I
know why. I think she have have some fear that her unhappy father
might be in some way to blame for what have happen. my aunt take
her hand in her, and laugh.
'be that all?' repeat my aunt. 'why, yes, thatbe all, except,
"and she live happy ever afterwards." perhaps I may add that of
Betsey yet, one of these day. now, Agnes, you have a wise head.
so have you, Trot, in some thing, though I cannot compliment you
always'; and here my aunt shake she own at I, with an energy
peculiar to herself. 'whatbe to be do? herebe the cottage,
take one time with another, will produce say seventy pound a
year. I think we may safely put it down at that. well! - thatbe
all wehave get,' say my aunt; with whom it be an idiosyncrasy, as
it be with some horse, to stop very short when she appear to be
in a fair way of go on for a long while.
'then,' say my aunt, after a rest, 'therebe Dick. hebe good for
a hundred a-year, but of course that must be expend on himself.
I would soon send he away, though I know I be the only person
who appreciate he, than have he, and not spend his money on
himself. how can trot and I do well, upon our mean? what do you
say, Agnes?'
'I say, aunt,' I interpose, 'that I must do something!'
'go for a soldier, do you mean?' return my aunt, alarm; 'or go
to sea? I willnot hear of it. you be to be a proctor. webe not
go to have any knocking on the head in this family, if you
please, sir.'
I be about to explain that I be not desirous of introduce that
mode of provision into the family, when Agnes inquire if my room
be hold for any long term?
'you come to the point, my dear,' say my aunt. 'they be not to
be get rid of, for six month at least, unless they could be
underlet, and that I donot believe. the last man die here. five
people out of six would die - of course - of that woman in nankeen
with the flannel petticoat. I have a little ready money; and I
agree with you, the good thing we can do, be, to live the term out
here, and get a bedroom hard by.'
I think it my duty to hint at the discomfort my aunt would
sustain, from live in a continual state of guerilla warfare with
Mrs. Crupp; but she dispose of that objection summarily by
declare that, on the first demonstration of hostility, she be
prepared to astonish Mrs. Crupp for the whole remainder of her
natural life.
'I have be think, Trotwood,' say Agnes, diffidently, 'that if
you have time -'
'I have a good deal of time, Agnes. I be always disengage after
four or five o'clock, and I have time early in the morning. in one
way and another,' say I, conscious of redden a little as I
think of the hour and hour I have devote to fag about town,
and to and fro upon the Norwood Road, 'I have abundance of time.'
'I know you would not mind,' say Agnes, come to I, and speak
in a low voice, so full of sweet and hopeful consideration that I
hear it now, 'the duty of a secretary.'
'Mind, my dear Agnes?'
'because,' continue Agnes, 'Doctor Strong have act on his
intention of retire, and have come to live in London; and he ask
papa, I know, if he could recommend he one. donot you think he
would rather have his favourite old pupil near he, than anybody
else?'
'Dear Agnes!' say I. 'what should I do without you! you be
always my good angel. I tell you so. I never think of you in any
other light.'
Agnes answer with her pleasant laugh, that one good Angel
(mean Dora) be enough; and go on to remind I that the Doctor
have be use to occupy himself in his study, early in the morning,
and in the evening - and that probably my leisure would suit his
requirement very well. I be scarcely more delighted with the
prospect of earn my own bread, than with the hope of earn it
under my old master; in short, act on the advice of Agnes, I sit
down and write a letter to the Doctor, state my object, and
appoint to call on he next day at ten in the forenoon. this I
address to Highgate - for in that place, so memorable to I, he
live - and go and post, myself, without lose a minute.
Wherever Agnes be, some agreeable token of her noiseless presence
seem inseparable from the place. when I come back, I find my
aunt's bird hang, just as they have hang so long in the parlour
window of the cottage; and my easy-chair imitating my aunt's much
easy chair in its position at the open window; and even the round
green fan, which my aunt have bring away with she, screw on to
the window-sill. I know who have do all this, by its seeming to
have quietly do itself; and I should have know in a moment who
have arrange my neglect book in the old order of my school day,
even if I have suppose Agnes to be mile away, instead of see
her busy with they, and smile at the disorder into which they have
fall.
my aunt be quite gracious on the subject of the Thames (it really
do look very well with the sun upon it, though not like the sea
before the cottage), but she could not relent towards the London
smoke, which, she say, 'pepper everything'. a complete
revolution, in which Peggotty bear a prominent part, be be
effect in every corner of my room, in regard of this pepper; and
I be look on, think how little even Peggotty seem to do
with a good deal of bustle, and how much Agnes do without any
bustle at all, when a knock come at the door.
'I think,' say Agnes, turn pale, 'itbe papa. he promise I
that he would come.'
I open the door, and admit, not only Mr. Wickfield, but Uriah
Heep. I have not see Mr. Wickfield for some time. I be prepare
for a great change in he, after what I have hear from Agnes, but
his appearance shock I.
it be not that he look many year old, though still dress
with the old scrupulous cleanliness; or that there be an
unwholesome ruddines upon his face; or that his eye be full and
bloodshot; or that there be a nervous trembling in his hand, the
cause of which I know, and have for some year see at work. it be
not that he have lose his good look, or his old bearing of a
gentleman - for that he have not - but the thing that strike I
most, be, that with the evidence of his native superiority still
upon he, he should submit himself to that crawl impersonation
of meanness, Uriah Heep. the reversal of the two nature, in their
relative position, Uriah's of power and Mr. Wickfield's of
dependence, be a sight more painful to I than I can express. if
I have see an Ape take command of a man, I should hardly have
think it a more degrading spectacle.
he appear to be only too conscious of it himself. when he come
in, he stand still; and with his head bow, as if he feel it.
this be only for a moment; for Agnes softly say to he, 'papa!
here be Miss Trotwood - and Trotwood, whom you have not see for a
long while!' and then he approach, and constrainedly give my aunt
his hand, and shake hand more cordially with I. in the moment's
pause I speak of, I see Uriah's countenance form itself into a most
ill-favour smile. Agnes see it too, I think, for she shrink from
he.
what my aunt see, or do not see, I defy the science of physiognomy
to have make out, without her own consent. I believe there never
be anybody with such an imperturbable countenance when she choose.
her face might have be a dead-wall on the occasion in question,
for any light it throw upon her thought; until she break silence
with her usual abruptness.
'well, Wickfield!' say my aunt; and he look up at she for the
first time. 'I have be tell your daughter how well I have
be dispose of my money for myself, because I couldnot trust it
to you, as you be grow rusty in business matter. we have
be take counsel together, and get on very well, all thing
consider. Agnes be worth the whole firm, in my opinion.'
'if I may umbly make the remark,' say Uriah Heep, with a writhe,
'I fully agree with Miss Betsey Trotwood, and should be only too
appy if Miss Agnes be a partner.'
'yoube a partner yourself, you know,' return my aunt, 'and
thatbe about enough for you, I expect. how do you find yourself,
sir?'
in acknowledgement of this question, address to he with
extraordinary curtness, Mr. Heep, uncomfortably clutch the blue
bag he carry, reply that he be pretty well, he thank my
aunt, and hop she be the same.
'and you, Master - I should say, Mister Copperfield,' pursue
Uriah. 'I hope I see you well! I be rejoice to see you, Mister
Copperfield, even under present circumstance.' I believe that;
for he seem to relish they very much. 'present circumstance be
not what your friend would wish for you, Mister Copperfield, but
it benot money make the man: itbe - I be really unequal with my
umble power to express what it be,' say Uriah, with a fawning
jerk, 'but it benot money!'
here he shake hand with I: not in the common way, but stand at
a good distance from I, and lift my hand up and down like a
pump handle, that he be a little afraid of.
'and how do you think we be look, Master Copperfield, - I
should say, Mister?' fawn Uriah. 'donot you find Mr. Wickfield
blooming, sir? year donot tell much in our firm, Master
Copperfield, except in raise up the umble, namely, mother and
self - and in develop,' he add, as an afterthought, 'the
beautiful, namely, Miss Agnes.'
he jerk himself about, after this compliment, in such an
intolerable manner, that my aunt, who have sit look straight at
he, lose all patience.
'deuce take the man!' say my aunt, sternly, 'whatbe he about?
donot be galvanic, sir!'
'I ask your pardon, Miss Trotwood,' return Uriah; 'Ibe aware
yoube nervous.'
'go along with you, sir!' say my aunt, anything but appease.
'donot presume to say so! I be nothing of the sort. if yoube an
eel, sir, conduct yourself like one. if yoube a man, control your
limb, sir! good God!' say my aunt, with great indignation, 'I be
not go to be serpentine and corkscrew out of my sens!'
Mr. Heep be rather abash, as most people might have be, by
this explosion; which derive great additional force from the
indignant manner in which my aunt afterwards move in her chair,
and shake her head as if she be make snap or bounce at he.
but he say to I aside in a meek voice:
'I be well aware, Master Copperfield, that Miss Trotwood, though an
excellent lady, have a quick temper (indeed I think I have the
pleasure of know she, when I be a numble clerk, before you do,
Master Copperfield), and itbe only natural, I be sure, that it
should be make quick by present circumstance. the wonder be,
that it benot much bad! I only call to say that if there be
anything we could do, in present circumstance, mother or self, or
Wickfield and Heep, -we should be really glad. I may go so far?'
say Uriah, with a sickly smile at his partner.
'Uriah Heep,' say Mr. Wickfield, in a monotonous forced way, 'be
active in the business, Trotwood. what he say, I quite concur in.
you know I have an old interest in you. apart from that, what Uriah
say I quite concur in!'
'oh, what a reward it be,' say Uriah, draw up one leg, at the
risk of bring down upon himself another visitation from my aunt,
'to be so trust in! but I hope I be able to do something to
relieve he from the fatigue of business, Master Copperfield!'
'Uriah Heep be a great relief to I,' say Mr. Wickfield, in the
same dull voice. 'itbe a load off my mind, Trotwood, to have such
a partner.'
the red fox make he say all this, I know, to exhibit he to I in
the light he have indicate on the night when he poison my rest.
I see the same ill-favour smile upon his face again, and see how
he watch I.
'you be not go, papa?' say Agnes, anxiously. 'will you not
walk back with Trotwood and I?'
he would have look to Uriah, I believe, before reply, if that
worthy have not anticipate he.
'I be bespoke myself,' say Uriah, 'on business; otherwise I should
have be appy to have keep with my friend. but I leave my
partner to represent the firm. Miss Agnes, ever your! I wish you
good-day, Master Copperfield, and leave my umble respect for Miss
Betsey Trotwood.'
with those word, he retire, kiss his great hand, and leer
at we like a mask.
we sit there, talk about our pleasant old Canterbury day, an
hour or two. Mr. Wickfield, leave to Agnes, soon become more like
his former self; though there be a settle depression upon he,
which he never shake off. for all that, he brighten; and have an
evident pleasure in hear we recall the little incident of our
old life, many of which he remember very well. he say it be
like those time, to be alone with Agnes and I again; and he
wish to Heaven they have never change. I be sure there be an
influence in the placid face of Agnes, and in the very touch of she
hand upon his arm, that do wonder for he.
my aunt (who be busy nearly all this while with Peggotty, in the
inner room) would not accompany we to the place where they be
stay, but insist on my going; and I go. we din together.
after dinner, Agnes sit beside he, as of old, and pour out his
wine. he take what she give he, and no more - like a child - and
we all three sit together at a window as the evening gather in.
when it be almost dark, he lie down on a sofa, Agnes pillow his
head and bend over he a little while; and when she come back to
the window, it be not so dark but I could see tear glitter in
her eye.
I pray Heaven that I never may forget the dear girl in her love and
truth, at that time of my life; for if I should, I must be draw
near the end, and then I would desire to remember she good! she
fill my heart with such good resolution, strengthen my
weakness so, by her example, so direct - I know not how, she be
too modest and gentle to advise I in many word - the wandering
ardour and unsettled purpose within I, that all the little good I
have do, and all the harm I have forbear, I solemnly believe I
may refer to she.
and how she speak to I of Dora, sit at the window in the dark;
listen to my praise of she; praise again; and round the little
fairy-figure shed some glimpse of her own pure light, that make it
yet more precious and more innocent to I! oh, Agnes, sister of my
boyhood, if I have know then, what I know long afterwards! -
there be a beggar in the street, when I go down; and as I turn
my head towards the window, think of her calm seraphic eye, he
make I start by mutter, as if he be an echo of the morning:
'blind! blind! blind!'
CHAPTER 36
ENTHUSIASM
I begin the next day with another dive into the roman bath, and
then start for Highgate. I be not dispirit now. I be not
afraid of the shabby coat, and have no yearning after gallant
grey. my whole manner of thinking of our late misfortune be
change. what I have to do, be, to show my aunt that her past
goodness to I have not be throw away on an insensible,
ungrateful object. what I have to do, be, to turn the painful
discipline of my young day to account, by go to work with a
resolute and steady heart. what I have to do, be, to take my
woodman's axe in my hand, and clear my own way through the forest
of difficulty, by cut down the tree until I come to Dora. and
I go on at a mighty rate, as if it could be do by walk.
when I find myself on the familiar highgate road, pursue such a
different errand from that old one of pleasure, with which it be
associate, it seem as if a complete change have come on my whole
life. but that do not discourage I. with the new life, come new
purpose, new intention. Great be the labour; priceless the
reward. Dora be the reward, and Dora must be win.
I get into such a transport, that I feel quite sorry my coat be
not a little shabby already. I want to be cut at those tree
in the forest of difficulty, under circumstance that should prove
my strength. I have a good mind to ask an old man, in wire
spectacle, who be break stone upon the road, to lend I his
hammer for a little while, and let I begin to beat a path to Dora
out of granite. I stimulate myself into such a heat, and get so
out of breath, that I feel as if I have be earn I donot know
how much.
in this state, I go into a cottage that I see be to let, and
examine it narrowly, - for I feel it necessary to be practical.
it would do for I and Dora admirably: with a little front garden
for Jip to run about in, and bark at the tradespeople through the
railing, and a capital room upstairs for my aunt. I come out
again, hot and fast than ever, and dash up to Highgate, at
such a rate that I be there an hour too early; and, though I have
not be, should have be oblige to stroll about to cool myself,
before I be at all presentable.
my first care, after put myself under this necessary course of
preparation, be to find the Doctor's house. it be not in that
part of Highgate where Mrs. Steerforth live, but quite on the
opposite side of the little town. when I have make this discovery,
I go back, in an attraction I could not resist, to a lane by Mrs.
Steerforth's, and look over the corner of the garden wall. his
room be shut up close. the conservatory door be stand open,
and Rosa Dartle be walk, bareheade, with a quick, impetuous
step, up and down a gravel walk on one side of the lawn. she give
I the idea of some fierce thing, that be drag the length of
its chain to and fro upon a beat track, and wear its heart
out.
I come softly away from my place of observation, and avoid that
part of the neighbourhood, and wish I have not go near it,
stroll about until it be ten o'clock. the church with the
slender spire, that stand on the top of the hill now, be not
there then to tell I the time. an old red-brick mansion, use as
a school, be in its place; and a fine old house it must have be
to go to school at, as I recollect it.
when I approach the Doctor's cottage - a pretty old place, on
which he seem to have expend some money, if I might judge from
the embellishment and repair that have the look of be just
complete - I see he walk in the garden at the side, gaiter
and all, as if he have never leave off walk since the day of my
pupilage. he have his old companion about he, too; for there be
plenty of high tree in the neighbourhood, and two or three rook
be on the grass, look after he, as if they have be write
to about he by the Canterbury rook, and be observe he
closely in consequence.
know the utter hopelessness of attract his attention from
that distance, I make bold to open the gate, and walk after he, so
as to meet he when he should turn round. when he do, and come
towards I, he look at I thoughtfully for a few moment,
evidently without think about I at all; and then his benevolent
face express extraordinary pleasure, and he take I by both
hand.
'why, my dear copperfield,' say the Doctor, 'you be a man! how
do you do? I be delighted to see you. my dear Copperfield, how
very much you have improve! you be quite - yes - dear I!'
I hop he be well, and Mrs. Strong too.
'oh dear, yes!' say the doctor; 'Annie's quite well, and shewill be
delighted to see you. you be always her favourite. she say so,
last night, when I show she your letter. and - yes, to be sure
- you recollect Mr. Jack Maldon, Copperfield?'
'perfectly, sir.'
'of course,' say the Doctor. 'to be sure. hebe pretty well,
too.'
'has he come home, sir?' I inquire.
'from India?' say the Doctor. 'yes. Mr. Jack Maldon couldnot
bear the climate, my dear. Mrs. Markleham - you have not forget
Mrs. Markleham?'
Forgotten the Old Soldier! and in that short time!
'Mrs. Markleham,' say the Doctor, 'be quite vex about he, poor
thing; so we have get he at home again; and we have buy he a
little patent place, which agree with he much well.'
I know enough of Mr. Jack Maldon to suspect from this account that
it be a place where there be not much to do, and which be pretty
well pay. the Doctor, walk up and down with his hand on my
shoulder, and his kind face turn encouragingly to mine, go on:
'now, my dear Copperfield, in reference to this proposal of your.
itbe very gratifying and agreeable to I, I be sure; but donot you
think you could do well? you achieve distinction, you know,
when you be with we. you be qualified for many good thing.
you have lay a foundation that any edifice may be raise upon; and
be it not a pity that you should devote the spring-time of your
life to such a poor pursuit as I can offer?'
I become very glowing again, and, express myself in a
rhapsodical style, I be afraid, urge my request strongly;
remind the doctor that I have already a profession.
'well, well,' say the Doctor, 'thatbe true. certainly, your
have a profession, and be actually engage in study it,
make a difference. but, my good young friend, whatbe seventy
pound a year?'
'it double our income, Doctor Strong,' say I.
'dear I!' reply the Doctor. 'to think of that! not that I mean
to say itbe rigidly limit to seventy pound a-year, because I
have always contemplate make any young friend I might thus
employ, a present too. undoubtedly,' say the Doctor, still
walk I up and down with his hand on my shoulder. 'I have
always take an annual present into account.'
'my dear tutor,' say I (now, really, without any nonsense), 'to
whom I owe more obligation already than I ever can acknowledge -'
'no, no,' interpose the Doctor. 'pardon I!'
'if you will take such time as I have, and that be my morning and
evening, and can think it worth seventy pound a year, you will do
I such a service as I cannot express.'
'dear I!' say the Doctor, innocently. 'to think that so little
should go for so much! dear, dear! and when you can do well,
you will? on your word, now?' say the Doctor, - which he have
always make a very grave appeal to the honour of we boy.
'on my word, sir!' I return, answer in our old school manner.
'then be it so,' say the Doctor, clap I on the shoulder, and
still keep his hand there, as we still walk up and down.
'and I shall be twenty time happy, sir,' say I, with a little
- I hope innocent - flattery, 'if my employment be to be on the
Dictionary.'
the Doctor stop, smilingly clap I on the shoulder again, and
exclaim, with a triumph most delightful to behold, as if I have
penetrate to the profound depth of mortal sagacity, 'my dear
young friend, you have hit it. it be the Dictionary!'
how could it be anything else! his pocket be as full of it as
his head. it be stick out of he in all direction. he tell
I that since his retirement from scholastic life, he have be
advance with it wonderfully; and that nothing could suit he
well than the propose arrangement for morning and evening work,
as it be his custom to walk about in the daytime with his
consider cap on. his paper be in a little confusion, in
consequence of Mr. Jack Maldon have lately proffer his
occasional service as an amanuensis, and not be accustom to
that occupation; but we should soon put right what be amiss, and
go on swimmingly. afterwards, when we be fairly at our work, I
find Mr. Jack Maldon's effort more troublesome to I than I have
expect, as he have not confine himself to make numerous
mistake, but have sketch so many soldier, and lady' head,
over the Doctor's manuscript, that I often become involved in
labyrinth of obscurity.
the Doctor be quite happy in the prospect of our go to work
together on that wonderful performance, and we settle to begin
next morning at seven o'clock. we be to work two hour every
morning, and two or three hour every night, except on Saturdays,
when I be to rest. on Sundays, of course, I be to rest also, and
I consider these very easy term.
our plan be thus arrange to our mutual satisfaction, the
Doctor take I into the house to present I to Mrs. Strong, whom we
find in the Doctor's new study, dust his book, - a freedom
which he never permit anybody else to take with those sacred
favourite.
they have postpone their breakfast on my account, and we sit down
to table together. we have not be seat long, when I see an
approach arrival in Mrs. Strong's face, before I hear any sound
of it. a gentleman on horseback come to the gate, and lead his
horse into the little court, with the bridle over his arm, as if he
be quite at home, tie he to a ring in the empty coach-house
wall, and come into the breakfast parlour, whip in hand. it be
Mr. Jack Maldon; and Mr. Jack Maldon be not at all improve by
India, I think. I be in a state of ferocious virtue, however,
as to young man who be not cut down tree in the forest of
difficulty; and my impression must be receive with due allowance.
'Mr. Jack!' say the Doctor. 'copperfield!'
Mr. Jack Maldon shake hand with I; but not very warmly, I
believe; and with an air of languid patronage, at which I secretly
take great umbrage. but his languor altogether be quite a
wonderful sight; except when he address himself to his cousin
Annie.
'have you breakfast this morning, Mr. Jack?' say the Doctor.
'I hardly ever take breakfast, sir,' he reply, with his head
throw back in an easy-chair. 'I find it bore I.'
'be there any news today?' inquire the Doctor.
'nothing at all, sir,' reply Mr. Maldon. 'therebe an account
about the people be hungry and discontent down in the North,
but they be always be hungry and discontent somewhere.'
the Doctor look grave, and say, as though he wish to change
the subject, 'then therebe no news at all; and no news, they say,
be good news.'
'therebe a long statement in the paper, sir, about a murder,'
observe Mr. Maldon. 'but somebody be always be murder, and
I donot read it.'
a display of indifference to all the action and passion of
mankind be not suppose to be such a distinguished quality at that
time, I think, as I have observe it to be consider since. I
have know it very fashionable indeed. I have see it display
with such success, that I have encounter some fine lady and
gentleman who might as well have be bear caterpillar. perhaps
it impress I the more then, because it be new to I, but it
certainly do not tend to exalt my opinion of, or to strengthen my
confidence in, Mr. Jack Maldon.
'I come out to inquire whether Annie would like to go to the opera
tonight,' say Mr. Maldon, turn to she. 'itbe the last good
night there will be, this season; and therebe a singer there, whom
she really ought to hear. she be perfectly exquisite. besides
which, she be so charmingly ugly,' relapse into languor.
the Doctor, ever pleased with what be likely to please his young
wife, turn to she and say:
'you must go, Annie. you must go.'
'I would rather not,' she say to the Doctor. 'I prefer to remain
at home. I would much rather remain at home.'
without look at her cousin, she then address I, and ask I
about Agnes, and whether she should see she, and whether she be
not likely to come that day; and be so much disturbed, that I
wonder how even the Doctor, butter his toast, could be blind
to what be so obvious.
but he see nothing. he tell she, good-naturedly, that she be
young and ought to be amuse and entertain, and must not allow
herself to be make dull by a dull old fellow. moreover, he say,
he want to hear she sing all the new singer's song to he; and
how could she do that well, unless she go? so the Doctor
persist in make the engagement for she, and Mr. Jack Maldon be
to come back to dinner. this conclude, he go to his patent
place, I suppose; but at all event go away on his horse, look
very idle.
I be curious to find out next morning, whether she have be. she
have not, but have send into London to put her cousin off; and have
go out in the afternoon to see Agnes, and have prevail upon the
Doctor to go with she; and they have walk home by the field, the
Doctor tell I, the evening be delightful. I wonder then,
whether she would have go if Agnes have not be in town, and
whether Agnes have some good influence over she too!
she do not look very happy, I think; but it be a good face, or
a very false one. I often glance at it, for she sit in the window
all the time we be at work; and make our breakfast, which we take
by snatch as we be employ. when I leave, at nine o'clock, she
be kneel on the ground at the Doctor's foot, put on his
shoe and gaiter for he. there be a softened shade upon she
face, throw from some green leaf overhang the open window of
the low room; and I think all the way to doctor' Commons, of the
night when I have see it look at he as he read.
I be pretty busy now; up at five in the morning, and home at nine
or ten at night. but I have infinite satisfaction in be so
closely engage, and never walk slowly on any account, and feel
enthusiastically that the more I tire myself, the more I be do
to deserve Dora. I have not reveal myself in my altered character
to Dora yet, because she be come to see Miss Mills in a few
day, and I defer all I have to tell she until then; merely
inform she in my letter (all our communication be secretly
forward through Miss Mills), that I have much to tell she. in the
meantime, I put myself on a short allowance of bear's grease,
wholly abandon scented soap and lavender water, and sell off
three waistcoat at a prodigious sacrifice, as be too luxurious
for my stern career.
not satisfied with all these proceeding, but burn with
impatience to do something more, I go to see traddle, now
lodge up behind the parapet of a house in Castle Street, Holborn.
Mr. Dick, who have be with I to Highgate twice already, and have
resume his companionship with the Doctor, I take with I.
I take Mr. Dick with I, because, acutely sensitive to my aunt's
revers, and sincerely believe that no galley-slave or convict
work as I do, he have begin to fret and worry himself out of
spirit and appetite, as have nothing useful to do. in this
condition, he feel more incapable of finish the Memorial than
ever; and the hard he work at it, the oftener that unlucky head
of King Charles the First get into it. seriously apprehend that
his malady would increase, unless we put some innocent deception
upon he and cause he to believe that he be useful, or unless we
could put he in the way of be really useful (which would be
well), I make up my mind to try if traddle could help we.
before we go, I write Traddles a full statement of all that have
happen, and Traddles write I back a capital answer, expressive
of his sympathy and friendship.
we find he hard at work with his inkstand and paper, refresh
by the sight of the flower-pot stand and the little round table in
a corner of the small apartment. he receive we cordially, and
make friend with Mr. Dick in a moment. Mr. Dick profess an
absolute certainty of have see he before, and we both say,
'very likely.'
the first subject on which I have to consult Traddles be this, - I
have hear that many man distinguish in various pursuit have begin
life by report the debate in Parliament. traddle have
mention newspaper to I, as one of his hope, I have put the two
thing together, and tell traddle in my letter that I wish to
know how I could qualify myself for this pursuit. traddle now
inform I, as the result of his inquiry, that the mere
mechanical acquisition necessary, except in rare case, for
thorough excellence in it, that be to say, a perfect and entire
command of the mystery of short-hand writing and reading, be about
equal in difficulty to the mastery of six language; and that it
might perhaps be attain, by dint of perseverance, in the course
of a few year. traddle reasonably suppose that this would
settle the business; but I, only feel that here indeed be a
few tall tree to be hew down, immediately resolve to work my way
on to Dora through this thicket, axe in hand.
'I be very much oblige to you, my dear traddle!' say I. 'Iwill
begin tomorrow.'
traddle look astonished, as he well might; but he have no notion
as yet of my rapturous condition.
'Iwill buy a book,' say I, 'with a good scheme of this art in it;
Iwill work at it at the Commons, where I havenot half enough to do;
Iwill take down the speech in our court for practice - traddle,
my dear fellow, Iwill master it!'
'dear I,' say traddle, open his eye, 'I have no idea you be
such a determined character, Copperfield!'
I donot know how he should have have, for it be new enough to I.
I pass that off, and bring Mr. Dick on the carpet.
'you see,' say Mr. Dick, wistfully, 'if I could exert myself, Mr.
Traddles - if I could beat a drum- or blow anything!'
poor fellow! I have little doubt he would have prefer such an
employment in his heart to all other. traddle, who would not
have smile for the world, reply composedly:
'but you be a very good penman, sir. you tell I so,
copperfield?'
'excellent!' say I. and indeed he be. he write with
extraordinary neatness.
'donot you think,' say traddle, 'you could copy writing, sir, if
I get they for you?'
Mr. Dick look doubtfully at I. 'eh, Trotwood?'
I shake my head. Mr. Dick shake his, and sigh. 'tell he about
the Memorial,' say Mr. Dick.
I explain to Traddles that there be a difficulty in keep King
Charles the First out of Mr. Dick's manuscript; Mr. Dick in the
meanwhile look very deferentially and seriously at traddle, and
suck his thumb.
'but these writing, you know, that I speak of, be already draw
up and finish,' say traddle after a little consideration. 'Mr.
Dick have nothing to do with they. wouldnot that make a difference,
Copperfield? at all event, wouldnot it be well to try?'
this give we new hope. traddle and I lay our head together
apart, while Mr. Dick anxiously watch we from his chair, we
concoct a scheme in virtue of which we get he to work next day,
with triumphant success.
on a table by the window in Buckingham Street, we set out the work
traddle procure for he - which be to make, I forget how many
copy of a legal document about some right of way - and on another
table we spread the last unfinished original of the great Memorial.
our instruction to Mr. Dick be that he should copy exactly what
he have before he, without the least departure from the original;
and that when he feel it necessary to make the slight allusion
to King Charles the First, he should fly to the Memorial. we
exhort he to be resolute in this, and leave my aunt to observe
he. my aunt report to we, afterwards, that, at first, he be
like a man play the kettle-drum, and constantly divide his
attention between the two; but that, find this confuse and
fatigue he, and have his copy there, plainly before his eye, he
soon sit at it in an orderly business-like manner, and postpone
the Memorial to a more convenient time. in a word, although we
take great care that he should have no more to do than be good for
he, and although he do not begin with the beginning of a week, he
earn by the following Saturday night ten shilling and
nine-pence; and never, while I live, shall I forget his go about
to all the shop in the neighbourhood to change this treasure into
sixpence, or his bring they to my aunt arrange in the form of
a heart upon a waiter, with tear of joy and pride in his eye. he
be like one under the propitious influence of a charm, from the
moment of his be usefully employ; and if there be a happy
man in the world, that Saturday night, it be the grateful creature
who think my aunt the most wonderful woman in existence, and I
the most wonderful young man.
'no starve now, Trotwood,' say Mr. Dick, shake hand with I
in a corner. 'Iwill provide for she, Sir!' and he flourish his
ten finger in the air, as if they be ten bank.
I hardly know which be the well pleased, Traddles or i. 'it
really,' say traddle, suddenly, take a letter out of his
pocket, and give it to I, 'put Mr. Micawber quite out of my
head!'
the letter (Mr. Micawber never miss any possible opportunity of
write a letter) be address to I, 'by the kindness of T.
Traddles, Esquire, of the Inner Temple.' it run thus: -
'MY DEAR COPPERFIELD,
'you may possibly not be unprepared to receive the intimation that
something have turn up. I may have mention to you on a former
occasion that I be in expectation of such an event.
'I be about to establish myself in one of the provincial town of
our favoured island (where the society may be describe as a happy
admixture of the agricultural and the clerical), in immediate
connexion with one of the learn profession. Mrs. Micawber and
our offspring will accompany I. our ash, at a future period,
will probably be find commingle in the cemetery attach to a
venerable pile, for which the spot to which I refer have acquire a
reputation, shall I say from China to Peru?
'in bid adieu to the modern Babylon, where we have undergo
many vicissitude, I trust not ignobly, Mrs. Micawber and myself
cannot disguise from our mind that we part, it may be for year
and it may be for ever, with an individual link by strong
association to the altar of our domestic life. if, on the eve of
such a departure, you will accompany our mutual friend, Mr. Thomas
Traddles, to our present abode, and there reciprocate the wish
natural to the occasion, you will confer a Boon
'on
'one
'who
'be
'ever your,
'WILKINS MICAWBER.'
I be glad to find that Mr. Micawber have get rid of his dust and
ash, and that something really have turn up at last. learn
from Traddles that the invitation refer to the evening then
wear away, I express my readiness to do honour to it; and we
go off together to the lodging which Mr. Micawber occupy as Mr.
Mortimer, and which be situate near the top of the Gray's Inn
Road.
the resource of this lodging be so limited, that we find the
twin, now some eight or nine year old, repose in a turn-up
bedstead in the family sitting-room, where Mr. Micawber have
prepare, in a wash-hand-stand jug, what he call 'a Brew' of the
agreeable beverage for which he be famous. I have the pleasure, on
this occasion, of renew the acquaintance of Master Micawber,
whom I find a promising boy of about twelve or thirteen, very
subject to that restlessness of limb which be not an unfrequent
phenomenon in youth of his age. I also become once more known to
his sister, Miss Micawber, in whom, as Mr. Micawber tell we, 'her
mother renew her youth, like the Phoenix'.
'my dear copperfield,' say Mr. Micawber, 'yourself and Mr.
traddle find we on the brink of migration, and will excuse any
little discomfort incidental to that position.'
glancing round as I make a suitable reply, I observe that the
family effect be already pack, and that the amount of luggage
be by no mean overwhelming. I congratulate Mrs. Micawber on the
approach change.
'my dear Mr. Copperfield,' say Mrs. Micawber, 'of your friendly
interest in all our affair, I be well assured. my family may
consider it banishment, if they please; but I be a wife and mother,
and I never will desert Mr. Micawber.'
traddle, appeal to by Mrs. Micawber's eye, feelingly acquiesce.
'that,' say Mrs. Micawber, 'that, at least, be my view, my dear
Mr. Copperfield and Mr. Traddles, of the obligation which I take
upon myself when I repeat the irrevocable word, "I, Emma, take
thee, Wilkins." I read the service over with a flat-candle on the
previous night, and the conclusion I derive from it be, that I
never could desert Mr. Micawber. and,' say Mrs. Micawber, 'though
it be possible I may be mistake in my view of the ceremony, I
never will!'
'my dear,' say Mr. Micawber, a little impatiently, 'I be not
conscious that you be expect to do anything of the sort.'
'I be aware, my dear Mr. Copperfield,' pursue Mrs. Micawber, 'that
I be now about to cast my lot among stranger; and I be also aware
that the various member of my family, to whom Mr. Micawber have
write in the most gentlemanly term, announce that fact, have
not take the least notice of Mr. Micawber's communication. indeed
I may be superstitious,' say Mrs. Micawber, 'but it appear to I
that Mr. Micawber be destine never to receive any answer whatever
to the great majority of the communication he write. I may
augur, from the silence of my family, that they object to the
resolution I have take; but I should not allow myself to be
swerve from the path of duty, Mr. Copperfield, even by my papa and
mama, be they still live.'
I express my opinion that this be go in the right direction.
'it may be a sacrifice,' say Mrs. Micawber, 'to immure one's-self
in a Cathedral town; but surely, Mr. Copperfield, if it be a
sacrifice in I, it be much more a sacrifice in a man of Mr.
Micawber's ability.'
'oh! you be go to a Cathedral town?' say I.
Mr. Micawber, who have be help we all, out of the
wash-hand-stand jug, reply:
'to Canterbury. in fact, my dear Copperfield, I have enter into
arrangement, by virtue of which I stand pledge and contract to
our friend Heep, to assist and serve he in the capacity of - and
to be - his confidential clerk.'
I star at Mr. Micawber, who greatly enjoy my surprise.
'I be bind to state to you,' he say, with an official air, 'that
the business habit, and the prudent suggestion, of Mrs. Micawber,
have in a great measure conduce to this result. the gauntlet, to
which Mrs. Micawber refer upon a former occasion, be throw
down in the form of an advertisement, be take up by my friend
Heep, and lead to a mutual recognition. of my friend Heep,' say
Mr. Micawber, 'who be a man of remarkable shrewdness, I desire to
speak with all possible respect. my friend Heep have not fix the
positive remuneration at too high a figure, but he have make a great
deal, in the way of extrication from the pressure of pecuniary
difficulty, contingent on the value of my service; and on the
value of those service I pin my faith. such address and
intelligence as I chance to possess,' say Mr. Micawber, boastfully
disparage himself, with the old genteel air, 'will be devoted to
my friend Heep's service. I have already some acquaintance with
the law - as a defendant on civil process - and I shall immediately
apply myself to the Commentaries of one of the most eminent and
remarkable of our english jurist. I believe it be unnecessary to
add that I allude to Mr. justice Blackstone.'
these observation, and indeed the great part of the observation
make that evening, be interrupt by Mrs. Micawber's discovering
that Master Micawber be sit on his boot, or hold his head
on with both arm as if he feel it loose, or accidentally kick
traddle under the table, or shuffle his foot over one another,
or produce they at distance from himself apparently outrageous
to nature, or lie sideways with his hair among the wine-glass,
or develop his restlessness of limb in some other form
incompatible with the general interest of society; and by Master
Micawber's receive those discovery in a resentful spirit. I
sit all the while, amazed by Mr. Micawber's disclosure, and
wonder what it mean; until Mrs. Micawber resume the thread of
the discourse, and claim my attention.
'what I particularly request Mr. Micawber to be careful of, be,'
say Mrs. Micawber, 'that he do not, my dear Mr. Copperfield, in
apply himself to this subordinate branch of the law, place it
out of his power to rise, ultimately, to the top of the tree. I be
convince that Mr. Micawber, give his mind to a profession so
adapt to his fertile resource, and his flow of language, must
distinguish himself. now, for example, Mr. Traddles,' say Mrs.
Micawber, assume a profound air, 'a judge, or even say a
Chancellor. do an individual place himself beyond the pale of
those preferment by enter on such an office as Mr. Micawber have
accept?'
'my dear,' observe Mr. Micawber - but glance inquisitively at
traddle, too; 'we have time enough before we, for the
consideration of those question.'
'Micawber,' she return, 'no! your mistake in life be, that you
do not look forward far enough. you be bind, in justice to your
family, if not to yourself, to take in at a comprehensive glance
the extreme point in the horizon to which your ability may lead
you.'
Mr. Micawber cough, and drink his punch with an air of exceed
satisfaction - still glance at traddle, as if he desire to have
his opinion.
'why, the plain state of the case, Mrs. Micawber,' say Traddles,
mildly break the truth to she. 'I mean the real prosaic fact,
you know -'
'just so,' say Mrs. Micawber, 'my dear Mr. Traddles, I wish to be
as prosaic and literal as possible on a subject of so much
importance.'
'- be,' say traddle, 'that this branch of the law, even if Mr.
Micawber be a regular solicitor -'
'exactly so,' return Mrs. Micawber. ('wilkin, you be
squint, and will not be able to get your eye back.')
'- have nothing,' pursue traddle, 'to do with that. only a
barrister be eligible for such preferment; and Mr. Micawber could
not be a barrister, without be enter at an inn of court as a
student, for five year.'
'do I follow you?' say Mrs. Micawber, with her most affable air of
business. 'do I understand, my dear Mr. Traddles, that, at the
expiration of that period, Mr. Micawber would be eligible as a
Judge or Chancellor?'
'he would be ELIGIBLE,' return traddle, with a strong emphasis
on that word.
'thank you,' say Mrs. Micawber. 'that be quite sufficient. if
such be the case, and Mr. Micawber forfeit no privilege by
enter on these duty, my anxiety be set at rest. I speak,'
say Mrs. Micawber, 'as a female, necessarily; but I have always
be of opinion that Mr. Micawber possess what I have hear my
papa call, when I live at home, the judicial mind; and I hope Mr.
Micawber be now enter on a field where that mind will develop
itself, and take a commanding station.'
I quite believe that Mr. Micawber see himself, in his judicial
mind's eye, on the woolsack. he pass his hand complacently over
his bald head, and say with ostentatious resignation:
'my dear, we will not anticipate the decree of fortune. if I be
reserve to wear a wig, I be at least prepare, externally,' in
allusion to his baldness, 'for that distinction. I do not,' say
Mr. Micawber, 'regret my hair, and I may have be deprive of it
for a specific purpose. I cannot say. it be my intention, my dear
Copperfield, to educate my son for the Church; I will not deny that
I should be happy, on his account, to attain to eminence.'
'for the Church?' say I, still ponder, between while, on Uriah
Heep.
'yes,' say Mr. Micawber. 'he have a remarkable head-voice, and
will commence as a chorister. our residence at Canterbury, and our
local connexion, will, no doubt, enable he to take advantage of
any vacancy that may arise in the Cathedral corps.'
on look at Master Micawber again, I see that he have a certain
expression of face, as if his voice be behind his eyebrow; where
it presently appear to be, on his sing we (as an alternative
between that and bed) 'the Wood-Pecker tapping'. after many
compliment on this performance, we fall into some general
conversation; and as I be too full of my desperate intention to
keep my altered circumstance to myself, I make they know to Mr.
and Mrs. Micawber. I cannot express how extremely delighted they
both be, by the idea of my aunt's be in difficulty; and how
comfortable and friendly it make they.
when we be nearly come to the last round of the punch, I
address myself to traddle, and remind he that we must not
separate, without wish our friend health, happiness, and
success in their new career. I beg Mr. Micawber to fill we
bumper, and propose the toast in due form: shake hand with he
across the table, and kiss Mrs. Micawber, to commemorate that
eventful occasion. traddle imitate I in the first particular,
but do not consider himself a sufficiently old friend to venture
on the second.
'my dear copperfield,' say Mr. Micawber, rise with one of his
thumb in each of his waistcoat pocket, 'the companion of my
youth: if I may be allow the expression - and my esteemed friend
traddle: if I may be permit to call he so - will allow I, on
the part of Mrs. Micawber, myself, and our offspring, to thank they
in the warm and most uncompromising term for their good wish.
it may be expect that on the eve of a migration which will
consign we to a perfectly new existence,' Mr. Micawber speak as if
they be go five hundred thousand mile, 'I should offer a few
valedictory remark to two such friend as I see before I. but
all that I have to say in this way, I have say. whatever station
in society I may attain, through the medium of the learn
profession of which I be about to become an unworthy member, I
shall endeavour not to disgrace, and Mrs. Micawber will be safe to
adorn. under the temporary pressure of pecuniary liability,
contract with a view to their immediate liquidation, but
remain unliquidated through a combination of circumstance, I
have be under the necessity of assume a garb from which my
natural instinct recoil - I allude to spectacle - and possess
myself of a cognoman, to which I can establish no legitimate
pretension. all I have to say on that score be, that the cloud
have pass from the dreary scene, and the God of Day be once more
high upon the mountain top. on Monday next, on the arrival of the
four o'clock afternoon coach at Canterbury, my foot will be on my
native heath - my name, Micawber!'
Mr. Micawber resume his seat on the close of these remark, and
drink two glass of punch in grave succession. he then say with
much solemnity:
'one thing more I have to do, before this separation be complete,
and that be to perform an act of justice. my friend Mr. Thomas
Traddles have, on two several occasion, "put his name", if I may
use a common expression, to bill of exchange for my accommodation.
on the first occasion Mr. Thomas Traddles be leave - let I say, in
short, in the lurch. the fulfilment of the second have not yet
arrive. the amount of the first obligation,' here Mr. Micawber
carefully refer to paper, 'be, I believe, twenty-three, four,
nine and a half, of the second, accord to my entry of that
transaction, eighteen, six, two. these sum, united, make a total,
if my calculation be correct, amount to forty-one, ten, eleven
and a half. my friend Copperfield will perhaps do I the favour to
check that total?'
I do so and find it correct.
'to leave this metropolis,' say Mr. Micawber, 'and my friend Mr.
Thomas Traddles, without acquit myself of the pecuniary part of
this obligation, would weigh upon my mind to an insupportable
extent. I have, therefore, prepare for my friend Mr. Thomas
Traddles, and I now hold in my hand, a document, which accomplish
the desire object. I beg to hand to my friend Mr. Thomas traddle
my I.O.U. for forty-one, ten, eleven and a half, and I be happy to
recover my moral dignity, and to know that I can once more walk
erect before my fellow man!'
with this introduction (which greatly affect he), Mr. Micawber
place his I.O.U. in the hand of traddle, and say he wish he
well in every relation of life. I be persuade, not only that this
be quite the same to Mr. Micawber as pay the money, but that
traddle himself hardly know the difference until he have have time
to think about it.
Mr. Micawber walk so erect before his fellow man, on the strength
of this virtuous action, that his chest look half as broad again
when he light we downstairs. we part with great heartiness on
both side; and when I have see traddle to his own door, and be
go home alone, I think, among the other odd and contradictory
thing I muse upon, that, slippery as Mr. Micawber be, I be
probably indebted to some compassionate recollection he retain of
I as his boy-lodger, for never have be ask by he for money.
I certainly should not have have the moral courage to refuse it; and
I have no doubt he know that (to his credit be it write), quite
as well as I do.
CHAPTER 37
a little cold WATER
my new life have last for more than a week, and I be strong
than ever in those tremendous practical resolution that I feel the
crisis require. I continue to walk extremely fast, and to have
a general idea that I be get on. I make it a rule to take as
much out of myself as I possibly could, in my way of do
everything to which I apply my energy. I make a perfect victim
of myself. I even entertain some idea of put myself on a
vegetable diet, vaguely conceive that, in become a
graminivorous animal, I should sacrifice to Dora.
as yet, little Dora be quite unconscious of my desperate firmness,
otherwise than as my letter darkly shadow it forth. but another
Saturday come, and on that Saturday evening she be to be at Miss
Mills's; and when Mr. Mills have go to his whist-club (telegraph
to I in the street, by a bird-cage in the drawing-room middle
window), I be to go there to tea.
by this time, we be quite settle down in Buckingham Street,
where Mr. Dick continue his copying in a state of absolute
felicity. my aunt have obtain a signal victory over Mrs. Crupp,
by pay she off, throw the first pitcher she plant on the
stair out of window, and protect in person, up and down the
staircase, a supernumerary whom she engage from the outer world.
these vigorous measure strike such terror to the breast of Mrs.
Crupp, that she subside into her own kitchen, under the impression
that my aunt be mad. my aunt be supremely indifferent to Mrs.
Crupp's opinion and everybody else's, and rather favour than
discourage the idea, Mrs. Crupp, of late the bold, become within
a few day so faint-hearted, that rather than encounter my aunt
upon the staircase, she would endeavour to hide she portly form
behind door - leave visible, however, a wide margin of flannel
petticoat - or would shrink into dark corner. this give my aunt
such unspeakable satisfaction, that I believe she take a delight in
prowl up and down, with her bonnet insanely perch on the top
of her head, at time when Mrs. Crupp be likely to be in the way.
my aunt, be uncommonly neat and ingenious, make so many little
improvement in our domestic arrangement, that I seem to be
rich instead of poor. among the rest, she convert the pantry
into a dressing-room for I; and purchase and embellish a
bedstead for my occupation, which look as like a bookcase in the
daytime as a bedstead could. I be the object of her constant
solicitude; and my poor mother herself could not have love I
well, or study more how to make I happy.
Peggotty have consider herself highly privileged in be allow
to participate in these labour; and, although she still retain
something of her old sentiment of awe in reference to my aunt, have
receive so many mark of encouragement and confidence, that they
be the good friend possible. but the time have now come (I be
speak of the Saturday when I be to take tea at Miss Mills's)
when it be necessary for she to return home, and enter on the
discharge of the duty she have undertake in behalf of Ham. 'so
good-bye, Barkis,' say my aunt, 'and take care of yourself! I be
sure I never think I could be sorry to lose you!'
I take Peggotty to the coach office and see she off. she cry at
parting, and confide her brother to my friendship as Ham have do.
we have hear nothing of he since he go away, that sunny
afternoon.
'and now, my own dear Davy,' say Peggotty, 'if, while yoube a
prentice, you should want any money to spend; or if, when yoube
out of your time, my dear, you should want any to set you up (and
you must do one or other, or both, my darling); who have such a good
right to ask leave to lend it you, as my sweet girl's own old
stupid I!'
I be not so savagely independent as to say anything in reply, but
that if ever I borrow money of anyone, I would borrow it of she.
next to accept a large sum on the spot, I believe this give
Peggotty more comfort than anything I could have do.
'and, my dear!' whisper Peggotty, 'tell the pretty little angel
that I should so have like to see she, only for a minute! and
tell she that before she marry my boy, Iwill come and make your
house so beautiful for you, if youwill let I!'
I declare that nobody else should touch it; and this give Peggotty
such delight that she go away in good spirit.
I fatigue myself as much as I possibly could in the Commons all
day, by a variety of device, and at the appoint time in the
evening repair to Mr. Mills's street. Mr. Mills, who be a
terrible fellow to fall asleep after dinner, have not yet go out,
and there be no bird-cage in the middle window.
he keep I wait so long, that I fervently hop the Club would
fine he for be late. at last he come out; and then I see my
own Dora hang up the bird-cage, and peep into the balcony to look
for I, and run in again when she see I be there, while Jip
remain behind, to bark injuriously at an immense butcher's dog in
the street, who could have take he like a pill.
Dora come to the drawing-room door to meet I; and Jip come
scramble out, tumble over his own growl, under the impression
that I be a Bandit; and we all three go in, as happy and love
as could be. I soon carry desolation into the bosom of our joy
- not that I mean to do it, but that I be so full of the subject
- by ask Dora, without the small preparation, if she could
love a beggar?
my pretty, little, startled Dora! her only association with the
word be a yellow face and a nightcap, or a pair of crutch, or a
wooden leg, or a dog with a decant-stand in his mouth, or
something of that kind; and she star at I with the most
delightful wonder.
'how can you ask I anything so foolish?' pout Dora. 'love a
beggar!'
'Dora, my own dearest!' say I. 'I be a beggar!'
'how can you be such a silly thing,' reply Dora, slap my
hand, 'as to sit there, tell such story? Iwill make Jip bite
you!'
her childish way be the most delicious way in the world to I, but
it be necessary to be explicit, and I solemnly repeat:
'Dora, my own life, I be your ruin David!'
'I declare Iwill make Jip bite you!' say Dora, shake her curl,
'if you be so ridiculous.'
but I look so serious, that Dora leave off shake her curl, and
lay her tremble little hand upon my shoulder, and first look
scared and anxious, then begin to cry. that be dreadful. I fall
upon my knee before the sofa, caress she, and implore she not
to rend my heart; but, for some time, poor little Dora do nothing
but exclaim oh dear! oh dear! and oh, she be so frightened! and
where be Julia Mills! and oh, take she to Julia Mills, and go
away, please! until I be almost beside myself.
at last, after an agony of supplication and protestation, I get
Dora to look at I, with a horrified expression of face, which I
gradually soothe until it be only love, and her soft, pretty
cheek be lie against mine. then I tell she, with my arm
clasp round she, how I love she, so dearly, and so dearly; how
I feel it right to offer to release she from her engagement,
because now I be poor; how I never could bear it, or recover it,
if I lose she; how I have no fear of poverty, if she have none, my
arm be nerve and my heart inspire by she; how I be already
work with a courage such as none but lover know; how I have
begin to be practical, and look into the future; how a crust well
earn be sweet far than a feast inherit; and much more to the
same purpose, which I deliver in a burst of passionate eloquence
quite surprising to myself, though I have be think about it,
day and night, ever since my aunt have astonish I.
'be your heart mine still, dear Dora?' say I, rapturously, for I
know by she cling to I that it be.
'oh, yes!' cry Dora. 'oh, yes, itbe all your. oh, donot be
dreadful!'
I dreadful! to Dora!
'donot talk about be poor, and work hard!' say Dora,
nestle close to I. 'oh, donot, donot!'
'my dearest love,' say I, 'the crust well-earn -'
'oh, yes; but I donot want to hear any more about crust!' say
Dora. 'and Jip must have a mutton-chop every day at twelve, or
hewill die.'
I be charm with her childish, win way. I fondly explain
to Dora that Jip should have his mutton-chop with his accustom
regularity. I draw a picture of our frugal home, make independent
by my labour - sketching in the little house I have see at
Highgate, and my aunt in her room upstairs.
'I be not dreadful now, Dora?' say I, tenderly.
'oh, no, no!' cry Dora. 'but I hope your aunt will keep in her
own room a good deal. and I hope shebe not a scold old thing!'
if it be possible for I to love Dora more than ever, I be sure
I do. but I feel she be a little impracticable. it damp my
new-bear ardour, to find that ardour so difficult of communication
to she. I make another trial. when she be quite herself again,
and be curl Jip's ear, as he lie upon her lap, I become grave,
and say:
'my own! may I mention something?'
'oh, please donot be practical!' say Dora, coaxingly. 'because it
frighten I so!'
'sweetheart!' I return; 'there be nothing to alarm you in all
this. I want you to think of it quite differently. I want to make
it nerve you, and inspire you, Dora!'
'oh, but thatbe so shocking!' cry Dora.
'my love, no. perseverance and strength of character will enable
we to bear much bad thing.'
'but I havenot get any strength at all,' say Dora, shake her
curl. 'have I, Jip? oh, do kiss Jip, and be agreeable!'
it be impossible to resist kiss Jip, when she hold he up to I
for that purpose, put her own bright, rosy little mouth into
kissing form, as she direct the operation, which she insist
should be perform symmetrically, on the centre of his nose. I
do as she bid I - reward myself afterwards for my obedience
- and she charm I out of my graver character for I donot know
how long.
'but, Dora, my beloved!' say I, at last resume it; 'I be go
to mention something.'
the judge of the Prerogative Court might have fall in love with
she, to see she fold her little hand and hold they up, beg and
pray I not to be dreadful any more.
'indeed I be not go to be, my darling!' I assure she. 'but,
Dora, my love, if you will sometimes think, - not despondingly, you
know; far from that! - but if you will sometimes think - just to
encourage yourself - that you be engage to a poor man -'
'donot, donot! pray donot!' cry Dora. 'itbe so very dreadful!'
'my soul, not at all!' say I, cheerfully. 'if you will sometimes
think of that, and look about now and then at your papa's
housekeeping, and endeavour to acquire a little habit - of
account, for instance -'
poor little Dora receive this suggestion with something that be
half a sob and half a scream.
'- it would be so useful to we afterwards,' I go on. 'and if you
would promise I to read a little - a little Cookery Book that I
would send you, it would be so excellent for both of we. for our
path in life, my Dora,' say I, warm with the subject, 'be stony
and rugge now, and it rest with we to smooth it. we must fight
our way onward. we must be brave. there be obstacle to be meet,
and we must meet, and crush they!'
I be go on at a great rate, with a clench hand, and a most
enthusiastic countenance; but it be quite unnecessary to proceed.
I have say enough. I have do it again. oh, she be so
frightened! oh, where be Julia Mills! oh, take she to Julia
Mills, and go away, please! so that, in short, I be quite
distracted, and rave about the drawing-room.
I think I have kill she, this time. I sprinkle water on her
face. I go down on my knee. I pluck at my hair. I denounce
myself as a remorseless brute and a ruthless beast. I implore she
forgiveness. I besought she to look up. I ravage Miss Mills's
work-box for a smelling-bottle, and in my agony of mind apply an
ivory needle-case instead, and drop all the needle over Dora.
I shake my fist at Jip, who be as frantic as myself. I do every
wild extravagance that could be do, and be a long way beyond the
end of my wit when Miss Mills come into the room.
'who have do this?' exclaim Miss Mills, succour her friend.
I reply, 'I, Miss Mills! I have do it! behold the destroyer!'
- or word to that effect - and hide my face from the light, in the
sofa cushion.
at first Miss Mills think it be a quarrel, and that we be
verge on the Desert of Sahara; but she soon find out how matter
stand, for my dear affectionate little Dora, embrace she, begin
exclaim that I be 'a poor labourer'; and then cry for I, and
embrace I, and ask I would I let she give I all her money to
keep, and then fall on Miss Mills's neck, sob as if her tender
heart be break.
Miss Mills must have be bear to be a blessing to we. she
ascertain from I in a few word what it be all about, comfort
Dora, and gradually convince she that I be not a labourer - from
my manner of state the case I believe Dora conclude that I be
a navigator, and go balance myself up and down a plank all day
with a wheelbarrow - and so bring we together in peace. when we
be quite compose, and Dora have go up-stair to put some
rose-water to her eye, Miss Mills rang for tea. in the ensue
interval, I tell Miss Mills that she be evermore my friend, and
that my heart must cease to vibrate ere I could forget her
sympathy.
I then expound to Miss Mills what I have endeavour, so very
unsuccessfully, to expound to Dora. Miss Mills reply, on general
principle, that the Cottage of content be well than the Palace
of cold splendour, and that where love be, all be.
I say to Miss Mills that this be very true, and who should know
it well than I, who love Dora with a love that never mortal have
experience yet? but on Miss Mills observe, with despondency,
that it be well indeed for some heart if this be so, I
explain that I beg leave to restrict the observation to
mortal of the masculine gender.
I then put it to Miss Mills, to say whether she consider that
there be or be not any practical merit in the suggestion I have
be anxious to make, concern the account, the housekeeping,
and the Cookery Book?
Miss Mills, after some consideration, thus reply:
'Mr. Copperfield, I will be plain with you. mental suffering and
trial supply, in some nature, the place of year, and I will be as
plain with you as if I be a Lady Abbess. no. the suggestion be
not appropriate to our Dora. our dear Dora be a favourite child
of nature. she be a thing of light, and airiness, and joy. I be
free to confess that if it could be do, it might be well, but -'
and Miss Mills shake her head.
I be encourage by this closing admission on the part of Miss
Mills to ask she, whether, for Dora's sake, if she have any
opportunity of lure her attention to such preparation for an
earnest life, she would avail herself of it? Miss Mills reply in
the affirmative so readily, that I far ask she if she would
take charge of the Cookery Book; and, if she ever could insinuate
it upon Dora's acceptance, without frighten she, undertake to do
I that crown service. Miss Mills accept this trust, too; but
be not sanguine.
and Dora return, look such a lovely little creature, that I
really doubt whether she ought to be trouble with anything so
ordinary. and she love I so much, and be so captivate
(particularly when she make Jip stand on his hind leg for toast,
and when she pretend to hold that nose of his against the hot
teapot for punishment because he wouldnot), that I feel like a sort
of Monster who have get into a Fairy's bower, when I think of
have frighten she, and make her cry.
after tea we have the guitar; and Dora sing those same dear old
french song about the impossibility of ever on any account leave
off dancing, La ra la, La ra la, until I feel a much great
Monster than before.
we have only one check to our pleasure, and that happen a little
while before I take my leave, when, Miss Mills chance to make
some allusion to tomorrow morning, I unluckily let out that, be
oblige to exert myself now, I get up at five o'clock. whether
Dora have any idea that I be a private Watchman, I be unable to
say; but it make a great impression on she, and she neither play
nor sing any more.
it be still on her mind when I bid her adieu; and she say to I,
in her pretty coax way - as if I be a doll, I use to think:
'now donot get up at five o'clock, you naughty boy. itbe so
nonsensical!'
'my love,' say I, 'I have work to do.'
'but donot do it!' return Dora. 'why should you?'
it be impossible to say to that sweet little surprised face,
otherwise than lightly and playfully, that we must work to live.
'oh! how ridiculous!' cry Dora.
'how shall we live without, Dora?' say I.
'how? any how!' say Dora.
she seem to think she have quite settle the question, and give I
such a triumphant little kiss, direct from her innocent heart, that
I would hardly have put she out of conceit with her answer, for a
fortune.
well! I love she, and I go on love she, most absorbingly,
entirely, and completely. but go on, too, work pretty hard,
and busily keep red-hot all the iron I now have in the fire, I
would sit sometimes of a night, opposite my aunt, think how I
have frighten Dora that time, and how I could well make my way
with a guitar-case through the forest of difficulty, until I use
to fancy that my head be turn quite grey.
CHAPTER 38
a dissolution of PARTNERSHIP
I do not allow my resolution, with respect to the parliamentary
Debates, to cool. it be one of the iron I begin to heat
immediately, and one of the iron I keep hot, and hammer at, with
a perseverance I may honestly admire. I buy an approve scheme
of the noble art and mystery of stenography (which cost I ten and
sixpence); and plunge into a sea of perplexity that bring I, in
a few week, to the confine of distraction. the change that be
ring upon dot, which in such a position mean such a thing, and in
such another position something else, entirely different; the
wonderful vagary that be play by circle; the unaccountable
consequence that result from mark like fly' leg; the
tremendous effect of a curve in a wrong place; not only trouble
my wake hour, but reappear before I in my sleep. when I have
grope my way, blindly, through these difficulty, and have
master the alphabet, which be an egyptian Temple in itself,
there then appear a procession of new horror, call arbitrary
character; the most despotic character I have ever know; who
insist, for instance, that a thing like the beginning of a
cobweb, mean expectation, and that a pen-and-ink sky-rocket, stand
for disadvantageous. when I have fix these wretch in my mind,
I find that they have drive everything else out of it; then,
begin again, I forget they; while I be pick they up, I
drop the other fragment of the system; in short, it be almost
heart-breaking.
it might have be quite heart-breaking, but for Dora, who be the
stay and anchor of my tempest-drive bark. every scratch in the
scheme be a gnarled oak in the forest of difficulty, and I go on
cut they down, one after another, with such vigour, that in
three or four month I be in a condition to make an experiment on
one of our crack speaker in the Commons. shall I ever forget how
the crack speaker walk off from I before I begin, and leave my
imbecile pencil staggering about the paper as if it be in a fit!
this would not do, it be quite clear. I be fly too high, and
should never get on, so. I resort to Traddles for advice; who
suggest that he should dictate speech to I, at a pace, and
with occasional stoppage, adapt to my weakness. very grateful
for this friendly aid, I accept the proposal; and night after
night, almost every night, for a long time, we have a sort of
Private Parliament in Buckingham Street, after I come home from the
Doctor's.
I should like to see such a Parliament anywhere else! my aunt and
Mr. Dick represent the Government or the opposition (as the case
might be), and traddle, with the assistance of Enfield's Speakers,
or a volume of parliamentary oration, thunder astonishing
invective against they. stand by the table, with his finger in
the page to keep the place, and his right arm flourish above his
head, traddle, as Mr. Pitt, Mr. Fox, Mr. Sheridan, Mr. Burke, Lord
Castlereagh, Viscount Sidmouth, or Mr. Canning, would work himself
into the most violent heat, and deliver the most withering
denunciation of the profligacy and corruption of my aunt and Mr.
Dick; while I use to sit, at a little distance, with my notebook
on my knee, fag after he with all my might and main. the
inconsistency and recklessness of Traddles be not to be exceed
by any real politician. he be for any description of policy, in
the compass of a week; and nail all sort of colour to every
denomination of mast. my aunt, look very like an immovable
Chancellor of the Exchequer, would occasionally throw in an
interruption or two, as 'hear!' or 'no!' or 'oh!' when the text
seem to require it: which be always a signal to Mr. Dick (a
perfect country gentleman) to follow lustily with the same cry.
but Mr. Dick get tax with such thing in the course of his
parliamentary career, and be make responsible for such awful
consequence, that he become uncomfortable in his mind sometimes.
I believe he actually begin to be afraid he really have be do
something, tend to the annihilation of the british constitution,
and the ruin of the country.
often and often we pursue these debate until the clock point to
midnight, and the candle be burn down. the result of so much
good practice be, that by and by I begin to keep pace with
traddle pretty well, and should have be quite triumphant if I
have have the least idea what my note be about. but, as to
read they after I have get they, I might as well have copy the
chinese inscription of an immense collection of tea-chest, or the
golden character on all the great red and green bottle in the
chemist' shop!
there be nothing for it, but to turn back and begin all over
again. it be very hard, but I turn back, though with a heavy
heart, and begin laboriously and methodically to plod over the same
tedious ground at a snail's pace; stop to examine minutely
every speck in the way, on all side, and make the most desperate
effort to know these elusive character by sight wherever I meet
they. I be always punctual at the office; at the Doctor's too:
and I really do work, as the common expression be, like a
cart-horse.
one day, when I go to the Commons as usual, I find Mr. Spenlow
in the doorway look extremely grave, and talk to himself. as
he be in the habit of complain of pain in his head - he have
naturally a short throat, and I do seriously believe he
over-starch himself - I be at first alarm by the idea that he
be not quite right in that direction; but he soon relieve my
uneasiness.
instead of return my 'good morning' with his usual affability,
he look at I in a distant, ceremonious manner, and coldly
request I to accompany he to a certain coffee-house, which, in
those day, have a door open into the Commons, just within the
little archway in St. Paul's Churchyard. I comply, in a very
uncomfortable state, and with a warm shooting all over I, as if my
apprehension be break out into bud. when I allow he to
go on a little before, on account of the narrowness of the way, I
observe that he carry his head with a lofty air that be
particularly unpromising; and my mind misgave I that he have find
out about my darling Dora.
if I have not guess this, on the way to the coffee-house, I could
hardly have fail to know what be the matter when I follow he
into an upstairs room, and find Miss Murdstone there, support by
a background of sideboard, on which be several invert tumbler
sustain lemon, and two of those extraordinary box, all
corner and fluting, for stick knife and fork in, which,
happily for mankind, be now obsolete.
Miss Murdstone give I her chilly finger-nail, and sit severely
rigid. Mr. Spenlow shut the door, motion I to a chair, and
stand on the hearth-rug in front of the fireplace.
'have the goodness to show Mr. Copperfield,' say Mr. Spenlow, what
you have in your reticule, Miss Murdstone.'
I believe it be the old identical steel-clasp reticule of my
childhood, that shut up like a bite. compress her lip, in
sympathy with the snap, Miss Murdstone open it - open her
mouth a little at the same time - and produce my last letter to
Dora, teem with expression of devoted affection.
'I believe that be your writing, Mr. Copperfield?' say Mr.
Spenlow.
I be very hot, and the voice I hear be very unlike mine, when I
say, 'it be, sir!'
'if I be not mistaken,' say Mr. Spenlow, as Miss Murdstone bring
a parcel of letter out of her reticule, tie round with the
dear bit of blue ribbon, 'those be also from your pen, Mr.
Copperfield?'
I take they from she with a most desolate sensation; and, glance
at such phrase at the top, as 'my ever dear and own Dora,' 'my
well beloved angel,' 'my blessed one for ever,' and the like,
blush deeply, and incline my head.
'no, thank you!' say Mr. Spenlow, coldly, as I mechanically
offer they back to he. 'I will not deprive you of they. Miss
Murdstone, be so good as to proceed!'
that gentle creature, after a moment's thoughtful survey of the
carpet, deliver herself with much dry unction as follow.
'I must confess to have entertain my suspicion of Miss
Spenlow, in reference to David Copperfield, for some time. I
observe Miss Spenlow and David Copperfield, when they first meet;
and the impression make upon I then be not agreeable. the
depravity of the human heart be such -'
'you will oblige I, ma'am,' interrupt Mr. Spenlow, 'by confine
yourself to fact.'
Miss Murdstone cast down her eye, shake her head as if protest
against this unseemly interruption, and with frown dignity
resume:
'since I be to confine myself to fact, I will state they as dryly
as I can. perhaps that will be consider an acceptable course of
proceeding. I have already say, sir, that I have have my
suspicion of Miss Spenlow, in reference to David Copperfield, for
some time. I have frequently endeavour to find decisive
corroboration of those suspicion, but without effect. I have
therefore forborne to mention they to Miss Spenlow's father';
look severely at him- 'know how little disposition there
usually be in such case, to acknowledge the conscientious
discharge of duty.'
Mr. Spenlow seem quite cow by the gentlemanly sternness of Miss
Murdstone's manner, and deprecate her severity with a conciliatory
little wave of his hand.
'on my return to Norwood, after the period of absence occasion by
my brother's marriage,' pursue Miss Murdstone in a disdainful
voice, 'and on the return of Miss Spenlow from her visit to her
friend Miss Mills, I imagine that the manner of Miss Spenlow give
I great occasion for suspicion than before. therefore I watch
Miss Spenlow closely.'
dear, tender little Dora, so unconscious of this Dragon's eye!
'still,' resume Miss Murdstone, 'I find no proof until last
night. it appear to I that Miss Spenlow receive too many
letter from her friend Miss Mills; but Miss Mills be her friend
with her father's full concurrence,' another telling blow at Mr.
Spenlow, 'it be not for I to interfere. if I may not be
permit to allude to the natural depravity of the human heart, at
least I may - I must - be permit, so far to refer to misplaced
confidence.'
Mr. Spenlow apologetically murmur his assent.
'last evening after tea,' pursue Miss Murdstone, 'I observe the
little dog start, roll, and growl about the drawing-room,
worry something. I say to Miss Spenlow, "Dora, what be that
the dog have in his mouth? itbe paper." Miss Spenlow immediately
put her hand to her frock, give a sudden cry, and run to the dog.
I interpose, and say, "Dora, my love, you must permit I." '
oh Jip, miserable Spaniel, this wretchedness, then, be your work!
'Miss Spenlow endeavour,' say Miss Murdstone, 'to bribe I with
kiss, work-box, and small article of jewellery - that, of
course, I pass over. the little dog retreat under the sofa on my
approach he, and be with great difficulty dislodge by the
fire-iron. even when dislodge, he still keep the letter in his
mouth; and on my endeavouring to take it from he, at the imminent
risk of be bite, he keep it between his tooth so
pertinaciously as to suffer himself to be hold suspend in the air
by mean of the document. at length I obtain possession of it.
after peruse it, I tax Miss Spenlow with have many such
letter in her possession; and ultimately obtain from her the
packet which be now in David Copperfield's hand.'
here she cease; and snap her reticule again, and shut she
mouth, look as if she might be break, but could never be bent.
'you have hear Miss Murdstone,' say Mr. Spenlow, turn to I.
'I beg to ask, Mr. Copperfield, if you have anything to say in
reply?'
the picture I have before I, of the beautiful little treasure of my
heart, sob and cry all night - of her be alone,
frighten, and wretche, then - of she have so piteously beg
and pray that stony-hearted woman to forgive she - of she have
vainly offer she those kiss, work-box, and trinket - of she
be in such grievous distress, and all for I - very much
impair the little dignity I have be able to muster. I be afraid
I be in a tremulous state for a minute or so, though I do my good
to disguise it.
'there be nothing I can say, sir,' I return, 'except that all the
blame be mine. Dora -'
'Miss Spenlow, if you please,' say her father, majestically.
'- be induce and persuade by I,' I go on, swallow that
colder designation, 'to consent to this concealment, and I bitterly
regret it.'
'you be very much to blame, sir,' say Mr. Spenlow, walk to and
fro upon the hearth-rug, and emphasize what he say with his
whole body instead of his head, on account of the stiffness of his
cravat and spine. 'you have do a stealthy and unbecoming action,
Mr. Copperfield. when I take a gentleman to my house, no matter
whether he be nineteen, twenty-nine, or ninety, I take he there in
a spirit of confidence. if he abuse my confidence, he commit a
dishonourable action, Mr. Copperfield.'
'I feel it, sir, I assure you,' I return. 'but I never think
so, before. sincerely, honestly, indeed, Mr. Spenlow, I never
think so, before. I love Miss Spenlow to that extent -'
'Pooh! nonsense!' say Mr. Spenlow, redden. 'pray donot tell I
to my face that you love my daughter, Mr. Copperfield!'
'could I defend my conduct if I do not, sir?' I return, with all
humility.
'can you defend your conduct if you do, sir?' say Mr. Spenlow,
stop short upon the hearth-rug. 'have you consider your
year, and my daughter's year, Mr. Copperfield? have you
consider what it be to undermine the confidence that should
subsist between my daughter and myself? have you consider my
daughter's station in life, the project I may contemplate for her
advancement, the testamentary intention I may have with reference
to she? have you consider anything, Mr. Copperfield?'
'very little, sir, I be afraid;' I answer, speak to he as
respectfully and sorrowfully as I feel; 'but pray believe I, I
have consider my own worldly position. when I explain it to
you, we be already engage -'
'I beg,' say Mr. Spenlow, more like Punch than I have ever see
he, as he energetically strike one hand upon the other - I could
not help notice that even in my despair; 'that you will not talk
to I of engagement, Mr. Copperfield!'
the otherwise immovable Miss Murdstone laugh contemptuously in
one short syllable.
'when I explain my altered position to you, sir,' I begin again,
substitute a new form of expression for what be so unpalatable
to he, 'this concealment, into which I be so unhappy as to have
lead Miss Spenlow, have begin. since I have be in that alter
position, I have strain every nerve, I have exert every energy,
to improve it. I be sure I shall improve it in time. will you
grant I time - any length of time? we be both so young, sir, -'
'you be right,' interrupt Mr. Spenlow, nod his head a great
many time, and frown very much, 'you be both very young. itbe
all nonsense. let there be an end of the nonsense. take away
those letter, and throw they in the fire. give I Miss Spenlow's
letter to throw in the fire; and although our future intercourse
must, you be aware, be restrict to the Commons here, we will
agree to make no further mention of the past. come, Mr.
Copperfield, you donot want sense; and this be the sensible
course.'
no. I couldnot think of agree to it. I be very sorry, but
there be a high consideration than sense. love be above all
earthly consideration, and I love Dora to idolatry, and Dora
love I. I donot exactly say so; I soften it down as much as
I could; but I imply it, and I be resolute upon it. I donot
think I make myself very ridiculous, but I know I be resolute.
'very well, Mr. Copperfield,' say Mr. Spenlow, 'I must try my
influence with my daughter.'
Miss Murdstone, by an expressive sound, a long draw respiration,
which be neither a sigh nor a moan, but be like both, give it as
her opinion that he should have do this at first.
'I must try,' say Mr. Spenlow, confirm by this support, 'my
influence with my daughter. do you decline to take those letter,
Mr. Copperfield?' for I have lay they on the table.
yes. I tell he I hop he would not think it wrong, but I
couldnot possibly take they from Miss Murdstone.
'nor from I?' say Mr. Spenlow.
no, I reply with the profound respect; nor from he.
'very well!' say Mr. Spenlow.
a silence succeed, I be undecided whether to go or stay. at
length I be move quietly towards the door, with the intention of
say that perhaps I should consult his feeling well by
withdrawing: when he say, with his hand in his coat pocket, into
which it be as much as he could do to get they; and with what I
should call, upon the whole, a decidedly pious air:
'you be probably aware, Mr. Copperfield, that I be not altogether
destitute of worldly possession, and that my daughter be my
near and dear relative?'
I hurriedly make he a reply to the effect, that I hop the error
into which I have be betray by the desperate nature of my love,
do not induce he to think I mercenary too?
'I donot allude to the matter in that light,' say Mr. Spenlow.
'it would be well for yourself, and all of we, if you be
mercenary, Mr. Copperfield - I mean, if you be more discreet and
less influence by all this youthful nonsense. no. I merely say,
with quite another view, you be probably aware I have some
property to bequeath to my child?'
I certainly suppose so.
'and you can hardly think,' say Mr. Spenlow, 'have experience of
what we see, in the Commons here, every day, of the various
unaccountable and negligent proceeding of man, in respect of their
testamentary arrangement - of all subject, the one on which
perhaps the strange revelation of human inconsistency be to be
meet with - but that mine be make?'
I incline my head in acquiescence.
'I should not allow,' say Mr. Spenlow, with an evident increase of
pious sentiment, and slowly shake his head as he poise himself
upon his toe and heel alternately, 'my suitable provision for my
child to be influence by a piece of youthful folly like the
present. it be mere folly. mere nonsense. in a little while, it
will weigh light than any feather. but I might - I might - if
this silly business be not completely relinquish altogether, be
induce in some anxious moment to guard she from, and surround she
with protection against, the consequence of any foolish step in
the way of marriage. now, Mr. Copperfield, I hope that you will
not render it necessary for I to open, even for a quarter of an
hour, that closed page in the book of life, and unsettle, even for
a quarter of an hour, grave affair long since compose.'
there be a serenity, a tranquillity, a calm sunset air about he,
which quite affect I. he be so peaceful and resign - clearly
have his affair in such perfect train, and so systematically wound
up - that he be a man to feel touch in the contemplation of. I
really think I see tear rise to his eye, from the depth of his
own feeling of all this.
but what could I do? I could not deny Dora and my own heart. when
he tell I I have well take a week to consider of what he have
say, how could I say I wouldnot take a week, yet how could I fail
to know that no amount of week could influence such love as mine?
'in the meantime, confer with Miss Trotwood, or with any person
with any knowledge of life,' say Mr. Spenlow, adjust his cravat
with both hand. 'take a week, Mr. Copperfield.'
I submit; and, with a countenance as expressive as I be able to
make it of dejected and despairing constancy, come out of the room.
Miss Murdstone's heavy eyebrow follow I to the door - I say she
eyebrow rather than her eye, because they be much more
important in her face - and she look so exactly as she use to
look, at about that hour of the morning, in our parlour at
Blunderstone, that I could have fancy I have be break down in
my lesson again, and that the dead weight on my mind be that
horrible old spelling-book, with oval woodcut, shape, to my
youthful fancy, like the glass out of spectacle.
when I get to the office, and, shut out old Tiffey and the rest
of they with my hand, sit at my desk, in my own particular nook,
thinking of this earthquake that have take place so unexpectedly,
and in the bitterness of my spirit curse Jip, I fall into such a
state of torment about Dora, that I wonder I do not take up my hat
and rush insanely to Norwood. the idea of their frightening she,
and make her cry, and of my not be there to comfort she, be
so excruciating, that it impel I to write a wild letter to Mr.
Spenlow, beseech he not to visit upon she the consequence of
my awful destiny. I implore he to spare her gentle nature - not
to crush a fragile flower - and address he generally, to the
good of my remembrance, as if, instead of be her father, he have
be an ogre, or the Dragon of Wantley.3 this letter I seal and
lay upon his desk before he return; and when he come in, I see
he, through the half-open door of his room, take it up and read
it.
he say nothing about it all the morning; but before he go away
in the afternoon he call I in, and tell I that I need not make
myself at all uneasy about his daughter's happiness. he have
assure she, he say, that it be all nonsense; and he have nothing
more to say to she. he believe he be an indulgent father (as
indeed he be), and I might spare myself any solicitude on her
account.
'you may make it necessary, if you be foolish or obstinate, Mr.
Copperfield,' he observe, 'for I to send my daughter abroad
again, for a term; but I have a well opinion of you. I hope you
will be wise than that, in a few day. as to Miss Murdstone,' for
I have allude to she in the letter, 'I respect that lady's
vigilance, and feel obliged to she; but she have strict charge to
avoid the subject. all I desire, Mr. Copperfield, be, that it
should be forget. all you have get to do, Mr. Copperfield, be
to forget it.'
all! in the note I write to Miss Mills, I bitterly quote this
sentiment. all I have to do, I say, with gloomy sarcasm, be to
forget Dora. that be all, and what be that! I entreat Miss
Mills to see I, that evening. if it could not be do with Mr.
Mills's sanction and concurrence, I besought a clandestine
interview in the back kitchen where the Mangle be. I inform she
that my reason be totter on its throne, and only she, Miss
Mills, could prevent its being depose. I sign myself, her
distractedly; and I couldnot help feel, while I read this
composition over, before send it by a porter, that it be
something in the style of Mr. Micawber.
however, I send it. at night I repair to Miss Mills's street,
and walk up and down, until I be stealthily fetch in by Miss
Mills's maid, and take the area way to the back kitchen. I have
since see reason to believe that there be nothing on earth to
prevent my go in at the front door, and be show up into the
drawing-room, except Miss Mills's love of the romantic and
mysterious.
in the back kitchen, I rave as become I. I go there, I
suppose, to make a fool of myself, and I be quite sure I do it.
Miss Mills have receive a hasty note from Dora, tell she that
all be discover, and say. 'oh pray come to I, Julia, do,
do!' but Miss Mills, mistrust the acceptability of her presence
to the high power, have not yet go; and we be all benighted
in the Desert of Sahara.
Miss Mills have a wonderful flow of word, and like to pour they
out. I could not help feel, though she mingle her tear with
mine, that she have a dreadful luxury in our affliction. she
pet they, as I may say, and make the most of they. a deep gulf,
she observe, have open between Dora and I, and love could only
span it with its rainbow. love must suffer in this stern world; it
ever have be so, it ever would be so. no matter, Miss Mills
remark. heart confine by cobwebs would burst at last, and then
Love be avenge.
this be small consolation, but Miss Mills wouldnot encourage
fallacious hope. she make I much more wretched than I be
before, and I feel (and tell she with the deep gratitude) that
she be indeed a friend. we resolve that she should go to Dora
the first thing in the morning, and find some mean of assure
she, either by look or word, of my devotion and misery. we
part, overwhelm with grief; and I think Miss Mills enjoy
herself completely.
I confide all to my aunt when I get home; and in spite of all she
could say to I, go to bed despairing. I get up despairing, and
go out despair. it be Saturday morning, and I go straight
to the Commons.
I be surprised, when I come within sight of our office-door, to
see the ticket-porter stand outside talk together, and some
half-dozen straggler gaze at the window which be shut up. I
quicken my pace, and, pass among they, wonder at their
look, go hurriedly in.
the clerk be there, but nobody be do anything. Old Tiffey,
for the first time in his life I should think, be sit on
somebody else's stool, and have not hang up his hat.
'this be a dreadful calamity, Mr. Copperfield,' say he, as I
enter.
'what be?' I exclaim. 'whatbe the matter?'
'donot you know?' cry Tiffey, and all the rest of they, come
round I.
'no!' say I, look from face to face.
'Mr. Spenlow,' say Tiffey.
'what about he!'
'dead!'
I think it be the office reeling, and not I, as one of the
clerk catch hold of I. they sit I down in a chair, untie my
neck-cloth, and bring I some water. I have no idea whether this
take any time.
'dead?' say I.
'he din in town yesterday, and drive down in the phaeton by
himself,' say Tiffey, 'have send his own groom home by the
coach, as he sometimes do, you know -'
'well?'
'the phaeton go home without he. the horse stop at the
stable-gate. the man go out with a lantern. nobody in the
carriage.'
'have they run away?'
'they be not hot,' say Tiffey, put on his glass; 'no
hotter, I understand, than they would have be, go down at the
usual pace. the rein be break, but they have be drag on
the ground. the house be rouse up directly, and three of they
go out along the road. they find he a mile off.'
'More than a mile off, Mr. Tiffey,' interpose a junior.
'be it? I believe you be right,' say Tiffey, - 'more than a
mile off - not far from the church - lie partly on the roadside,
and partly on the path, upon his face. whether he fall out in a
fit, or get out, feel ill before the fit come on - or even
whether he be quite dead then, though there be no doubt he be
quite insensible - no one appear to know. if he breathe,
certainly he never speak. medical assistance be get as soon as
possible, but it be quite useless.'
I cannot describe the state of mind into which I be throw by this
intelligence. the shock of such an event happen so suddenly,
and happen to one with whom I have be in any respect at
variance - the appalling vacancy in the room he have occupy so
lately, where his chair and table seem to wait for he, and his
handwriting of yesterday be like a ghost - the in- definable
impossibility of separate he from the place, and feeling, when
the door open, as if he might come in - the lazy hush and rest
there be in the office, and the insatiable relish with which our
people talk about it, and other people come in and out all day,
and gorge themselves with the subject - this be easily
intelligible to anyone. what I cannot describe be, how, in the
innermost recess of my own heart, I have a lurk jealousy even
of death. how I feel as if its might would push I from my ground
in Dora's thought. how I be, in a grudging way I have no word
for, envious of her grief. how it make I restless to think of she
weeping to other, or be console by other. how I have a
grasping, avaricious wish to shut out everybody from she but
myself, and to be all in all to she, at that unseasonable time of
all time.
in the trouble of this state of mind - not exclusively my own, I
hope, but know to other - I go down to Norwood that night; and
finding from one of the servant, when I make my inquiry at the
door, that Miss Mills be there, get my aunt to direct a letter to
she, which I write. I deplore the untimely death of Mr. Spenlow,
most sincerely, and shed tear in do so. I entreat she to
tell Dora, if Dora be in a state to hear it, that he have speak
to I with the utmost kindness and consideration; and have couple
nothing but tenderness, not a single or reproachful word, with her
name. I know I do this selfishly, to have my name bring before
she; but I try to believe it be an act of justice to his memory.
perhaps I do believe it.
my aunt receive a few line next day in reply; address, outside,
to she; within, to I. Dora be overcome by grief; and when her
friend have ask she should she send her love to I, have only
cry, as she be always cry, 'oh, dear papa! oh, poor papa!'
but she have not say no, and that I make the most of.
Mr. jorkin, who have be at Norwood since the occurrence, come to
the office a few day afterwards. he and Tiffey be closet
together for some few moment, and then Tiffey look out at the
door and beckon I in.
'oh!' say Mr. jorkins. 'Mr. Tiffey and myself, Mr. Copperfield,
be about to examine the desk, the drawer, and other such
repository of the deceased, with the view of seal up his
private paper, and search for a will. there be no trace of
any, elsewhere. it may be as well for you to assist we, if you
please.'
I have be in agony to obtain some knowledge of the circumstance
in which my Dora would be place - as, in whose guardianship, and
so forth - and this be something towards it. we begin the search
at once; Mr. jorkin unlock the drawer and desk, and we all
take out the paper. the office-paper we place on one side,
and the private paper (which be not numerous) on the other. we
be very grave; and when we come to a stray seal, or pencil-case,
or ring, or any little article of that kind which we associate
personally with he, we speak very low.
we have seal up several packet; and be still go on dustily
and quietly, when Mr. jorkin say to we, apply exactly the same
word to his late partner as his late partner have apply to he:
'Mr. Spenlow be very difficult to move from the beat track. you
know what he be! I be disposed to think he have make no will.'
'oh, I know he have!' say I.
they both stop and look at I.
'on the very day when I last see he,' say I, 'he tell I that he
have, and that his affair be long since settle.'
Mr. jorkin and old Tiffey shake their head with one accord.
'that look unpromising,' say Tiffey.
'very unpromising,' say Mr. jorkins.
'surely you donot doubt -' I begin.
'my good Mr. Copperfield!' say Tiffey, lay his hand upon my
arm, and shut up both his eye as he shake his head: 'if you
have be in the Commons as long as I have, you would know that
there be no subject on which man be so inconsistent, and so little
to be trust.'
'why, bless my soul, he make that very remark!' I reply
persistently.
'I should call that almost final,' observed Tiffey. 'my opinion be
- no will.'
it appear a wonderful thing to I, but it turn out that there
be no will. he have never so much as thought of make one, so far
as his paper afford any evidence; for there be no kind of hint,
sketch, or memorandum, of any testamentary intention whatever.
what be scarcely less astonishing to I, be, that his affair
be in a most disorder state. it be extremely difficult, I
hear, to make out what he owe, or what he have pay, or of what he
die possess. it be consider likely that for year he could
have have no clear opinion on these subject himself. by little and
little it come out, that, in the competition on all point of
appearance and gentility then run high in the Commons, he have
spend more than his professional income, which be not a very large
one, and have reduce his private mean, if they ever have be great
(which be exceedingly doubtful), to a very low ebb indeed. there
be a sale of the furniture and lease, at Norwood; and Tiffey tell
I, little think how interested I be in the story, that, pay
all the just debt of the deceased, and deduct his share of
outstanding bad and doubtful debt due to the firm, he wouldnot
give a thousand pound for all the asset remain.
this be at the expiration of about six week. I have suffer
torture all the time; and think I really must have lay violent
hand upon myself, when Miss Mills still report to I, that my
break-hearted little Dora would say nothing, when I be mention,
but 'oh, poor papa! oh, dear papa!' also, that she have no other
relation than two aunt, maiden sister of Mr. Spenlow, who live
at Putney, and who have not hold any other than chance communication
with their brother for many year. not that they have ever
quarrelled (Miss Mills inform I); but that have be, on the
occasion of Dora's christening, invite to tea, when they
consider themselves privileged to be invite to dinner, they have
express their opinion in writing, that it be 'well for the
happiness of all party' that they should stay away. since which
they have go their road, and their brother have go his.
these two lady now emerge from their retirement, and propose to
take Dora to live at Putney. Dora, cling to they both, and
weeping, exclaim, 'o yes, aunt! please take Julia Mills and I
and Jip to Putney!' so they go, very soon after the funeral.
how I find time to haunt Putney, I be sure I donot know; but I
contrive, by some mean or other, to prowl about the neighbourhood
pretty often. Miss Mills, for the more exact discharge of the
duty of friendship, keep a journal; and she use to meet I
sometimes, on the Common, and read it, or (if she have not time to
do that) lend it to I. how I treasure up the entry, of which
I subjoin a sample! -
'Monday. my sweet D. still much depressed. Headache. call
attention to J. as be beautifully sleek. D. fondle J.
Associations thus awaken, open floodgate of sorrow. rush of
grief admit. (be tear the dewdrop of the heart? J. M.)
'Tuesday. D. weak and nervous. beautiful in pallor. (do we not
remark this in moon likewise? J. M.) D., J. M. and J. take airing
in carriage. J. look out of window, and bark violently at
dustman, occasioned smile to overspread feature of D. (of such
slight link be chain of life compose! J. M.)
'Wednesday. D. comparatively cheerful. sang to she, as congenial
melody, "Evening Bells". effect not soothe, but reverse. D.
inexpressibly affect. find sob afterwards, in own room.
quote verse respect self and young Gazelle. ineffectually.
also refer to Patience on Monument. (Qy. why on monument? J.
M.)
'Thursday. D. certainly improve. well night. slight tinge of
damask revisit cheek. resolve to mention name of D. C.
introduce same, cautiously, in course of airing. D. immediately
overcome. "oh, dear, dear Julia! oh, I have be a naughty and
undutiful child!" soothed and caress. drew ideal picture of D.
C. on verge of tomb. D. again overcome. "oh, what shall I do,
what shall I do? oh, take I somewhere!" much alarmed. faint
of D. and glass of water from public-house. (Poetical affinity.
chequer sign on door-post; chequer human life. alas! J. M.)
'Friday. day of incident. Man appear in kitchen, with blue bag,
"for lady's boot leave out to heel". cook reply, "no such
order." man argue point. cook withdraw to inquire, leave man
alone with J. On Cook's return, man still argue point, but
ultimately go. J. miss. D. distract. information send to
police. man to be identify by broad nose, and leg like
balustrade of bridge. search make in every direction. no J. D.
weep bitterly, and inconsolable. renew reference to young
Gazelle. appropriate, but unavaile. towards evening, strange
boy call. bring into parlour. broad nose, but no balustrade.
say he want a pound, and know a dog. decline to explain
far, though much press. pound be produce by D. take
Cook to little house, where J. alone tie up to leg of table. Joy
of D. who dance round J. while he eat his supper. embolden by
this happy change, mention D. C. upstairs. D. weep afresh, cry
piteously, "oh, donot, donot, donot! it be so wicked to think of
anything but poor papa!" - embrace J. and sob herself to sleep.
(must not D. C. confine himself to the broad pinion of Time? J.
M.)'
Miss Mills and her journal be my sole consolation at this period.
to see she, who have see Dora but a little while before - to trace
the initial letter of Dora's name through her sympathetic page -
to be make more and more miserable by she - be my only comfort.
I feel as if I have be live in a palace of card, which have
tumble down, leave only Miss Mills and I among the ruin; I
feel as if some grim enchanter have draw a magic circle round the
innocent goddess of my heart, which nothing indeed but those same
strong pinion, capable of carry so many people over so much,
would enable I to enter!
CHAPTER 39
WICKFIELD and HEEP
my aunt, begin, I imagine, to be make seriously uncomfortable
by my prolonged dejection, make a pretence of be anxious that I
should go to Dover, to see that all be work well at the
cottage, which be let; and to conclude an agreement, with the same
tenant, for a long term of occupation. Janet be draft into
the service of Mrs. Strong, where I see she every day. she have
be undecided, on leave Dover, whether or no to give the
finishing touch to that renunciation of mankind in which she have
be educate, by marry a pilot; but she decide against that
venture. not so much for the sake of principle, I believe, as
because she happen not to like he.
although it require an effort to leave Miss Mills, I fall rather
willingly into my aunt's pretence, as a means of enable I to
pass a few tranquil hour with Agnes. I consult the good doctor
relative to an absence of three day; and the Doctor wish I to
take that relaxation, - he wish I to take more; but my energy
could not bear that, - I make up my mind to go.
as to the Commons, I have no great occasion to be particular about
my duty in that quarter. to say the truth, we be get in no
very good odour among the tip-top proctor, and be rapidly
slide down to but a doubtful position. the business have be
indifferent under Mr. jorkin, before Mr. Spenlow's time; and
although it have be quicken by the infusion of new blood, and by
the display which Mr. Spenlow make, still it be not establish on
a sufficiently strong basis to bear, without be shake, such a
blow as the sudden loss of its active manager. it fall off very
much. Mr. jorkins, notwithstanding his reputation in the firm, be
an easy-go, incapable sort of man, whose reputation out of door
be not calculate to back it up. I be turn over to he now,
and when I see he take his snuff and let the business go, I
regret my aunt's thousand pound more than ever.
but this be not the bad of it. there be a number of
hanger-on and outsider about the Commons, who, without be
proctor themselves, dabble in common-form business, and get it
do by real proctor, who lend their name in consideration of a
share in the spoil; - and there be a good many of these too. as
our house now want business on any term, we join this noble
band; and throw out lur to the hanger-on and outsider, to bring
their business to we. marriage licence and small probate be
what we all look for, and what pay we well; and the competition
for these run very high indeed. kidnapper and inveigler be
plant in all the avenue of entrance to the Commons, with
instruction to do their utmost to cut off all person in mourning,
and all gentleman with anything bashful in their appearance, and
entice they to the office in which their respective employer be
interested; which instruction be so well observe, that I
myself, before I be know by sight, be twice hustle into the
premise of our principal opponent. the conflict interest of
these tout gentleman be of a nature to irritate their
feeling, personal collision take place; and the Commons be even
scandalize by our principal inveigler (who have formerly be in
the wine trade, and afterwards in the sworn brokery line) walk
about for some day with a black eye. any one of these scout use
to think nothing of politely assist an old lady in black out of
a vehicle, kill any proctor whom she inquire for, represent
his employer as the lawful successor and representative of that
proctor, and bear the old lady off (sometimes greatly affect)
to his employer's office. many captive be bring to I in this
way. as to marriage licence, the competition rise to such a
pitch, that a shy gentleman in want of one, have nothing to do but
submit himself to the first inveigler, or be fight for, and become
the prey of the strong. one of our clerk, who be an outsider,
use, in the height of this contest, to sit with his hat on, that
he might be ready to rush out and swear before a surrogate any
victim who be bring in. the system of inveigling continue, I
believe, to this day. the last time I be in the Commons, a civil
able-bodied person in a white apron pounce out upon I from a
doorway, and whisper the word 'marriage-licence' in my ear, be
with great difficulty prevent from take I up in his arm and
lift I into a proctor's. from this digression, let I proceed
to Dover.
I find everything in a satisfactory state at the cottage; and be
enable to gratify my aunt exceedingly by report that the tenant
inherit her feud, and wag incessant war against donkey.
have settle the little business I have to transact there, and
sleep there one night, I walk on to Canterbury early in the
morning. it be now winter again; and the fresh, cold windy day,
and the sweeping downland, brighten up my hope a little.
come into Canterbury, I loiter through the old street with a
sober pleasure that calm my spirit, and ease my heart. there
be the old sign, the old name over the shop, the old people
serve in they. it appear so long, since I have be a schoolboy
there, that I wonder the place be so little change, until I
reflect how little I be change myself. strange to say, that
quiet influence which be inseparable in my mind from Agnes, seem
to pervade even the city where she dwelt. the venerable cathedral
tower, and the old jackdaw and rook whose airy voice make they
more retired than perfect silence would have do; the battered
gateway, one stick full with statue, long throw down, and
crumble away, like the reverential pilgrim who have gaze upon
they; the still nook, where the ivied growth of century creep
over gable end and ruin wall; the ancient house, the pastoral
landscape of field, orchard, and garden; everywhere - on everything
- I feel the same serener air, the same calm, thoughtful, soften
spirit.
arrive at Mr. Wickfield's house, I find, in the little low room
on the ground floor, where Uriah Heep have be of old accustom to
sit, Mr. Micawber ply his pen with great assiduity. he be
dress in a legal-look suit of black, and loomed, burly and
large, in that small office.
Mr. Micawber be extremely glad to see I, but a little confused
too. he would have conduct I immediately into the presence of
Uriah, but I decline.
'I know the house of old, you recollect,' say I, 'and will find my
way upstairs. how do you like the law, Mr. Micawber?'
'my dear copperfield,' he reply. 'to a man possess of the
high imaginative power, the objection to legal study be the
amount of detail which they involve. even in our professional
correspondence,' say Mr. Micawber, glance at some letter he be
write, 'the mind be not at liberty to soar to any exalt form of
expression. still, it be a great pursuit. a great pursuit!'
he then tell I that he have become the tenant of Uriah Heep's old
house; and that Mrs. Micawber would be delighted to receive I,
once more, under her own roof.
'it be humble,' say Mr. Micawber, '- to quote a favourite
expression of my friend Heep; but it may prove the step-stone
to more ambitious domiciliary accommodation.'
I ask he whether he have reason, so far, to be satisfied with his
friend Heep's treatment of he? he get up to ascertain if the door
be close shut, before he reply, in a low voice:
'my dear Copperfield, a man who labour under the pressure of
pecuniary embarrassment, be, with the generality of people, at a
disadvantage. that disadvantage be not diminish, when that
pressure necessitate the drawing of stipendiary emolument, before
those emolument be strictly due and payable. all I can say be,
that my friend Heep have respond to appeal to which I need not
more particularly refer, in a manner calculate to redound equally
to the honour of his head, and of his heart.'
'I should not have suppose he to be very free with his money
either,' I observe.
'pardon I!' say Mr. Micawber, with an air of constraint, 'I speak
of my friend Heep as I have experience.'
'I be glad your experience be so favourable,' I return.
'you be very obliging, my dear copperfield,' say Mr. Micawber;
and hum a tune.
'do you see much of Mr. Wickfield?' I ask, to change the subject.
'not much,' say Mr. Micawber, slightingly. 'Mr. Wickfield be, I
dare say, a man of very excellent intention; but he be - in short,
he be obsolete.'
'I be afraid his partner seek to make he so,' say I.
'my dear copperfield!' return Mr. Micawber, after some uneasy
evolution on his stool, 'allow I to offer a remark! I be here,
in a capacity of confidence. I be here, in a position of trust.
the discussion of some topic, even with Mrs. Micawber herself (so
long the partner of my various vicissitude, and a woman of a
remarkable lucidity of intellect), be, I be lead to consider,
incompatible with the function now devolve on I. I would
therefore take the liberty of suggest that in our friendly
intercourse - which I trust will never be disturb! - we draw a
line. on one side of this line,' say Mr. Micawber, represent
it on the desk with the office ruler, 'be the whole range of the
human intellect, with a trifling exception; on the other, be that
exception; that be to say, the affair of Messrs Wickfield and
Heep, with all belong and appertain thereunto. I trust I
give no offence to the companion of my youth, in submit this
proposition to his cool judgement?'
though I see an uneasy change in Mr. Micawber, which sit tightly on
he, as if his new duty be a misfit, I feel I have no right to
be offend. my tell he so, appear to relieve he; and he
shake hand with I.
'I be charm, Copperfield,' say Mr. Micawber, 'let I assure you,
with Miss Wickfield. she be a very superior young lady, of very
remarkable attraction, grace, and virtue. upon my honour,' say
Mr. Micawber, indefinitely kiss his hand and bow with his
genteelest air, 'I do homage to Miss Wickfield! Hem!'
'I be glad of that, at least,' say I.
'if you have not assure we, my dear Copperfield, on the occasion of
that agreeable afternoon we have the happiness of pass with you,
that D. be your favourite letter,' say Mr. Micawber, 'I should
unquestionably have suppose that a. have be so.'
we have all some experience of a feeling, that come over we
occasionally, of what we be say and do have be say and
do before, in a remote time - of our have be surround, dim
age ago, by the same face, object, and circumstance - of our
know perfectly what will be say next, as if we suddenly
remember it! I never have this mysterious impression more
strongly in my life, than before he utter those word.
I take my leave of Mr. Micawber, for the time, charge he with my
good remembrance to all at home. as I leave he, resume his
stool and his pen, and roll his head in his stock, to get it
into easy writing order, I clearly perceive that there be
something interpose between he and I, since he have come into his
new function, which prevent our getting at each other as we use
to do, and quite alter the character of our intercourse.
there be no one in the quaint old drawing-room, though it
present token of Mrs. Heep's whereabouts. I look into the
room still belong to Agnes, and see she sit by the fire, at
a pretty old-fashioned desk she have, write.
my darken the light make she look up. what a pleasure to be the
cause of that bright change in her attentive face, and the object
of that sweet regard and welcome!
'ah, Agnes!' say I, when we be sit together, side by side;
'I have miss you so much, lately!'
'indeed?' she reply. 'again! and so soon?'
I shake my head.
'I donot know how it be, Agnes; I seem to want some faculty of mind
that I ought to have. you be so much in the habit of thinking
for I, in the happy old day here, and I come so naturally to you
for counsel and support, that I really think I have miss
acquire it.'
'and what be it?' say Agnes, cheerfully.
'I donot know what to call it,' I reply. 'I think I be earnest
and persevere?'
'I be sure of it,' say Agnes.
'and patient, Agnes?' I inquire, with a little hesitation.
'yes,' return Agnes, laugh. 'pretty well.'
'and yet,' say I, 'I get so miserable and worried, and be so
unsteady and irresolute in my power of assure myself, that I know
I must want - shall I call it - reliance, of some kind?'
'call it so, if you will,' say Agnes.
'well!' I return. 'see here! you come to London, I rely on you,
and I have an object and a course at once. I be drive out of it,
I come here, and in a moment I feel an altered person. the
circumstance that distress I be not change, since I come into
this room; but an influence come over I in that short interval
that alter I, oh, how much for the well! what be it? what be
your secret, Agnes?'
her head be bent down, look at the fire.
'itbe the old story,' say I. 'donot laugh, when I say it be
always the same in little thing as it be in great one. my old
trouble be nonsense, and now they be serious; but whenever I
have go away from my adopt sister -'
Agnes look up - with such a heavenly face! - and give I her
hand, which I kiss.
'whenever I have not have you, Agnes, to advise and approve in the
beginning, I have seem to go wild, and to get into all sort of
difficulty. when I have come to you, at last (as I have always
do), I have come to peace and happiness. I come home, now, like
a tired traveller, and find such a blessed sense of rest!'
I feel so deeply what I say, it affect I so sincerely, that my
voice fail, and I cover my face with my hand, and break into
tear. I write the truth. whatever contradiction and
inconsistency there be within I, as there be within so many
of we; whatever might have be so different, and so much well;
whatever I have do, in which I have perversely wander away from
the voice of my own heart; I know nothing of. I only know that I
be fervently in earnest, when I feel the rest and peace of have
Agnes near I.
in her placid sisterly manner; with her beam eye; with her
tender voice; and with that sweet composure, which have long ago
make the house that hold she quite a sacred place to I; she soon
win I from this weakness, and lead I on to tell all that have
happen since our last meeting.
'and there be not another word to tell, Agnes,' say I, when I have
make an end of my confidence. 'now, my reliance be on you.'
'but it must not be on I, Trotwood,' return Agnes, with a
pleasant smile. 'it must be on someone else.'
'On Dora?' say I.
'Assuredly.'
'why, I have not mention, Agnes,' say I, a little embarrassed,
'that Dora be rather difficult to - I would not, for the world,
say, to rely upon, because she be the soul of purity and truth -
but rather difficult to - I hardly know how to express it, really,
Agnes. she be a timid little thing, and easily disturb and
frightened. some time ago, before her father's death, when I
think it right to mention to she - but Iwill tell you, if you will
bear with I, how it be.'
accordingly, I tell Agnes about my declaration of poverty, about
the cookery-book, the housekeeping account, and all the rest of
it.
'oh, Trotwood!' she remonstrate, with a smile. 'just your old
headlong way! you might have be in earnest in strive to get on
in the world, without be so very sudden with a timid, loving,
inexperienced girl. Poor Dora!'
I never hear such sweet forbearing kindness express in a voice,
as she express in make this reply. it be as if I have see she
admiringly and tenderly embrace Dora, and tacitly reprove I,
by her considerate protection, for my hot haste in flutter that
little heart. it be as if I have see Dora, in all her fascinating
artlessness, caress Agnes, and thank she, and coaxingly
appeal against I, and love I with all her childish
innocence.
I feel so grateful to Agnes, and admire she so! I see those two
together, in a bright perspective, such well-associate friend,
each adorn the other so much!
'what ought I to do then, Agnes?' I inquire, after look at the
fire a little while. 'what would it be right to do?'
'I think,' say Agnes, 'that the honourable course to take, would
be to write to those two lady. donot you think that any secret
course be an unworthy one?'
'yes. if you think so,' say I.
'I be poorly qualified to judge of such matter,' reply Agnes,
with a modest hesitation, 'but I certainly feel - in short, I feel
that your be secret and clandestine, be not be like
yourself.'
'like myself, in the too high opinion you have of I, Agnes, I be
afraid,' say I.
'like yourself, in the candour of your nature,' she return; 'and
therefore I would write to those two lady. I would relate, as
plainly and as openly as possible, all that have take place; and I
would ask their permission to visit sometimes, at their house.
consider that you be young, and strive for a place in life,
I think it would be well to say that you would readily abide by any
condition they might impose upon you. I would entreat they not to
dismiss your request, without a reference to Dora; and to discuss
it with she when they should think the time suitable. I would not
be too vehement,' say Agnes, gently, 'or propose too much. I
would trust to my fidelity and perseverance - and to Dora.'
'but if they be to frighten Dora again, Agnes, by speak to
she,' say I. 'and if Dora be to cry, and say nothing about I!'
'be that likely?' inquire Agnes, with the same sweet consideration
in her face.
'God bless she, she be as easily scar as a bird,' say I. 'it
might be! or if the two Miss Spenlows (elderly lady of that sort
be odd character sometimes) should not be likely person to
address in that way!'
'I donot think, Trotwood,' return Agnes, raise her soft eye to
mine, 'I would consider that. perhaps it would be well only to
consider whether it be right to do this; and, if it be, to do it.'
I have no long any doubt on the subject. with a lightened heart,
though with a profound sense of the weighty importance of my task,
I devote the whole afternoon to the composition of the draft of
this letter; for which great purpose, Agnes relinquish her desk
to I. but first I go downstairs to see Mr. Wickfield and Uriah
Heep.
I find Uriah in possession of a new, plaster-smell office,
build out in the garden; look extraordinarily mean, in the midst
of a quantity of book and paper. he receive I in his usual
fawning way, and pretend not to have hear of my arrival from Mr.
Micawber; a pretence I take the liberty of disbelieve. he
accompany I into Mr. Wickfield's room, which be the shadow of
its former self - have be divest of a variety of
convenience, for the accommodation of the new partner - and stand
before the fire, warm his back, and shave his chin with his
bony hand, while Mr. Wickfield and I exchange greeting.
'you stay with we, Trotwood, while you remain in Canterbury?' say
Mr. Wickfield, not without a glance at Uriah for his approval.
'be there room for I?' say I.
'I be sure, Master Copperfield - I should say Mister, but the other
come so natural,' say Uriah, -'I would turn out of your old room
with pleasure, if it would be agreeable.'
'no, no,' say Mr. Wickfield. 'why should you be inconvenience?
therebe another room. therebe another room.'
'oh, but you know,' return Uriah, with a grin, 'I should really
be delight!'
to cut the matter short, I say I would have the other room or none
at all; so it be settle that I should have the other room; and,
take my leave of the firm until dinner, I go upstairs again.
I have hop to have no other companion than Agnes. but Mrs. Heep
have ask permission to bring herself and her knitting near the
fire, in that room; on pretence of its have an aspect more
favourable for her rheumatic, as the wind then be, than the
drawing-room or dining-parlour. though I could almost have
consign she to the mercy of the wind on the topmost pinnacle of
the Cathedral, without remorse, I make a virtue of necessity, and
give she a friendly salutation.
'Ibe umbly thankful to you, sir,' say Mrs. Heep, in
acknowledgement of my inquiry concern her health, 'but Ibe
only pretty well. I havenot much to boast of. if I could see my
Uriah well settle in life, I couldnot expect much more I think.
how do you think my Ury look, sir?'
I think he look as villainous as ever, and I reply that I
see no change in he.
'oh, donot you think hebe change?' say Mrs. Heep. 'there I must
umbly beg leave to differ from you. donot you see a thinness in
he?'
'not more than usual,' I reply.
'donot you though!' say Mrs. Heep. 'but you donot take notice of
he with a mother's eye!'
his mother's eye be an evil eye to the rest of the world, I
think as it meet mine, howsoever affectionate to he; and I
believe she and her son be devoted to one another. it pass I,
and go on to Agnes.
'donot you see a wasting and a wear in he, Miss Wickfield?'
inquire Mrs. Heep.
'no,' say Agnes, quietly pursue the work on which she be
engage. 'you be too solicitous about he. he be very well.'
Mrs. Heep, with a prodigious sniff, resume her knitting.
she never leave off, or leave we for a moment. I have arrive early
in the day, and we have still three or four hour before dinner; but
she sit there, ply her knitting-needle as monotonously as an
hour-glass might have pour out its sand. she sit on one side of
the fire; I sit at the desk in front of it; a little beyond I, on
the other side, sit Agnes. Whensoever, slowly ponder over my
letter, I lift up my eye, and meet the thoughtful face of
Agnes, see it clear, and beam encouragement upon I, with its own
angelic expression, I be conscious presently of the evil eye
pass I, and go on to she, and come back to I again, and
drop furtively upon the knitting. what the knitting be, I
donot know, not be learn in that art; but it look like a
net; and as she work away with those chinese chopstick of
knitting-needle, she show in the firelight like an ill-look
enchantress, baulk as yet by the radiant goodness opposite, but
get ready for a cast of her net by and by.
at dinner she maintain her watch, with the same unwinking eye.
after dinner, her son take his turn; and when Mr. Wickfield,
himself, and I be leave alone together, leer at I, and writhe
until I could hardly bear it. in the drawing-room, there be the
mother knitting and watch again. all the time that Agnes sing
and play, the mother sit at the piano. once she ask for a
particular ballad, which she say her Ury (who be yawn in a
great chair) dot on; and at interval she look round at he,
and report to Agnes that he be in rapture with the music. but
she hardly ever speak - I question if she ever do - without make
some mention of he. it be evident to I that this be the duty
assign to she.
this last until bedtime. to have see the mother and son, like
two great bat hang over the whole house, and darken it with
their ugly form, make I so uncomfortable, that I would rather
have remain downstairs, knitting and all, than go to bed. I
hardly get any sleep. next day the knitting and watch begin
again, and last all day.
I have not an opportunity of speak to Agnes, for ten minute. I
could barely show she my letter. I propose to she to walk out
with I; but Mrs. Heep repeatedly complain that she be bad,
Agnes charitably remain within, to bear her company. towards the
twilight I go out by myself, muse on what I ought to do, and
whether I be justify in withholding from Agnes, any long, what
Uriah Heep have tell I in London; for that begin to trouble I
again, very much.
I have not walk out far enough to be quite clear of the town, upon
the Ramsgate road, where there be a good path, when I be hail,
through the dust, by somebody behind I. the shambling figure, and
the scanty great-coat, be not to be mistake. I stop, and
Uriah Heep come up.
'well?' say I.
'how fast you walk!' say he. 'my leg be pretty long, but youhave
give them quite a job.'
'where be you go?' say I.
'I be go with you, Master Copperfield, if youwill allow I the
pleasure of a walk with an old acquaintance.' say this, with a
jerk of his body, which might have be either propitiatory or
derisive, he fall into step beside I.
'Uriah!' say I, as civilly as I could, after a silence.
'Master Copperfield!' say Uriah.
'to tell you the truth (at which you will not be offend), I come
out to walk alone, because I have have so much company.'
he look at I sideways, and say with his hard grin, 'you mean
mother.'
'why yes, I do,' say I.
'ah! but you know webe so very umble,' he return. 'and have
such a knowledge of our own umbleness, we must really take care
that webe not push to the wall by they as benot umble. all
stratagem be fair in love, sir.'
raise his great hand until they touch his chin, he rub they
softly, and softly chuckle; look as like a malevolent baboon,
I think, as anything human could look.
'you see,' he say, still hug himself in that unpleasant way,
and shake his head at I, 'yoube quite a dangerous rival, Master
Copperfield. you always be, you know.'
'do you set a watch upon Miss Wickfield, and make her home no home,
because of I?' say I.
'oh! Master Copperfield! those be very arsh word,' he reply.
'put my meaning into any word you like,' say I. 'you know what
it be, Uriah, as well as I do.'
'oh no! you must put it into word,' he say. 'oh, really! I
couldnot myself.'
'do you suppose,' say I, constrain myself to be very temperate
and quiet with he, on account of Agnes, 'that I regard Miss
Wickfield otherwise than as a very dear sister?'
'well, Master Copperfield,' he reply, 'you perceive I be not
bind to answer that question. you may not, you know. but then,
you see, you may!'
anything to equal the low cunning of his visage, and of his
shadowless eye without the ghost of an eyelash, I never see.
'come then!' say I. 'for the sake of Miss Wickfield -'
'my Agnes!' he exclaim, with a sickly, angular contortion of
himself. 'would you be so good as call her Agnes, Master
Copperfield!'
'for the sake of Agnes Wickfield - Heaven bless she!'
'thank you for that blessing, Master Copperfield!'he interpose.
'I will tell you what I should, under any other circumstance, as
soon have think of tell to - Jack Ketch.'
'to who, sir?' say Uriah, stretch out his neck, and shade his
ear with his hand.
'to the hangman,' I return. 'the most unlikely person I could
think of,' - though his own face have suggest the allusion quite
as a natural sequence. 'I be engaged to another young lady. I
hope that content you.'
'upon your soul?' say Uriah.
I be about indignantly to give my assertion the confirmation he
require, when he catch hold of my hand, and give it a squeeze.
'oh, Master Copperfield!' he say. 'if you have only have the
condescension to return my confidence when I pour out the fulness
of my art, the night I put you so much out of the way by sleep
before your sitting-room fire, I never should have doubt you. as
it be, Ibe sure Iwill take off mother directly, and only too appy.
I know youwill excuse the precaution of affection, willnot you? what
a pity, Master Copperfield, that you donot condescend to return my
confidence! Ibe sure I give you every opportunity. but you never
have condescend to I, as much as I could have wish. I know
you have never like I, as I have like you!'
all this time he be squeeze my hand with his damp fishy finger,
while I make every effort I decently could to get it away. but I
be quite unsuccessful. he draw it under the sleeve of his
mulberry-colour great-coat, and I walk on, almost upon
compulsion, arm-in-arm with he.
'shall we turn?' say Uriah, by and by wheel I face about
towards the town, on which the early moon be now shin,
silver the distant window.
'before we leave the subject, you ought to understand,' say I,
break a pretty long silence, 'that I believe Agnes Wickfield to
be as far above you, and as far remove from all your aspiration,
as that moon herself!'
'peaceful! benot she!' say Uriah. 'very! now confess, Master
Copperfield, that you havenot like I quite as I have like you.
all along youhave think I too umble now, I shouldnot wonder?'
'I be not fond of profession of humility,' I return, 'or
profession of anything else.'
'there now!' say Uriah, look flabby and lead-colour in the
moonlight. 'donot I know it! but how little you think of the
rightful umbleness of a person in my station, Master Copperfield!
Father and I be both bring up at a foundation school for boy;
and mother, she be likewise bring up at a public, sort of
charitable, establishment. they teach we all a deal of umbleness
- not much else that I know of, from morning to night. we be to
be umble to this person, and umble to that; and to pull off our
cap here, and to make bow there; and always to know our place,
and abase ourselves before our better. and we have such a lot of
better! Father get the monitor-medal by be umble. so do I.
Father get make a sexton by be umble. he have the character,
among the gentlefolk, of be such a well-behave man, that they
be determined to bring he in. "be umble, Uriah," say father to
I, "and youwill get on. it be what be always be din into
you and I at school; itbe what go down well. be umble," say
father, "and youwill do!" and really it benot do bad!'
it be the first time it have ever occur to I, that this
detestable cannot of false humility might have originate out of the
Heep family. I have see the harvest, but have never think of the
seed.
'when I be quite a young boy,' say Uriah, 'I get to know what
umbleness do, and I take to it. I eat umble pie with an appetite.
I stop at the umble point of my learning, and say I, "hold
hard!" when you offer to teach I Latin, I know well. "People
like to be above you," say father, "keep yourself down." I be very
umble to the present moment, Master Copperfield, but Ihave get a
little power!'
and he say all this - I know, as I see his face in the moonlight
- that I might understand he be resolve to recompense himself by
use his power. I have never doubt his meanness, his craft and
malice; but I fully comprehend now, for the first time, what a
base, unrelenting, and revengeful spirit, must have be engender
by this early, and this long, suppression.
his account of himself be so far attend with an agreeable
result, that it lead to his withdraw his hand in order that he
might have another hug of himself under the chin. once apart from
he, I be determined to keep apart; and we walk back, side by
side, say very little more by the way. whether his spirit be
elevate by the communication I have make to he, or by his have
indulge in this retrospect, I donot know; but they be raise by
some influence. he talk more at dinner than be usual with he;
ask his mother (off duty, from the moment of our re-enter the
house) whether he be not grow too old for a bachelor; and once
look at Agnes so, that I would have give all I have, for leave to
knock he down.
when we three male be leave alone after dinner, he get into a
more adventurous state. he have take little or no wine; and I
presume it be the mere insolence of triumph that be upon he,
flush perhaps by the temptation my presence furnish to its
exhibition.
I have observe yesterday, that he try to entice Mr. Wickfield to
drink; and, interpret the look which Agnes have give I as she
go out, have limit myself to one glass, and then propose that
we should follow she. I would have do so again today; but Uriah
be too quick for I.
'we seldom see our present visitor, sir,' he say, address Mr.
Wickfield, sit, such a contrast to he, at the end of the
table, 'and I should propose to give he welcome in another glass
or two of wine, if you have no objection. Mr. Copperfield, your
elth and appiness!'
I be oblige to make a show of take the hand he stretch across
to I; and then, with very different emotion, I take the hand of
the broken gentleman, his partner.
'come, fellow-partner,' say Uriah, 'if I may take the liberty, -
now, suppose you give we something or another appropriate to
Copperfield!'
I pass over Mr. Wickfield's propose my aunt, his propose Mr.
Dick, his propose doctor' Commons, his propose Uriah, his
drink everything twice; his consciousness of his own weakness,
the ineffectual effort that he make against it; the struggle
between his shame in Uriah's deportment, and his desire to
conciliate he; the manifest exultation with which Uriah twist
and turn, and hold he up before I. it make I sick at heart to
see, and my hand recoil from write it.
'come, fellow-partner!' say Uriah, at last, 'Iwill give you another
one, and I umbly ask for bumper, see I intend to make it the
divinest of her sex.'
her father have his empty glass in his hand. I see he set it down,
look at the picture she be so like, put his hand to his forehead,
and shrink back in his elbow-chair.
'Ibe an umble individual to give you her elth,' proceed Uriah,
'but I admire - adore she.'
no physical pain that her father's grey head could have bear, I
think, could have be more terrible to I, than the mental
endurance I see compress now within both his hand.
'Agnes,' say Uriah, either not regard he, or not know what
the nature of his action be, 'Agnes Wickfield be, I be safe to
say, the divinest of her sex. may I speak out, among friend? to
be her father be a proud distinction, but to be her usband -'
spare I from ever again hear such a cry, as that with which her
father rise up from the table!
'whatbe the matter?' say Uriah, turn of a deadly colour. 'you
be not go mad, after all, Mr. Wickfield, I hope? if I say Ihave
an ambition to make your Agnes my Agnes, I have as good a right to
it as another man. I have a well right to it than any other
man!'
I have my arm round Mr. Wickfield, implore he by everything that
I could think of, oftenest of all by his love for Agnes, to calm
himself a little. he be mad for the moment; tear out his hair,
beat his head, try to force I from he, and to force himself
from I, not answer a word, not look at or see anyone;
blindly strive for he know not what, his face all star and
distort - a frightful spectacle.
I conjure he, incoherently, but in the most impassioned manner,
not to abandon himself to this wildness, but to hear I. I
besought he to think of Agnes, to connect I with Agnes, to
recollect how Agnes and I have grow up together, how I honour she
and love she, how she be his pride and joy. I try to bring she
idea before he in any form; I even reproach he with not have
firmness to spare she the knowledge of such a scene as this. I may
have effect something, or his wildness may have spend itself; but
by degree he struggle less, and begin to look at I - strangely
at first, then with recognition in his eye. at length he say, 'I
know, Trotwood! my darling child and you - I know! but look at
he!'
he point to Uriah, pale and glower in a corner, evidently very
much out in his calculation, and take by surprise.
'look at my torturer,' he reply. 'before he I have step by step
abandon name and reputation, peace and quiet, house and home.'
'I have keep your name and reputation for you, and your peace and
quiet, and your house and home too,' say Uriah, with a sulky,
hurry, defeat air of compromise. 'donot be foolish, Mr.
Wickfield. if I have go a little beyond what you be prepare
for, I can go back, I suppose? therebe no harm do.'
'I look for single motif in everyone,' say Mr. Wickfield, and
I be satisfied I have bind he to I by motif of interest. but
see what he be - oh, see what he be!'
'you have well stop he, Copperfield, if you can,' cry Uriah,
with his long forefinger point towards I. 'hewill say something
presently - mind you! - hewill be sorry to have say afterwards, and
youwill be sorry to have hear!'
'Iwill say anything!' cry Mr. Wickfield, with a desperate air.
'why should I not be in all the world's power if I be in your?'
'mind! I tell you!' say Uriah, continue to warn I. 'if you
donot stop his mouth, yoube not his friend! why shouldnot you be
in all the world's power, Mr. Wickfield? because you have get a
daughter. you and I know what we know, donot we? let sleep
dog lie - who want to rouse them? I donot. cannot you see I be as
umble as I can be? I tell you, if Ihave go too far, Ibe sorry.
what would you have, sir?'
'oh, Trotwood, trotwood!'exclaime Mr. Wickfield, wring his
hand. 'what I have come down to be, since I first see you in this
house! I be on my downward way then, but the dreary, dreary road
I have traverse since! weak indulgence have ruin I. Indulgence
in remembrance, and indulgence in forgetfulness. my natural grief
for my child's mother turn to disease; my natural love for my
child turn to disease. I have infect everything I touch. I
have bring misery on what I dearly love, I know -you know! I
think it possible that I could truly love one creature in the
world, and not love the rest; I think it possible that I could
truly mourn for one creature go out of the world, and not have
some part in the grief of all who mourn. thus the lesson of my
life have be pervert! I have prey on my own morbid coward
heart, and it have prey on I. Sordid in my grief, sordid in my
love, sordid in my miserable escape from the dark side of both,
oh see the ruin I be, and hate I, shun I!'
he drop into a chair, and weakly sob. the excitement into
which he have be rouse be leave he. Uriah come out of his
corner.
'I donot know all I have do, in my fatuity,' say Mr. Wickfield,
put out his hand, as if to deprecate my condemnation. 'he
know well,' mean Uriah Heep, 'for he have always be at my
elbow, whisper I. you see the millstone that he be about my
neck. you find he in my house, you find he in my business. you
hear he, but a little time ago. what need have I to say more!'
'you havenot need to say so much, nor half so much, nor anything at
all,' observe Uriah, half defiant, and half fawn. 'you
wouldnot have take it up so, if it havenot be for the wine.
youwill think well of it tomorrow, sir. if I have say too much,
or more than I mean, what of it? I havenot stand by it!'
the door open, and Agnes, glide in, without a vestige of colour
in her face, put her arm round his neck, and steadily say, 'Papa,
you be not well. come with I!'
he lay his head upon her shoulder, as if he be oppress with
heavy shame, and go out with she. her eye meet mine for but an
instant, yet I see how much she know of what have pass.
'I donot expect hewould cut up so rough, Master Copperfield,' say
Uriah. 'but itbe nothing. Iwill be friend with he tomorrow.
itbe for his good. Ibe umbly anxious for his good.'
I give he no answer, and go upstairs into the quiet room where
Agnes have so often sit beside I at my book. nobody come near I
until late at night. I take up a book, and try to read. I hear
the clock strike twelve, and be still read, without know
what I read, when Agnes touch I.
'you will be go early in the morning, Trotwood! let we say
good-bye, now!'
she have be weep, but her face then be so calm and beautiful!
'Heaven bless you!' she say, give I her hand.
'Dearest Agnes!' I return, 'I see you ask I not to speak of
tonight - but be there nothing to be do?'
'there be God to trust in!' she reply.
'can I do nothing- I, who come to you with my poor sorrow?'
'and make mine so much light,' she reply. 'Dear Trotwood, no!'
'Dear Agnes,' I say, 'it be presumptuous for I, who be so poor in
all in which you be so rich - goodness, resolution, all noble
quality - to doubt or direct you; but you know how much I love
you, and how much I owe you. you will never sacrifice yourself to
a mistaken sense of duty, Agnes?'
more agitated for a moment than I have ever see she, she take she
hand from I, and move a step back.
'say you have no such thought, dear Agnes! much more than sister!
think of the priceless gift of such a heart as your, of such a
love as your!'
oh! long, long afterwards, I see that face rise up before I, with
its momentary look, not wonder, not accuse, not regret.
oh, long, long afterwards, I see that look subside, as it do now,
into the lovely smile, with which she tell I she have no fear for
herself - I need have none for she - and part from I by the name
of Brother, and be go!
it be dark in the morning, when I get upon the coach at the inn
door. the day be just break when we be about to start, and
then, as I sit think of she, come struggle up the coach side,
through the mingled day and night, Uriah's head.
'copperfield!' say he, in a croak whisper, as he hang by the
iron on the roof, 'I think youwould be glad to hear before you go
off, that there be no square break between we. Ihave be into
his room already, and wehave make it all smooth. why, though Ibe
umble, Ibe useful to he, you know; and he understand his interest
when he benot in liquor! what an agreeable man he be, after all,
Master Copperfield!'
I oblige myself to say that I be glad he have make his apology.
'oh, to be sure!' say Uriah. 'when a person's umble, you know,
whatbe an apology? so easy! I say! I suppose,' with a jerk, 'you
have sometimes pluck a pear before it be ripe, Master
Copperfield?'
'I suppose I have,' I reply.
'I do that last night,' say Uriah; 'but itwill ripen yet! it only
want attend to. I can wait!'
profuse in his farewell, he get down again as the coachman get up.
for anything I know, he be eat something to keep the raw
morning air out; but he make motion with his mouth as if the pear
be ripe already, and he be smack his lip over it.
CHAPTER 40
the wanderer
we have a very serious conversation in Buckingham Street that night,
about the domestic occurrence I have detail in the last chapter.
my aunt be deeply interested in they, and walk up and down the
room with her arm fold, for more than two hour afterwards.
whenever she be particularly discompose, she always perform one
of these pedestrian feat; and the amount of her discomposure might
always be estimate by the duration of her walk. on this occasion
she be so much disturb in mind as to find it necessary to open
the bedroom door, and make a course for herself, comprise the
full extent of the bedroom from wall to wall; and while Mr. Dick
and I sit quietly by the fire, she keep pass in and out, along
this measured track, at an unchanging pace, with the regularity of
a clock-pendulum.
when my aunt and I be leave to ourselves by Mr. Dick's go out
to bed, I sit down to write my letter to the two old lady. by
that time she be tired of walk, and sit by the fire with her
dress tuck up as usual. but instead of sit in her usual
manner, hold her glass upon her knee, she suffer it to stand
neglect on the chimney-piece; and, rest her left elbow on her
right arm, and her chin on her left hand, look thoughtfully at
I. as often as I raise my eye from what I be about, I meet
her. 'I be in the loving of temper, my dear,' she would
assure I with a nod, 'but I be fidgeted and sorry!'
I have be too busy to observe, until after she be go to bed,
that she have leave her night-mixture, as she always call it,
untasted on the chimney-piece. she come to her door, with even
more than her usual affection of manner, when I knock to acquaint
she with this discovery; but only say, 'I have not the heart to
take it, Trot, tonight,' and shake her head, and go in again.
she read my letter to the two old lady, in the morning, and
approve of it. I post it, and have nothing to do then, but wait,
as patiently as I could, for the reply. I be still in this state
of expectation, and have be, for nearly a week; when I leave the
Doctor's one snowy night, to walk home.
it have be a bitter day, and a cut north-east wind have blow
for some time. the wind have go down with the light, and so the
snow have come on. it be a heavy, settle fall, I recollect, in
great flake; and it lie thick. the noise of wheel and tread of
people be as hush, as if the street have be strew that depth
with feather.
my short way home, - and I naturally take the short way on
such a night - be through St. Martin's Lane. now, the church
which give its name to the lane, stand in a less free situation at
that time; there be no open space before it, and the lane
wind down to the Strand. as I pass the step of the portico,
I encounter, at the corner, a woman's face. it look in mine,
pass across the narrow lane, and disappear. I know it. I have
see it somewhere. but I could not remember where. I have some
association with it, that strike upon my heart directly; but I be
think of anything else when it come upon I, and be confuse.
on the step of the church, there be the stoop figure of a man,
who have put down some burden on the smooth snow, to adjust it; my
see the face, and my see he, be simultaneous. I donot
think I have stop in my surprise; but, in any case, as I go on,
he rise, turn, and come down towards I. I stand face to face
with Mr. Peggotty!
then I remember the woman. it be Martha, to whom Emily have
give the money that night in the kitchen. Martha Endell - side by
side with whom, he would not have see his dear niece, Ham have tell
I, for all the treasure wreck in the sea.
we shake hand heartily. at first, neither of we could speak a
word.
'Mas'r Davy!' he say, grip I tight, 'it do my art good to see
you, sir. well meet, well meet!'
'well meet, my dear old friend!' say I.
'I have my thowts o' come to make inquiration for you, sir,
tonight,' he say, 'but know as your aunt be live along wi'
you - fur Ihave be down yonder - yarmouth way - I be afeerd it
be too late. I should have come early in the morning, sir, afore
go away.'
'again?' say I.
'yes, sir,' he reply, patiently shake his head, 'Ibe away
tomorrow.'
'where be you go now?' I ask.
'well!' he reply, shake the snow out of his long hair, 'I be
a-go to turn in somewheer.'
in those day there be a side-entrance to the stable-yard of the
Golden Cross, the inn so memorable to I in connexion with his
misfortune, nearly opposite to where we stand. I point out the
gateway, put my arm through his, and we go across. two or three
public-room open out of the stable-yard; and look into one of
they, and find it empty, and a good fire burning, I take he in
there.
when I see he in the light, I observe, not only that his hair be
long and ragged, but that his face be burn dark by the sun. he
be greyer, the line in his face and forehead be deep, and he
have every appearance of have toil and wander through all
variety of weather; but he look very strong, and like a man
uphold by steadfastness of purpose, whom nothing could tire out.
he shake the snow from his hat and clothe, and brush it away
from his face, while I be inwardly make these remark. as he
sit down opposite to I at a table, with his back to the door by
which we have enter, he put out his rough hand again, and grasp
mine warmly.
'Iwill tell you, Mas'r Davy,' he say, - 'wheer all Ihave be, and
what-all wehave heerd. Ihave be fur, and wehave heerd little; but
Iwill tell you!'
I ring the bell for something hot to drink. he would have nothing
strong than ale; and while it be be bring, and be warm
at the fire, he sit think. there be a fine, massive gravity in
his face, I do not venture to disturb.
'when she be a child,' he say, lift up his head soon after we
be leave alone, 'she use to talk to I a deal about the sea, and
about they coast where the sea get to be dark blue, and to lay
a-shin and a-shin in the sun. I thowt, odd time, as she
father be drownde make she think on it so much. I doen't know,
you see, but maybe she believe - or hop - he have drift out to
they part, where the flower be always a-blowing, and the country
bright.'
'it be likely to have be a childish fancy,' I reply.
'when she be - lost,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'I know'd in my mind, as
he would take she to they country. I know'd in my mind, as hewould
have tell her wonder of them, and how she be to be a lady theer,
and how he get she to listen to he fust, along o' sech like. when
we see his mother, I know'd quite well as I be right. I go
across-channel to France, and land theer, as if Ihave fall down
from the sky.'
I see the door move, and the snow drift in. I see it move a little
more, and a hand softly interpose to keep it open.
'I find out an English gen'leman as be in authority,' say Mr.
Peggotty, 'and tell he I be a-go to seek my niece. he get I
they paper as I want fur to carry I through - I doen't rightly
know how theybe call - and he would have give I money, but that
I be thankful to have no need on. I thank he kind, for all he
do, Ibe sure! "Ihave write afore you," he say to I, "and I
shall speak to many as will come that way, and many will know you,
fur distant from here, when yoube a-travel alone." I tell he,
well as I be able, what my gratitoode be, and go away through
France.'
'alone, and on foot?' say I.
'mostly a-foot,' he rejoin; 'sometimes in cart along with people
go to market; sometimes in empty coach. many mile a day
a-foot, and often with some poor soldier or another, travel to
see his friend. I couldnot talk to he,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'nor
he to I; but we be company for one another, too, along the dusty
road.'
I should have know that by his friendly tone.
'when I come to any town,' he pursue, 'I find the inn, and wait
about the yard till someone turn up (someone mostly do) as
know'd English. then I tell how that I be on my way to seek my
niece, and they tell I what manner of gentlefolk be in the
house, and I wait to see any as seem like she, go in or out.
when it warn't Em'ly, I go on agen. by little and little, when
I come to a new village or that, among the poor people, I find
they know'd about I. they would set I down at their cottage
door, and give I what-not fur to eat and drink, and show I where
to sleep; and many a woman, Mas'r Davy, as have have a daughter of
about Em'ly's age, Ihave find a-wait fur I, at our Saviour's
Cross outside the village, fur to do I sim'lar kindness. some
have have daughter as be dead. and God only know how good they
mother be to I!'
it be Martha at the door. I see she haggard, listen face
distinctly. my dread be lest he should turn his head, and see she
too.
'they would often put their child - particular their little
girl,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'upon my knee; and many a time you might
have see I sit at their door, when night be come in,
a'most as if theyhave be my darling's child. oh, my Darling!'
overpower by sudden grief, he sob aloud. I lay my trembling
hand upon the hand he put before his face. 'Thankee, sir,' he
say, 'doen't take no notice.'
in a very little while he take his hand away and put it on his
breast, and go on with his story.
'they often walk with I,' he say, 'in the morning, maybe a mile
or two upon my road; and when we part, and I say, "Ibe very
thankful to you! God bless you!" they always seem to understand,
and answer pleasant. at last I come to the sea. it warn't hard,
you may suppose, for a seafaring man like I to work his way over
to Italy. when I get theer, I wander on as I have do afore.
the people be just as good to I, and I should have go from town
to town, maybe the country through, but that I get news of she
be see among they swiss mountain yonder. one as know'd his
servant see them there, all three, and tell I how they travel,
and where they be. I make fur they mountain, Mas'r Davy, day and
night. ever so fur as I go, ever so fur the mountain seem to
shift away from I. but I come up with them, and I cross them.
when I get nigh the place as I have be tell of, I begin to think
within my own self, "what shall I do when I see she?"'
the listening face, insensible to the inclement night, still
droop at the door, and the hand beg I - pray I - not to
cast it forth.
'I never doubt she,' say Mr. Peggotty. 'no! not a bit! On'y
let she see my face - on'y let her beer my voice - on'y let my
stanning still afore her bring to her thought the home she have
flee away from, and the child she have be - and if she have grow
to be a royal lady, shewould have fall down at my foot! I know'd it
well! many a time in my sleep have I heerd her cry out, "Uncle!"
and see she fall like death afore I. many a time in my sleep have
I raise she up, and whisper to she, "Em'ly, my dear, I be come
fur to bring forgiveness, and to take you home!"'
he stop and shake his head, and go on with a sigh.
'he be nowt to I now. Em'ly be all. I buy a country dress
to put upon she; and I know'd that, once find, she would walk
beside I over they stony road, go where I would, and never,
never, leave I more. to put that dress upon she, and to cast off
what she wear - to take she on my arm again, and wander towards
home - to stop sometimes upon the road, and heal her bruise foot
and her worse-bruise heart - be all that I thowt of now. I
doen't believe I should have do so much as look at he. but,
Mas'r Davy, it warn't to be - not yet! I be too late, and they
be go. Wheer, I couldnot learn. some say beer, some say
theer. I travel beer, and I travel theer, but I find no
Em'ly, and I travel home.'
'how long ago?' I ask.
'a matter o' fower day,' say Mr. Peggotty. 'I sight the old
boat arter dark, and the light a-shin in the winder. when I
come nigh and look in through the glass, I see the faithful
creetur Missis Gummidge sittin' by the fire, as we have fix upon,
alone. I call out, "doen't be afeerd! itbe Dan'l!" and I go
in. I never could have thowt the old boat would have be so
strange!'
from some pocket in his breast, he take out, with a very careful
hand a small paper bundle contain two or three letter or little
packet, which he lay upon the table.
'this fust one come,' he say, select it from the rest, 'afore
I have be go a week. a fifty pound Bank note, in a sheet of
paper, direct to I, and put underneath the door in the night.
she try to hide her writing, but she couldnot hide it from I!'
he fold up the note again, with great patience and care, in
exactly the same form, and lay it on one side.
'this come to Missis Gummidge,' he say, open another, 'two or
three month ago.'after look at it for some moment, he give it
to I, and add in a low voice, 'be so good as read it, sir.'
I read as follow:
'oh what will you feel when you see this writing, and know it come
from my wicked hand! but try, try - not for my sake, but for
uncle's goodness, try to let your heart soften to I, only for a
little little time! try, pray do, to relent towards a miserable
girl, and write down on a bit of paper whether he be well, and what
he say about I before you leave off ever name I among
yourself - and whether, of a night, when it be my old time of
come home, you ever see he look as if he think of one he use
to love so dear. oh, my heart be break when I think about it!
I be kneel down to you, beg and pray you not to be as
hard with I as I deserve - as I well, well, know I deserve - but
to be so gentle and so good, as to write down something of he, and
to send it to I. you need not call I little, you need not call
I by the name I have disgrace; but oh, listen to my agony, and
have mercy on I so far as to write I some word of uncle, never,
never to be see in this world by my eye again!
'dear, if your heart be hard towards I - justly hard, I know -
but, listen, if it be hard, dear, ask he I have wrong the most
- he whose wife I be to have be - before you quite decide
against my poor poor prayer! if he should be so compassionate as
to say that you might write something for I to read - I think he
would, oh, I think he would, if you would only ask he, for he
always be so brave and so forgiving - tell he then (but not
else), that when I hear the wind blow at night, I feel as if it
be pass angrily from see he and uncle, and be go up to
God against I. tell he that if I be to die tomorrow (and oh, if
I be fit, I would be so glad to die!) I would bless he and uncle
with my last word, and pray for his happy home with my last
breath!'
some money be enclose in this letter also. five pound. it be
untouched like the previous sum, and he refolde it in the same
way. detailed instruction be add relative to the address of
a reply, which, although they betray the intervention of several
hand, and make it difficult to arrive at any very probable
conclusion in reference to her place of concealment, make it at
least not unlikely that she have write from that spot where she
be state to have be see.
'what answer be send?' I inquire of Mr. Peggotty.
'Missis Gummidge,' he return, 'not be a good scholar, sir, Ham
kindly draw it out, and she make a copy on it. they tell she I
be go to seek she, and what my parting word be.'
'be that another letter in your hand?' say I.
'itbe money, sir,' say Mr. Peggotty, unfold it a little way.
'ten pound, you see. and write inside, "from a true friend," like
the fust. but the fust be put underneath the door, and this come
by the post, day afore yesterday. Ibe a-go to seek she at the
post-mark.'
he show it to I. it be a town on the Upper Rhine. he have
find out, at Yarmouth, some foreign dealer who know that country,
and they have draw he a rude map on paper, which he could very
well understand. he lay it between we on the table; and, with his
chin rest on one hand, track his course upon it with the
other.
I ask he how Ham be? he shake his head.
'he work,' he say, 'as bold as a man can. his name's as good, in
all that part, as any man's be, anywhere in the wureld. anyone's
hand be ready to help he, you understand, and his be ready to help
they. hebe never be heerd fur to complain. but my sister's
belief be ('twixt ourselves) as it have cut he deep.'
'poor fellow, I can believe it!'
'he benot no care, Mas'r Davy,' say Mr. Peggotty in a solemn
whisper - 'kind no care no-how for his life. when a man's want
for rough sarvice in rough weather, hebe theer. when therebe hard
duty to be do with danger in it, he step for'ard afore all his
mate. and yet hebe as gentle as any child. there benot a child
in Yarmouth that doen't know he.'
he gather up the letter thoughtfully, smooth they with his
hand; put they into their little bundle; and place it tenderly in
his breast again. the face be go from the door. I still see
the snow drift in; but nothing else be there.
'well!' he say, look to his bag, 'have see you tonight,
Mas'r Davy (and that doos I good!), I shall away betime tomorrow
morning. you have see what Ihave get heer'; put his hand on
where the little packet lay; 'all that trouble I be, to think
that any harm might come to I, afore that money be give back. if
I be to die, and it be lose, or stole, or elseway make away
with, and it be never know'd by he but what Ihave take it, I
believe the t'other wureld wouldnot hold I! I believe I must come
back!'
he rise, and I rise too; we grasp each other by the hand again,
before go out.
'Iwould go ten thousand mile,' he say, 'Iwould go till I drop dead,
to lay that money down afore he. if I do that, and find my Em'ly,
Ibe content. if I doen't find she, maybe shewill come to hear,
sometime, as her love uncle only end his search for she when he
end his life; and if I know she, even that will turn her home at
last!'
as he go out into the rigorous night, I see the lonely figure
flit away before we. I turn he hastily on some pretence, and
hold he in conversation until it be go.
he speak of a traveller's house on the Dover Road, where he know he
could find a clean, plain lodging for the night. I go with he
over Westminster Bridge, and part from he on the Surrey shore.
everything seem, to my imagination, to be hush in reverence for
he, as he resume his solitary journey through the snow.
I return to the inn yard, and, impress by my remembrance of the
face, look awfully around for it. it be not there. the snow
have cover our late footprint; my new track be the only one to
be see; and even that begin to die away (it snow so fast) as I
look back over my shoulder.
CHAPTER 41
dora's aunt
at last, an answer come from the two old lady. they present
their compliment to Mr. Copperfield, and inform he that they
have give his letter their good consideration, 'with a view to the
happiness of both party' - which I think rather an alarming
expression, not only because of the use they have make of it in
relation to the family difference before-mention, but because I
have (and have all my life) observe that conventional phrase be
a sort of firework, easily let off, and liable to take a great
variety of shape and colour not at all suggest by their
original form. the Misses Spenlow add that they beg to
forbear express, 'through the medium of correspondence', an
opinion on the subject of Mr. Copperfield's communication; but that
if Mr. Copperfield would do they the favour to call, upon a certain
day (accompany, if he think proper, by a confidential friend),
they would be happy to hold some conversation on the subject.
to this favour, Mr. Copperfield immediately reply, with his
respectful compliment, that he would have the honour of wait on
the Misses Spenlow, at the time appoint; accompany, in
accordance with their kind permission, by his friend Mr. Thomas
traddle of the Inner Temple. have dispatch which missive, Mr.
Copperfield fall into a condition of strong nervous agitation; and
so remain until the day arrive.
it be a great augmentation of my uneasiness to be bereave, at
this eventful crisis, of the inestimable service of Miss Mills.
but Mr. Mills, who be always do something or other to annoy I
- or I feel as if he be, which be the same thing - have bring
his conduct to a climax, by take it into his head that he would
go to India. why should he go to India, except to harass I? to
be sure he have nothing to do with any other part of the world, and
have a good deal to do with that part; be entirely in the India
trade, whatever that be (I have float dream myself concern
golden shawl and elephant' tooth); have be at Calcutta in his
youth; and design now to go out there again, in the capacity of
resident partner. but this be nothing to I. however, it be so
much to he that for India he be bind, and Julia with he; and
Julia go into the country to take leave of her relation; and the
house be put into a perfect suit of bill, announce that it be
to be let or sell, and that the furniture (Mangle and all) be to
be take at a valuation. so, here be another earthquake of which
I become the sport, before I have recover from the shock of its
predecessor!
I be in several mind how to dress myself on the important day;
be divide between my desire to appear to advantage, and my
apprehension of put on anything that might impair my severely
practical character in the eye of the Misses Spenlow. I
endeavour to hit a happy medium between these two extreme; my
aunt approve the result; and Mr. Dick throw one of his shoe after
traddle and I, for luck, as we go downstairs.
excellent fellow as I know traddle to be, and warmly attach to
he as I be, I could not help wish, on that delicate occasion,
that he have never contract the habit of brush his hair so very
upright. it give he a surprised look - not to say a hearth-broomy
kind of expression - which, my apprehension whisper, might be
fatal to we.
I take the liberty of mention it to traddle, as we be walk
to Putney; and say that if he would smooth it down a little -
'my dear copperfield,' say traddle, lift off his hat, and
rub his hair all kind of way, 'nothing would give I great
pleasure. but it willnot.'
'willnot be smooth down?' say I.
'no,' say traddle. 'nothing will induce it. if I be to carry
a half-hundred-weight upon it, all the way to Putney, it would be
up again the moment the weight be take off. you have no idea
what obstinate hair mine be, Copperfield. I be quite a fretful
porcupine.'
I be a little disappointed, I must confess, but thoroughly charm
by his good-nature too. I tell he how I esteem his good-nature;
and say that his hair must have take all the obstinacy out of his
character, for he have none.
'oh!' return traddle, laugh. 'I assure you, itbe quite an
old story, my unfortunate hair. my uncle's wife couldnot bear it.
she say it exasperate she. it stand very much in my way, too,
when I first fall in love with Sophy. very much!'
'do she object to it?'
'she donot,' rejoin traddle; 'but her eld sister - the one
thatbe the Beauty - quite make game of it, I understand. in fact,
all the sister laugh at it.'
'agreeable!' say I.
'yes,' return Traddles with perfect innocence, 'itbe a joke for
we. they pretend that Sophy have a lock of it in her desk, and be
oblige to shut it in a clasp book, to keep it down. we laugh
about it.'
'by the by, my dear traddle,' say I, 'your experience may suggest
something to I. when you become engaged to the young lady whom
you have just mention, do you make a regular proposal to her
family? be there anything like - what we be go through today,
for instance?' I add, nervously.
'why,' reply traddle, on whose attentive face a thoughtful shade
have steal, 'it be rather a painful transaction, Copperfield, in
my case. you see, Sophy be of so much use in the family, none
of they could endure the thought of she ever be marry.
indeed, they have quite settle among themselves that she never be
to be marry, and they call she the old maid. accordingly, when
I mention it, with the great precaution, to Mrs. Crewler -'
'the mama?' say I.
'the mama,' say Traddles - 'Reverend Horace Crewler - when I
mention it with every possible precaution to Mrs. Crewler, the
effect upon she be such that she give a scream and become
insensible. I couldnot approach the subject again, for month.'
'you do at last?' say I.
'well, the Reverend Horace do,' say traddle. 'he be an
excellent man, most exemplary in every way; and he point out to
she that she ought, as a Christian, to reconcile herself to the
sacrifice (especially as it be so uncertain), and to bear no
uncharitable feeling towards I. as to myself, Copperfield, I give
you my word, I feel a perfect bird of prey towards the family.'
'the sister take your part, I hope, traddle?'
'why, I cannot say they do,' he return. 'when we have
comparatively reconcile Mrs. Crewler to it, we have to break it to
Sarah. you recollect my mentioning Sarah, as the one that have
something the matter with her spine?'
'perfectly!'
'she clench both her hand,' say traddle, look at I in
dismay; 'shut her eye; turn lead-colour; become perfectly stiff;
and take nothing for two day but toast-and-water, administer
with a tea-spoon.'
'what a very unpleasant girl, traddle!' I remark.
'oh, I beg your pardon, Copperfield!' say traddle. 'she be a
very charming girl, but she have a great deal of feeling. in fact,
they all have. Sophy tell I afterwards, that the self-reproach
she undergo while she be in attendance upon Sarah, no word
could describe. I know it must have be severe, by my own
feeling, Copperfield; which be like a criminal's. after Sarah
be restore, we still have to break it to the other eight; and it
produce various effect upon they of a most pathetic nature. the
two little one, whom Sophy educate, have only just leave off
de-test I.'
'at any rate, they be all reconcile to it now, I hope?' say I.
'ye-yes, I should say they be, on the whole, resign to it,'
say traddle, doubtfully. 'the fact be, we avoid mention the
subject; and my unsettled prospect and indifferent circumstance
be a great consolation to they. there will be a deplorable scene,
whenever we be married. it will be much more like a funeral, than
a wedding. and theywill all hate I for take she away!'
his honest face, as he look at I with a serio-comic shake of his
head, impress I more in the remembrance than it do in the
reality, for I be by this time in a state of such excessive
trepidation and wandering of mind, as to be quite unable to fix my
attention on anything. on our approach the house where the
Misses Spenlow live, I be at such a discount in respect of my
personal look and presence of mind, that traddle propose a
gentle stimulant in the form of a glass of ale. this have be
administer at a neighbour public-house, he conduct I, with
tottering step, to the Misses Spenlow's door.
I have a vague sensation of be, as it be, on view, when the
maid open it; and of wavering, somehow, across a hall with a
weather-glass in it, into a quiet little drawing-room on the
ground-floor, command a neat garden. also of sit down here,
on a sofa, and see Traddles's hair start up, now his hat be
remove, like one of those obtrusive little figure make of
spring, that fly out of fictitious snuff-box when the lid be
take off. also of hear an old-fashioned clock tick away on
the chimney-piece, and try to make it keep time to the jerking
of my heart, - which it wouldnot. also of look round the room
for any sign of Dora, and see none. also of think that Jip
once bark in the distance, and be instantly choke by somebody.
ultimately I find myself back traddle into the fireplace, and
bow in great confusion to two dry little elderly lady, dress
in black, and each look wonderfully like a preparation in chip
or tan of the late Mr. Spenlow.
'pray,' say one of the two little lady, 'be seat.'
when I have do tumble over traddle, and have sit upon something
which be not a cat - my first seat be - I so far recover my
sight, as to perceive that Mr. Spenlow have evidently be the
young of the family; that there be a disparity of six or eight
year between the two sister; and that the young appear to be
the manager of the conference, inasmuch as she have my letter in her
hand - so familiar as it look to I, and yet so odd! - and be
refer to it through an eye-glass. they be dress alike, but
this sister wear her dress with a more youthful air than the other;
and perhaps have a trifle more frill, or tucker, or brooch, or
bracelet, or some little thing of that kind, which make she look
more lively. they be both upright in their carriage, formal,
precise, compose, and quiet. the sister who have not my letter,
have her arm cross on her breast, and rest on each other, like
an Idol.
'Mr. Copperfield, I believe,' say the sister who have get my
letter, address herself to Traddles.
this be a frightful beginning. traddle have to indicate that I
be Mr. Copperfield, and I have to lay claim to myself, and they have
to divest themselves of a preconceived opinion that traddle be
Mr. Copperfield, and altogether we be in a nice condition. to
improve it, we all distinctly hear Jip give two short bark, and
receive another choke.
'Mr. Copperfield!' say the sister with the letter.
I do something - bow, I suppose - and be all attention, when
the other sister strike in.
'my sister Lavinia,' say she 'be conversant with matter of
this nature, will state what we consider most calculate to promote
the happiness of both party.'
I discover afterwards that Miss Lavinia be an authority in
affair of the heart, by reason of there have anciently exist
a certain Mr. Pidger, who play short whist, and be suppose to
have be enamour of she. my private opinion be, that this be
entirely a gratuitous assumption, and that Pidger be altogether
innocent of any such sentiment - to which he have never give any
sort of expression that I could ever hear of. both Miss Lavinia
and Miss Clarissa have a superstition, however, that he would have
declare his passion, if he have not be cut short in his youth (at
about sixty) by over-drink his constitution, and over-do an
attempt to set it right again by swill Bath water. they have a
lurking suspicion even, that he die of secret love; though I must
say there be a picture of he in the house with a damask nose,
which concealment do not appear to have ever prey upon.
'we will not,' say Miss Lavinia, 'enter on the past history of
this matter. our poor brother Francis's death have cancel that.'
'we have not,' say Miss Clarissa, 'be in the habit of frequent
association with our brother Francis; but there be no decided
division or disunion between we. Francis take his road; we take
our. we consider it conducive to the happiness of all party
that it should be so. and it be so.'
each of the sister lean a little forward to speak, shake she
head after speak, and become upright again when silent. Miss
Clarissa never move her arm. she sometimes play tune upon
they with her finger - minuet and march I should think - but
never move they.
'our niece's position, or suppose position, be much change by our
brother Francis's death,' say Miss Lavinia; 'and therefore we
consider our brother's opinion as regard her position as be
change too. we have no reason to doubt, Mr. Copperfield, that you
be a young gentleman possess of good quality and honourable
character; or that you have an affection - or be fully persuade
that you have an affection - for our niece.'
I reply, as I usually do whenever I have a chance, that nobody
have ever love anybody else as I love Dora. traddle come to my
assistance with a confirmatory murmur.
Miss Lavinia be go on to make some rejoinder, when Miss
Clarissa, who appear to be incessantly beset by a desire to refer
to her brother Francis, strike in again:
'if Dora's mama,' she say, 'when she marry our brother Francis,
have at once say that there be not room for the family at the
dinner-table, it would have be well for the happiness of all
party.'
'Sister Clarissa,' say Miss Lavinia. 'perhaps we neednot mind
that now.'
'Sister Lavinia,' say Miss Clarissa, 'it belong to the subject.
with your branch of the subject, on which alone you be competent
to speak, I should not think of interfere. on this branch of the
subject I have a voice and an opinion. it would have be well
for the happiness of all party, if Dora's mama, when she marry
our brother Francis, have mention plainly what her intention
be. we should then have know what we have to expect. we should
have say "pray do not invite we, at any time"; and all possibility
of misunderstanding would have be avoid.'
when Miss Clarissa have shake her head, Miss Lavinia resume: again
refer to my letter through her eye-glass. they both have little
bright round twinkle eye, by the way, which be like bird'
eye. they be not unlike bird, altogether; have a sharp,
brisk, sudden manner, and a little short, spruce way of adjust
themselves, like canary.
Miss Lavinia, as I have say, resume:
'you ask permission of my sister Clarissa and myself, Mr.
Copperfield, to visit here, as the accept suitor of our niece.'
'if our brother Francis,' say Miss Clarissa, break out again,
if I may call anything so calm a break out, 'wish to surround
himself with an atmosphere of doctor' Commons, and of doctor'
Commons only, what right or desire have we to object? none, I be
sure. we have ever be far from wish to obtrude ourselves on
anyone. but why not say so? let our brother Francis and his wife
have their society. let my sister Lavinia and myself have our
society. we can find it for ourselves, I hope.'
as this appear to be address to Traddles and I, both traddle
and I make some sort of reply. traddle be inaudible. I think I
observe, myself, that it be highly creditable to all concern.
I donot in the least know what I mean.
'Sister Lavinia,' say Miss Clarissa, have now relieve her mind,
'you can go on, my dear.'
Miss Lavinia proceed:
'Mr. Copperfield, my sister Clarissa and I have be very careful
indeed in consider this letter; and we have not consider it
without finally show it to our niece, and discuss it with our
niece. we have no doubt that you think you like she very much.'
'think, ma'am,' I rapturously begin, 'oh! -'
but Miss Clarissa give I a look (just like a sharp canary), as
request that I would not interrupt the oracle, I beg pardon.
'affection,' say Miss Lavinia, glance at her sister for
corroboration, which she give in the form of a little nod to every
clause, 'mature affection, homage, devotion, do not easily
express itself. its voice be low. it be modest and retire, it
lie in ambush, wait and wait. such be the mature fruit.
sometimes a life glide away, and find it still ripen in the
shade.'
of course I do not understand then that this be an allusion to
her suppose experience of the stricken Pidger; but I see, from the
gravity with which Miss Clarissa nod her head, that great weight
be attach to these word.
'the light - for I call they, in comparison with such sentiment,
the light - inclination of very young people,' pursue Miss
Lavinia, 'be dust, compare to rock. it be owe to the
difficulty of know whether they be likely to endure or have any
real foundation, that my sister Clarissa and myself have be very
undecided how to act, Mr. Copperfield, and Mr. -'
'traddle,' say my friend, find himself look at.
'I beg pardon. of the Inner Temple, I believe?' say Miss
Clarissa, again glance at my letter.
traddle say 'exactly so,' and become pretty red in the face.
now, although I have not receive any express encouragement as yet,
I fancy that I see in the two little sister, and particularly in
Miss Lavinia, an intensified enjoyment of this new and fruitful
subject of domestic interest, a settle down to make the most of
it, a disposition to pet it, in which there be a good bright ray
of hope. I think I perceive that Miss Lavinia would have
uncommon satisfaction in superintend two young lover, like Dora
and I; and that Miss Clarissa would have hardly less satisfaction
in see she superintend we, and in chime in with her own
particular department of the subject whenever that impulse be
strong upon she. this give I courage to protest most vehemently
that I love Dora well than I could tell, or anyone believe; that
all my friend know how I love she; that my aunt, Agnes, traddle,
everyone who know I, know how I love she, and how earnest my love
have make I. for the truth of this, I appeal to traddle. and
traddle, fire up as if he be plunge into a parliamentary
debate, really do come out nobly: confirm I in good round
term, and in a plain sensible practical manner, that evidently
make a favourable impression.
'I speak, if I may presume to say so, as one who have some little
experience of such thing,' say traddle, 'be myself engage to
a young lady - one of ten, down in Devonshire - and see no
probability, at present, of our engagement come to a
termination.'
'you may be able to confirm what I have say, Mr. Traddles,'
observe Miss Lavinia, evidently take a new interest in he, 'of
the affection that be modest and retiring; that wait and wait?'
'entirely, ma'am,' say Traddles.
Miss Clarissa look at Miss Lavinia, and shake her head gravely.
Miss Lavinia look consciously at Miss Clarissa, and heave a
little sigh.
'Sister Lavinia,' say Miss Clarissa, 'take my smell-bottle.'
Miss Lavinia revive herself with a few whiff of aromatic vinegar
- Traddles and I look on with great solicitude the while; and
then go on to say, rather faintly:
'my sister and myself have be in great doubt, Mr. Traddles, what
course we ought to take in reference to the liking, or imaginary
liking, of such very young people as your friend Mr. Copperfield
and our niece.'
'our brother Francis's child,' remark Miss Clarissa. 'if our
brother Francis's wife have find it convenient in her lifetime
(though she have an unquestionable right to act as she think well)
to invite the family to her dinner-table, we might have know our
brother Francis's child well at the present moment. Sister
Lavinia, proceed.'
Miss Lavinia turn my letter, so as to bring the superscription
towards herself, and refer through her eye-glass to some
orderly-look note she have make on that part of it.
'it seem to we,' say she, 'prudent, Mr. Traddles, to bring these
feeling to the test of our own observation. at present we know
nothing of they, and be not in a situation to judge how much
reality there may be in they. therefore we be incline so far to
accede to Mr. Copperfield's proposal, as to admit his visit here.'
'I shall never, dear lady,' I exclaim, relieve of an immense
load of apprehension, 'forget your kindness!'
'but,' pursue Miss Lavinia, - 'but, we would prefer to regard
those visit, Mr. Traddles, as make, at present, to we. we must
guard ourselves from recognize any positive engagement between
Mr. Copperfield and our niece, until we have have an opportunity -'
'until you have have an opportunity, sister Lavinia,' say Miss
Clarissa.
'be it so,' assent Miss Lavinia, with a sigh - 'until I have have
an opportunity of observe they.'
'copperfield,' say traddle, turn to I, 'you feel, I be sure,
that nothing could be more reasonable or considerate.'
'nothing!' cry I. 'I be deeply sensible of it.'
'in this position of affair,' say Miss Lavinia, again refer
to her note, 'and admit his visit on this understanding only,
we must require from Mr. Copperfield a distinct assurance, on his
word of honour, that no communication of any kind shall take place
between he and our niece without our knowledge. that no project
whatever shall be entertain with regard to our niece, without
be first submit to we -'
'to you, sister Lavinia,' Miss Clarissa interpose.
'be it so, Clarissa!' assent Miss Lavinia resignedly - 'to I -
and receive our concurrence. we must make this a most express
and serious stipulation, not to be break on any account. we
wish Mr. Copperfield to be accompany by some confidential
friend today,' with an inclination of her head towards traddle,
who bow, 'in order that there might be no doubt or misconception
on this subject. if Mr. Copperfield, or if you, Mr. Traddles, feel
the least scruple, in give this promise, I beg you to take time
to consider it.'
I exclaim, in a state of high ecstatic fervour, that not a
moment's consideration could be necessary. I bind myself by the
require promise, in a most impassioned manner; call upon
traddle to witness it; and denounce myself as the most atrocious
of character if I ever swerve from it in the least degree.
'stay!' say Miss Lavinia, hold up her hand; 'we resolve,
before we have the pleasure of receive you two gentleman, to leave
you alone for a quarter of an hour, to consider this point. you
will allow we to retire.'
it be in vain for I to say that no consideration be necessary.
they persist in withdraw for the specify time. accordingly,
these little bird hop out with great dignity; leave I to
receive the congratulation of Traddles, and to feel as if I be
translate to region of exquisite happiness. exactly at the
expiration of the quarter of an hour, they reappear with no less
dignity than they have disappear. they have go rustle away as
if their little dress be make of autumn-leaf: and they come
rustle back, in like manner.
I then bind myself once more to the prescribed condition.
'Sister Clarissa,' say Miss Lavinia, 'the rest be with you.'
Miss Clarissa, unfold her arm for the first time, take the
note and glance at they.
'we shall be happy,' say Miss Clarissa, 'to see Mr. Copperfield to
dinner, every Sunday, if it should suit his convenience. our hour
be three.'
I bow.
'in the course of the week,' say Miss Clarissa, 'we shall be happy
to see Mr. Copperfield to tea. our hour be half-past six.'
I bow again.
'twice in the week,' say Miss Clarissa, 'but, as a rule, not
oftener.'
I bow again.
'Miss Trotwood,' say Miss Clarissa, 'mention in Mr.
Copperfield's letter, will perhaps call upon we. when visit be
well for the happiness of all party, we be glad to receive
visit, and return they. when it be well for the happiness of
all party that no visiting should take place, (as in the case of
our brother Francis, and his establishment) that be quite
different.'
I intimate that my aunt would be proud and delighted to make their
acquaintance; though I must say I be not quite sure of their
get on very satisfactorily together. the condition be now
closed, I express my acknowledgement in the warm manner; and,
take the hand, first of Miss Clarissa, and then of Miss Lavinia,
press it, in each case, to my lip.
Miss Lavinia then arise, and beg Mr. Traddles to excuse we for
a minute, request I to follow she. I obey, all in a tremble,
and be conduct into another room. there I find my bless
darling stop her ear behind the door, with her dear little
face against the wall; and Jip in the plate-warmer with his head
tie up in a towel.
oh! how beautiful she be in her black frock, and how she sob
and cry at first, and wouldnot come out from behind the door!
how fond we be of one another, when she do come out at last; and
what a state of bliss I be in, when we take Jip out of the
plate-warmer, and restore he to the light, sneeze very much,
and be all three reunite!
'my dear Dora! now, indeed, my own for ever!'
'oh, don't!' plead Dora. 'please!'
'be you not my own for ever, Dora?'
'oh yes, of course I be!' cry Dora, 'but I be so frightened!'
'Frightened, my own?'
'oh yes! I donot like he,' say Dora. 'why donot he go?'
'who, my life?'
'your friend,' say Dora. 'it benot any business of his. what a
stupid he must be!'
'my love!' (there never be anything so coax as her childish
way.) 'he be the good creature!'
'oh, but we donot want any good creature!' pout Dora.
'my dear,' I argue, 'you will soon know he well, and like he of
all thing. and here be my aunt come soon; and youwill like she
of all thing too, when you know she.'
'no, please donot bring she!' say Dora, give I a horrified
little kiss, and fold her hand. 'donot. I know shebe a
naughty, mischief-make old thing! donot let she come here,
Doady!' which be a corruption of David.
Remonstrance be of no use, then; so I laugh, and admire, and
be very much in love and very happy; and she show I Jip's new
trick of stand on his hind leg in a corner - which he do for
about the space of a flash of lightning, and then fall down - and
I donot know how long I should have stay there, oblivious of
traddle, if Miss Lavinia have not come in to take I away. Miss
Lavinia be very fond of Dora (she tell I Dora be exactly like
what she have be herself at her age - she must have alter a good
deal), and she treat Dora just as if she have be a toy. I
want to persuade Dora to come and see traddle, but on my
propose it she run off to her own room and lock herself in; so
I go to Traddles without she, and walk away with he on air.
'nothing could be more satisfactory,' say traddle; 'and they be
very agreeable old lady, I be sure. I shouldnot be at all
surprised if you be to be marry year before I, Copperfield.'
'do your Sophy play on any instrument, traddle?' I inquire, in
the pride of my heart.
'she know enough of the piano to teach it to her little sister,'
say traddle.
'do she sing at all?' I ask.
'why, she sing ballad, sometimes, to freshen up the other a
little when theybe out of spirit,' say traddle. 'nothing
scientific.'
'she donot sing to the guitar?' say I.
'oh dear no!' say traddle.
'paint at all?'
'not at all,' say Traddles.
I promise Traddles that he should hear Dora sing, and see some of
her flower-painting. he say he should like it very much, and we
go home arm in arm in great good humour and delight. I
encourage he to talk about Sophy, on the way; which he do with
a love reliance on she that I very much admire. I compare she
in my mind with Dora, with considerable inward satisfaction; but I
candidly admit to myself that she seem to be an excellent kind
of girl for traddle, too.
of course my aunt be immediately make acquainted with the
successful issue of the conference, and with all that have be say
and do in the course of it. she be happy to see I so happy,
and promise to call on Dora's aunt without loss of time. but she
take such a long walk up and down our room that night, while I be
write to Agnes, that I begin to think she mean to walk till
morning.
my letter to Agnes be a fervent and grateful one, narrate all
the good effect that have result from my follow her advice.
she write, by return of post, to I. her letter be hopeful,
earnest, and cheerful. she be always cheerful from that time.
I have my hand more full than ever, now. my daily journey to
Highgate consider, Putney be a long way off; and I naturally
want to go there as often as I could. the propose tea-drinking
be quite impracticable, I compound with Miss Lavinia for
permission to visit every Saturday afternoon, without detriment to
my privileged sunday. so, the close of every week be a delicious
time for I; and I get through the rest of the week by look
forward to it.
I be wonderfully relieve to find that my aunt and Dora's aunt
rub on, all thing consider, much more smoothly than I could
have expect. my aunt make her promise visit within a few day
of the conference; and within a few more day, Dora's aunt call
upon she, in due state and form. similar but more friendly
exchange take place afterwards, usually at interval of three or
four week. I know that my aunt distress Dora's aunt very much,
by utterly set at naught the dignity of fly-conveyance, and
walk out to Putney at extraordinary time, as shortly after
breakfast or just before tea; likewise by wear her bonnet in any
manner that happen to be comfortable to her head, without at all
deferring to the prejudice of civilization on that subject. but
Dora's aunt soon agree to regard my aunt as an eccentric and
somewhat masculine lady, with a strong understanding; and although
my aunt occasionally ruffle the feather of Dora's aunt, by
express heretical opinion on various point of ceremony, she
love I too well not to sacrifice some of her little peculiarity
to the general harmony.
the only member of our small society who positively refuse to
adapt himself to circumstance, be Jip. he never see my aunt
without immediately display every tooth in his head, retire
under a chair, and growl incessantly: with now and then a
doleful howl, as if she really be too much for his feeling. all
kind of treatment be try with he, coax, scold,
slapping, bring he to Buckingham Street (where he instantly
dash at the two cat, to the terror of all beholder); but he
never could prevail upon himself to bear my aunt's society. he
would sometimes think he have get the well of his objection, and
be amiable for a few minute; and then would put up his snub nose,
and howl to that extent, that there be nothing for it but to blind
he and put he in the plate-warmer. at length, Dora regularly
muffle he in a towel and shut he up there, whenever my aunt be
report at the door.
one thing trouble I much, after we have fall into this quiet
train. it be, that Dora seem by one consent to be regard like
a pretty toy or playthe. my aunt, with whom she gradually become
familiar, always call she little Blossom; and the pleasure of
Miss Lavinia's life be to wait upon she, curl her hair, make
ornament for she, and treat she like a pet child. what Miss
Lavinia do, her sister do as a matter of course. it be very odd
to I; but they all seem to treat Dora, in her degree, much as
Dora treat Jip in his.
I make up my mind to speak to Dora about this; and one day when we
be out walk (for we be license by Miss Lavinia, after a
while, to go out walk by ourselves), I say to she that I wish
she could get they to behave towards she differently.
'because you know, my darling,' I remonstrate, 'you be not a
child.'
'there!' say Dora. 'now yoube go to be cross!'
'Cross, my love?'
'I be sure theybe very kind to I,' say Dora, 'and I be very
happy -'
'well! but my dear life!' say I, 'you might be very happy, and
yet be treat rationally.'
Dora give I a reproachful look - the prettiest look! - and then
begin to sob, say, if I donot like she, why have I ever want
so much to be engage to she? and why donot I go away, now, if I
couldnot bear she?
what could I do, but kiss away her tear, and tell she how I dot
on she, after that!
'I be sure I be very affectionate,' say Dora; 'you oughtnot to be
cruel to I, Doady!'
'Cruel, my precious love! as if I would - or could - be cruel to
you, for the world!'
'then donot find fault with I,' say Dora, make a rosebud of her
mouth; 'and Iwill be good.'
I be charm by she presently ask I, of her own accord, to
give she that cookery-book I have once speak of, and to show she
how to keep account as I have once promise I would. I bring the
volume with I on my next visit (I get it prettily bind, first, to
make it look less dry and more inviting); and as we stroll about
the Common, I show she an old housekeeping-book of my aunt's, and
give she a set of tablet, and a pretty little pencil-case and box
of lead, to practise housekeeping with.
but the cookery-book make Dora's head ache, and the figure make
her cry. they wouldnot add up, she say. so she rub they out,
and draw little nosegay and likeness of I and Jip, all over the
tablet.
then I playfully try verbal instruction in domestic matter, as
we walk about on a Saturday afternoon. sometimes, for example,
when we pass a butcher's shop, I would say:
'now suppose, my pet, that we be married, and you be go to
buy a shoulder of mutton for dinner, would you know how to buy it?'
my pretty little Dora's face would fall, and she would make she
mouth into a bud again, as if she would very much prefer to shut
mine with a kiss.
'would you know how to buy it, my darling?' I would repeat,
perhaps, if I be very inflexible.
Dora would think a little, and then reply, perhaps, with great
triumph:
'why, the butcher would know how to sell it, and what need I know?
oh, you silly boy!'
so, when I once ask Dora, with an eye to the cookery-book, what
she would do, if we be marry, and I be to say I should like
a nice irish stew, she reply that she would tell the servant to
make it; and then clap she little hand together across my arm,
and laugh in such a charming manner that she be more delightful
than ever.
consequently, the principal use to which the cookery-book be
devote, be be put down in the corner for Jip to stand upon.
but Dora be so pleased, when she have train he to stand upon it
without offer to come off, and at the same time to hold the
pencil-case in his mouth, that I be very glad I have buy it.
and we fall back on the guitar-case, and the flower-painting, and
the song about never leave off dancing, Ta ra la! and be as
happy as the week be long. I occasionally wish I could venture
to hint to Miss Lavinia, that she treat the darling of my heart
a little too much like a plaything; and I sometimes awake, as it
be, wonder to find that I have fall into the general fault,
and treat she like a playthe too - but not often.
CHAPTER 42
MISCHIEF
I feel as if it be not for I to record, even though this
manuscript be intend for no eye but mine, how hard I work at
that tremendous short-hand, and all improvement appertaining to it,
in my sense of responsibility to Dora and her aunt. I will only
add, to what I have already write of my perseverance at this time
of my life, and of a patient and continuous energy which then begin
to be mature within I, and which I know to be the strong part of
my character, if it have any strength at all, that there, on
look back, I find the source of my success. I have be very
fortunate in worldly matter; many man have work much hard, and
not succeed half so well; but I never could have do what I have
do, without the habit of punctuality, order, and diligence,
without the determination to concentrate myself on one object at a
time, no matter how quickly its successor should come upon its
heel, which I then form. Heaven know I write this, in no
spirit of self-laudation. the man who review his own life, as I
do mine, in go on here, from page to page, have need to have be
a good man indeed, if he would be spar the sharp consciousness of
many talent neglect, many opportunity waste, many erratic and
pervert feeling constantly at war within his breast, and
defeat he. I do not hold one natural gift, I dare say, that I
have not abuse. my meaning simply be, that whatever I have try
to do in life, I have try with all my heart to do well; that
whatever I have devote myself to, I have devote myself to
completely; that in great aim and in small, I have always be
thoroughly in earnest. I have never believe it possible that any
natural or improved ability can claim immunity from the
companionship of the steady, plain, hard-work quality, and
hope to gain its end. there be no such thing as such fulfilment on
this earth. some happy talent, and some fortunate opportunity, may
form the two side of the ladder on which some man mount, but the
round of that ladder must be make of stuff to stand wear and tear;
and there be no substitute for thorough-go, ardent, and sincere
earnestness. never to put one hand to anything, on which I could
throw my whole self; and never to affect depreciation of my work,
whatever it be; I find, now, to have be my golden rule.
how much of the practice I have just reduce to precept, I owe to
Agnes, I will not repeat here. my narrative proceed to Agnes,
with a thankful love.
she come on a visit of a fortnight to the Doctor's. Mr. Wickfield
be the Doctor's old friend, and the doctor wish to talk with
he, and do he good. it have be matter of conversation with
Agnes when she be last in town, and this visit be the result.
she and her father come together. I be not much surprised to hear
from she that she have engage to find a lodging in the
neighbourhood for Mrs. Heep, whose rheumatic complaint require
change of air, and who would be charm to have it in such company.
neither be I surprised when, on the very next day, Uriah, like a
dutiful son, bring his worthy mother to take possession.
'you see, Master Copperfield,' say he, as he force himself upon
my company for a turn in the Doctor's garden, 'where a person
love, a person be a little jealous - leastway, anxious to keep an
eye on the beloved one.'
'of whom be you jealous, now?' say I.
'thank to you, Master Copperfield,' he return, 'of no one in
particular just at present - no male person, at least.'
'do you mean that you be jealous of a female person?'
he give I a sidelong glance out of his sinister red eye, and
laugh.
'really, Master Copperfield,' he say, '- I should say Mister, but
I know youwill excuse the abit Ihave get into - yoube so
insinuating, that you draw I like a corkscrew! well, I donot mind
tell you,' put his fish-like hand on mine, 'Ibe not a lady's
man in general, sir, and I never be, with Mrs. Strong.'
his eye look green now, as they watch mine with a rascally
cunning.
'what do you mean?' say I.
'why, though I be a lawyer, Master Copperfield,' he reply, with
a dry grin, 'I mean, just at present, what I say.'
'and what do you mean by your look?' I retort, quietly.
'by my look? dear I, Copperfield, thatbe sharp practice! what do
I mean by my look?'
'yes,' say I. 'by your look.'
he seem very much amused, and laugh as heartily as it be in
his nature to laugh. after some scraping of his chin with his
hand, he go on to say, with his eye cast downward - still
scrap, very slowly:
'when I be but an umble clerk, she always look down upon I.
she be for ever have my Agnes backwards and forwards at her
ouse, and she be for ever be a friend to you, Master
Copperfield; but I be too far beneath she, myself, to be notice.'
'well?' say I; 'suppose you be!'
'- and beneath he too,' pursue Uriah, very distinctly, and in a
meditative tone of voice, as he continue to scrape his chin.
'donot you know the doctor well,' say I, 'than to suppose he
conscious of your existence, when you be not before he?'
he direct his eye at I in that sidelong glance again, and he
make his face very lantern-jaw, for the great convenience of
scraping, as he answer:
'oh dear, I be not refer to the Doctor! oh no, poor man! I
mean Mr. Maldon!'
my heart quite die within I. all my old doubt and apprehension
on that subject, all the doctor's happiness and peace, all the
mingled possibility of innocence and compromise, that I could not
unravel, I see, in a moment, at the mercy of this fellow's
twisting.
'he never could come into the office, without order and shove
I about,' say Uriah. 'one of your fine gentleman he be! I be
very meek and umble - and I be. but I donot like that sort of
thing - and I donot!'
he leave off scrap his chin, and suck in his cheek until they
seem to meet inside; keep his sidelong glance upon I all the
while.
'she be one of your lovely woman, she be,' he pursue, when he have
slowly restore his face to its natural form; 'and ready to be no
friend to such as I, I know. shebe just the person as would put
my Agnes up to high sort of game. now, I benot one of your
lady's man, Master Copperfield; but Ihave have eye in my ed, a
pretty long time back. we umble one have get eye, mostly
speak - and we look out of them.'
I endeavour to appear unconscious and not disquiet, but, I see
in his face, with poor success.
'now, Ibe not a-go to let myself be run down, Copperfield,' he
continue, raise that part of his countenance, where his red
eyebrow would have be if he have have any, with malignant triumph,
'and I shall do what I can to put a stop to this friendship. I
donot approve of it. I donot mind acknowledge to you that Ihave
get rather a grudging disposition, and want to keep off all
intruder. I benot a-go, if I know it, to run the risk of be
plot against.'
'you be always plot, and delude yourself into the belief that
everybody else be do the like, I think,' say I.
'perhaps so, Master Copperfield,' he reply. 'but Ihave get a
motive, as my fellow-partner use to say; and I go at it tooth and
nail. I mustnot be put upon, as a numble person, too much. I
cannot allow people in my way. really they must come out of the
cart, Master Copperfield!'
'I donot understand you,' say I.
'donot you, though?' he return, with one of his jerk. 'Ibe
astonish at that, Master Copperfield, you be usually so quick!
Iwill try to be plainer, another time. - be that Mr. Maldon
a-norseback, ring at the gate, sir?'
'it look like he,' I reply, as carelessly as I could.
Uriah stop short, put his hand between his great knob of
knee, and double himself up with laughter. with perfectly silent
laughter. not a sound escape from he. I be so repel by his
odious behaviour, particularly by this conclude instance, that I
turn away without any ceremony; and leave he double up in the
middle of the garden, like a scarecrow in want of support.
it be not on that evening; but, as I well remember, on the next
evening but one, which be a Sunday; that I take Agnes to see Dora.
I have arrange the visit, beforehand, with Miss Lavinia; and Agnes
be expect to tea.
I be in a flutter of pride and anxiety; pride in my dear little
betroth, and anxiety that Agnes should like she. all the way to
Putney, Agnes be inside the stage-coach, and I outside, I
picture Dora to myself in every one of the pretty look I know so
well; now make up my mind that I should like she to look exactly
as she look at such a time, and then doubt whether I should
not prefer she look as she look at such another time; and
almost worry myself into a fever about it.
I be trouble by no doubt of she be very pretty, in any case;
but it fall out that I have never see she look so well. she be
not in the drawing-room when I present Agnes to her little aunt,
but be shyly keep out of the way. I know where to look for
she, now; and sure enough I find she stop her ear again,
behind the same dull old door.
at first she wouldnot come at all; and then she plead for five
minute by my watch. when at length she put her arm through mine,
to be take to the drawing-room, her charming little face be
flushed, and have never be so pretty. but, when we go into the
room, and it turn pale, she be ten thousand time pretty yet.
Dora be afraid of Agnes. she have tell I that she know Agnes be
'too clever'. but when she see she look at once so cheerful and
so earnest, and so thoughtful, and so good, she give a faint little
cry of pleased surprise, and just put her affectionate arm round
Agnes's neck, and lay her innocent cheek against her face.
I never be so happy. I never be so pleased as when I see those
two sit down together, side by side. as when I see my little
darling look up so naturally to those cordial eye. as when I
see the tender, beautiful regard which Agnes cast upon she.
Miss Lavinia and Miss Clarissa partook, in their way, of my joy.
it be the pleasantest tea-table in the world. Miss Clarissa
preside. I cut and hand the sweet seed-cake - the little
sister have a bird-like fondness for pick up seed and peck
at sugar; Miss Lavinia look on with benignant patronage, as if
our happy love be all her work; and we be perfectly content
with ourselves and one another.
the gentle cheerfulness of Agnes go to all their heart. her
quiet interest in everything that interested Dora; her manner of
make acquaintance with Jip (who respond instantly); her
pleasant way, when Dora be ashamed to come over to her usual seat
by I; her modest grace and ease, elicit a crowd of blush
little mark of confidence from Dora; seem to make our circle
quite complete.
'I be so glad,' say Dora, after tea, 'that you like I. I donot
think you would; and I want, more than ever, to be like, now Julia
Mills be go.'
I have omit to mention it, by the by. Miss Mills have sail,
and Dora and I have go aboard a great East Indiaman at Gravesend
to see she; and we have have preserve ginger, and guava, and other
delicacy of that sort for lunch; and we have leave Miss Mills
weeping on a camp-stool on the quarter-deck, with a large new diary
under her arm, in which the original reflection awaken by the
contemplation of Ocean be to be record under lock and key.
Agnes say she be afraid I must have give she an unpromising
character; but Dora correct that directly.
'oh no!' she say, shake her curl at I; 'it be all praise. he
think so much of your opinion, that I be quite afraid of it.'
'my good opinion cannot strengthen his attachment to some people
whom he know,' say Agnes, with a smile; 'it be not worth their
have.'
'but please let I have it,' say Dora, in her coax way, 'if you
can!'
we make merry about Dora's want to be like, and Dora say I be
a goose, and she donot like I at any rate, and the short evening
fly away on gossamer-wing. the time be at hand when the coach
be to call for we. I be stand alone before the fire, when
Dora come steal softly in, to give I that usual precious little
kiss before I go.
'donot you think, if I have have she for a friend a long time ago,
Doady,' say Dora, her bright eye shin very brightly, and her
little right hand idly busy itself with one of the button of my
coat, 'I might have be more clever perhaps?'
'my love!' say I, 'what nonsense!'
'do you think it be nonsense?' return Dora, without look at
I. 'be you sure it be?'
'of course I be!'
'I have forget,' say Dora, still turn the button round and
round, 'what relation Agnes be to you, you dear bad boy.'
'no blood-relation,' I reply; 'but we be bring up together,
like brother and sister.'
'I wonder why you ever fall in love with I?' say Dora, begin
on another button of my coat.
'perhaps because I couldnot see you, and not love you, Dora!'
'suppose you have never see I at all,' say Dora, go to another
button.
'suppose we have never be bear!' say I, gaily.
I wonder what she be think about, as I glance in admire
silence at the little soft hand travel up the row of button on
my coat, and at the cluster hair that lie against my breast, and
at the lash of her downcast eye, slightly rise as they
follow her idle finger. at length her eye be lift up to
mine, and she stand on tiptoe to give I, more thoughtfully than
usual, that precious little kiss - once, twice, three time - and
go out of the room.
they all come back together within five minute afterwards, and
Dora's unusual thoughtfulness be quite go then. she be
laughingly resolve to put Jip through the whole of his
performance, before the coach come. they take some time (not so
much on account of their variety, as Jip's reluctance), and be
still unfinished when it be hear at the door. there be a
hurried but affectionate parting between Agnes and herself; and
Dora be to write to Agnes (who be not to mind her letter be
foolish, she say), and Agnes be to write to Dora; and they have a
second parting at the coach door, and a third when Dora, in spite
of the remonstrance of Miss Lavinia, would come run out once
more to remind Agnes at the coach window about writing, and to
shake her curl at I on the box.
the stage-coach be to put we down near Covent Garden, where we
be to take another stage-coach for Highgate. I be impatient for
the short walk in the interval, that Agnes might praise Dora to I.
ah! what praise it be! how lovingly and fervently do it commend
the pretty creature I have win, with all her artless grace well
display, to my most gentle care! how thoughtfully remind I, yet
with no pretence of do so, of the trust in which I hold the
orphan child!
never, never, have I love Dora so deeply and truly, as I love she
that night. when we have again alight, and be walk in the
starlight along the quiet road that lead to the Doctor's house, I
tell Agnes it be she do.
'when you be sit by she,' say I, 'you seem to be no less
her guardian angel than mine; and you seem so now, Agnes.'
'a poor angel,' she return, 'but faithful.'
the clear tone of her voice, go straight to my heart, make it
natural to I to say:
'the cheerfulness that belong to you, Agnes (and to no one else
that ever I have see), be so restore, I have observe today, that
I have begin to hope you be happy at home?'
'I be happy in myself,' she say; 'I be quite cheerful and
light-hearted.'
I glance at the serene face look upward, and think it be the
star that make it seem so noble.
'there have be no change at home,' say Agnes, after a few
moment.
'no fresh reference,' say I, 'to - I wouldnot distress you, Agnes,
but I cannot help ask - to what we speak of, when we part
last?'
'no, none,' she answer.
'I have think so much about it.'
'you must think less about it. remember that I confide in simple
love and truth at last. have no apprehension for I, Trotwood,'
she add, after a moment; 'the step you dread my taking, I shall
never take.'
although I think I have never really fear it, in any season of
cool reflection, it be an unspeakable relief to I to have this
assurance from her own truthful lip. I tell she so, earnestly.
'and when this visit be over,' say I, - 'for we may not be alone
another time, - how long be it likely to be, my dear Agnes, before
you come to London again?'
'probably a long time,' she reply; 'I think it will be well - for
papa's sake - to remain at home. we be not likely to meet often,
for some time to come; but I shall be a good correspondent of
Dora's, and we shall frequently hear of one another that way.'
we be now within the little courtyard of the Doctor's cottage.
it be grow late. there be a light in the window of Mrs.
Strong's chamber, and Agnes, point to it, bid I good night.
'do not be trouble,' she say, give I her hand, 'by our
misfortune and anxiety. I can be happy in nothing than in
your happiness. if you can ever give I help, rely upon it I will
ask you for it. God bless you always!'
in her beam smile, and in these last tone of her cheerful
voice, I seem again to see and hear my little Dora in her
company. I stand awhile, look through the porch at the star,
with a heart full of love and gratitude, and then walk slowly
forth. I have engage a bed at a decent alehouse close by, and be
go out at the gate, when, happen to turn my head, I see a
light in the Doctor's study. a half-reproachful fancy come into my
mind, that he have be work at the Dictionary without my help.
with the view of see if this be so, and, in any case, of
bid he good night, if he be yet sit among his book, I
turn back, and go softly across the hall, and gently open
the door, look in.
the first person whom I see, to my surprise, by the sober light of
the shaded lamp, be Uriah. he be stand close beside it, with
one of his skeleton hand over his mouth, and the other rest on
the Doctor's table. the Doctor sit in his study chair, cover
his face with his hand. Mr. Wickfield, sorely troubled and
distressed, be lean forward, irresolutely touch the Doctor's
arm.
for an instant, I suppose that the Doctor be ill. I hastily
advance a step under that impression, when I meet Uriah's eye, and
see what be the matter. I would have withdraw, but the doctor
make a gesture to detain I, and I remain.
'at any rate,' observe Uriah, with a writhe of his ungainly
person, 'we may keep the door shut. we neednot make it know to
all the town.'
say which, he go on his toe to the door, which I have leave
open, and carefully close it. he then come back, and take up his
former position. there be an obtrusive show of compassionate zeal
in his voice and manner, more intolerable - at least to I - than
any demeanour he could have assume.
'I have feel it incumbent upon I, Master Copperfield,' say Uriah,
'to point out to Doctor Strong what you and I have already talk
about. you donot exactly understand I, though?'
I give he a look, but no other answer; and, go to my good old
master, say a few word that I mean to be word of comfort and
encouragement. he put his hand upon my shoulder, as it have be
his custom to do when I be quite a little fellow, but do not lift
his grey head.
'as you donot understand I, Master Copperfield,' resume Uriah in
the same officious manner, 'I may take the liberty of umbly
mentioning, be among friend, that I have call Doctor Strong's
attention to the going-on of Mrs. Strong. itbe much against the
grain with I, I assure you, Copperfield, to be concern in
anything so unpleasant; but really, as it be, webe all mix
ourselves up with what oughtnot to be. that be what my meaning
be, sir, when you donot understand I.'
I wonder now, when I recall his leer, that I do not collar he,
and try to shake the breath out of his body.
'I dare say I donot make myself very clear,' he go on, 'nor you
neither. naturally, we be both of we incline to give such a
subject a wide berth. Hows'ever, at last I have make up my mind to
speak plain; and I have mention to Doctor Strong that - do you
speak, sir?'
this be to the Doctor, who have moan. the sound might have
touch any heart, I think, but it have no effect upon Uriah's.
'- mention to Doctor Strong,' he proceed, 'that anyone may see
that Mr. Maldon, and the lovely and agreeable lady as be Doctor
Strong's wife, be too sweet on one another. really the time be
come (we be at present all mix ourselves up with what
oughtnot to be), when Doctor Strong must be tell that this be full
as plain to everybody as the sun, before Mr. Maldon go to India;
that Mr. Maldon make excuse to come back, for nothing else; and
that hebe always here, for nothing else. when you come in, sir, I
be just put it to my fellow-partner,' towards whom he turn,
'to say to Doctor Strong upon his word and honour, whether hewould
ever be of this opinion long ago, or not. come, Mr. Wickfield,
sir! would you be so good as tell we? yes or no, sir? come,
partner!'
'for God's sake, my dear doctor,' say Mr. Wickfield again lay
his irresolute hand upon the Doctor's arm, 'donot attach too much
weight to any suspicion I may have entertain.'
'there!' cry Uriah, shake his head. 'what a melancholy
confirmation: benot it? he! such an old friend! bless your
soul, when I be nothing but a clerk in his office, Copperfield,
Ihave see he twenty time, if Ihave see he once, quite in a
take about it - quite put out, you know (and very proper in he
as a father; Ibe sure I cannot blame he), to think that Miss Agnes
be mix herself up with what oughtnot to be.'
'my dear Strong,' say Mr. Wickfield in a tremulous voice, 'my good
friend, I neednot tell you that it have be my vice to look for
some one master motive in everybody, and to try all action by one
narrow test. I may have fall into such doubt as I have have,
through this mistake.'
'you have have doubt, Wickfield,' say the Doctor, without lift
up his head. 'you have have doubt.'
'speak up, fellow-partner,' urge Uriah.
'I have, at one time, certainly,' say Mr. Wickfield. 'I - God
forgive I - I think you have.'
'no, no, no!' return the Doctor, in a tone of most pathetic
grief.
'I think, at one time,' say Mr. Wickfield, 'that you wish to
send Maldon abroad to effect a desirable separation.'
'no, no, no!' return the Doctor. 'to give Annie pleasure, by
make some provision for the companion of her childhood. nothing
else.'
'so I find,' say Mr. Wickfield. 'I couldnot doubt it, when you
tell I so. but I think - I implore you to remember the narrow
construction which have be my beset sin - that, in a case
where there be so much disparity in point of year -'
'thatbe the way to put it, you see, Master Copperfield!' observe
Uriah, with fawn and offensive pity.
'- a lady of such youth, and such attraction, however real her
respect for you, might have be influence in marrying, by worldly
consideration only. I make no allowance for innumerable feeling
and circumstance that may have all tend to good. for Heaven's
sake remember that!'
'how kind he put it!' say Uriah, shake his head.
'always observe she from one point of view,' say Mr. Wickfield;
'but by all that be dear to you, my old friend, I entreat you to
consider what it be; I be force to confess now, have no escape
-'
'no! therebe no way out of it, Mr. Wickfield, sir,' observe
Uriah, 'when itbe get to this.'
'- that I do,' say Mr. Wickfield, glance helplessly and
distractedly at his partner, 'that I do doubt she, and think she
want in her duty to you; and that I do sometimes, if I must say
all, feel averse to Agnes be in such a familiar relation towards
she, as to see what I see, or in my diseased theory fancy that I
see. I never mention this to anyone. I never mean it to be
know to anyone. and though it be terrible to you to hear,' say
Mr. Wickfield, quite subdue, 'if you know how terrible it be for
I to tell, you would feel compassion for I!'
the Doctor, in the perfect goodness of his nature, put out his
hand. Mr. Wickfield hold it for a little while in his, with his
head bow down.
'I be sure,' say Uriah, writhe himself into the silence like a
Conger-eel, 'that this be a subject full of unpleasantness to
everybody. but since we have get so far, I ought to take the
liberty of mention that Copperfield have notice it too.'
I turn upon he, and ask he how he dare refer to I!
'oh! itbe very kind of you, Copperfield,' return Uriah,
undulate all over, 'and we all know what an amiable character
your be; but you know that the moment I speak to you the other
night, you know what I mean. you know you know what I mean,
Copperfield. donot deny it! you deny it with the good intention;
but donot do it, Copperfield.'
I see the mild eye of the good old Doctor turn upon I for a
moment, and I feel that the confession of my old misgiving and
remembrance be too plainly write in my face to be overlook.
it be of no use rag. I could not undo that. say what I would,
I could not unsay it.
we be silent again, and remain so, until the Doctor rise and
walk twice or thrice across the room. presently he return to
where his chair stand; and, lean on the back of it, and
occasionally put his handkerchief to his eye, with a simple
honesty that do he more honour, to my thinking, than any disguise
he could have effect, say:
'I have be much to blame. I believe I have be very much to
blame. I have expose one whom I hold in my heart, to trial and
aspersion - I call they aspersion, even to have be conceive in
anybody's inmost mind - of which she never, but for I, could have
be the object.'
Uriah Heep give a kind of snivel. I think to express sympathy.
'of which my Annie,' say the Doctor, 'never, but for I, could
have be the object. gentleman, I be old now, as you know; I do
not feel, tonight, that I have much to live for. but my life - my
life - upon the truth and honour of the dear lady who have be the
subject of this conversation!'
I do not think that the well embodiment of chivalry, the
realization of the handsome and most romantic figure ever
imagine by painter, could have say this, with a more impressive
and affect dignity than the plain old Doctor do.
'but I be not prepared,' he go on, 'to deny - perhaps I may have
be, without know it, in some degree prepare to admit - that
I may have unwittingly ensnare that lady into an unhappy marriage.
I be a man quite unaccustomed to observe; and I cannot but believe
that the observation of several people, of different age and
position, all too plainly tend in one direction (and that so
natural), be well than mine.'
I have often admire, as I have elsewhere describe, his benignant
manner towards his youthful wife; but the respectful tenderness he
manifest in every reference to she on this occasion, and the
almost reverential manner in which he put away from he the
light doubt of her integrity, exalt he, in my eye, beyond
description.
'I marry that lady,' say the Doctor, 'when she be extremely
young. I take she to myself when her character be scarcely
form. so far as it be develop, it have be my happiness to
form it. I know her father well. I know she well. I have teach
her what I could, for the love of all her beautiful and virtuous
quality. if I do she wrong; as I fear I do, in take
advantage (but I never mean it) of her gratitude and her
affection; I ask pardon of that lady, in my heart!'
he walk across the room, and come back to the same place; hold
the chair with a grasp that tremble, like his subdued voice, in
its earnestness.
'I regard myself as a refuge, for she, from the danger and
vicissitude of life. I persuade myself that, unequal though we
be in year, she would live tranquilly and contentedly with I.
I do not shut out of my consideration the time when I should leave
she free, and still young and still beautiful, but with she
judgement more mature - no, gentleman - upon my truth!'
his homely figure seem to be lighten up by his fidelity and
generosity. every word he utter have a force that no other grace
could have impart to it.
'my life with this lady have be very happy. until tonight, I have
have uninterrupted occasion to bless the day on which I do she
great injustice.'
his voice, more and more faltering in the utterance of these word,
stop for a few moment; then he go on:
'once awaken from my dream - I have be a poor dreamer, in one
way or other, all my life - I see how natural it be that she should
have some regretful feeling towards her old companion and her
equal. that she do regard he with some innocent regret, with
some blameless thought of what might have be, but for I, be, I
fear, too true. much that I have see, but not note, have come
back upon I with new meaning, during this last try hour. but,
beyond this, gentleman, the dear lady's name never must be couple
with a word, a breath, of doubt.'
for a little while, his eye kindle and his voice be firm; for a
little while he be again silent. presently, he proceed as
before:
'it only remain for I, to bear the knowledge of the unhappiness
I have occasion, as submissively as I can. it be she who should
reproach; not i. to save she from misconstruction, cruel
misconstruction, that even my friend have not be able to avoid,
become my duty. the more retired we live, the well I shall
discharge it. and when the time come - may it come soon, if it be
his merciful pleasure! - when my death shall release she from
constraint, I shall close my eye upon her honoured face, with
unbounded confidence and love; and leave she, with no sorrow then,
to happy and bright day.'
I could not see he for the tear which his earnestness and
goodness, so adorn by, and so adorn, the perfect simplicity of
his manner, bring into my eye. he have move to the door, when
he add:
'gentleman, I have show you my heart. I be sure you will respect
it. what we have say tonight be never to be say more.
Wickfield, give I an old friend's arm upstairs!'
Mr. Wickfield hasten to he. without interchange a word they
go slowly out of the room together, Uriah look after they.
'well, Master Copperfield!' say Uriah, meekly turn to I. 'the
thing havenot take quite the turn that might have be expect, for
the old Scholar - what an excellent man! - be as blind as a
brickbat; but this familybe out of the cart, I think!'
I need but the sound of his voice to be so madly enrage as I
never be before, and never have be since.
'you villain,' say I, 'what do you mean by entrap I into your
scheme? how dare you appeal to I just now, you false rascal, as
if we have be in discussion together?'
as we stand, front to front, I see so plainly, in the stealthy
exultation of his face, what I already so plainly know; I mean that
he force his confidence upon I, expressly to make I miserable,
and have set a deliberate trap for I in this very matter; that I
couldnot bear it. the whole of his lank cheek be invitingly
before I, and I strike it with my open hand with that force that
my finger tingle as if I have burn they.
he catch the hand in his, and we stand in that connexion, look
at each other. we stand so, a long time; long enough for I to see
the white mark of my finger die out of the deep red of his cheek,
and leave it a deep red.
'copperfield,' he say at length, in a breathless voice, 'have you
take leave of your sens?'
'I have take leave of you,' say I, wrest my hand away. 'you
dog, Iwill know no more of you.'
'willnot you?' say he, constrain by the pain of his cheek to put
his hand there. 'perhaps you willnot be able to help it. benot this
ungrateful of you, now?'
'I have show you often enough,' say I, 'that I despise you. I
have show you now, more plainly, that I do. why should I dread
your do your bad to all about you? what else do you ever do?'
he perfectly understand this allusion to the consideration that
have hitherto restrain I in my communication with he. I rather
think that neither the blow, nor the allusion, would have escape
I, but for the assurance I have have from Agnes that night. it be
no matter.
there be another long pause. his eye, as he look at I, seem
to take every shade of colour that could make eye ugly.
'copperfield,' he say, remove his hand from his cheek, 'you have
always go against I. I know you always use to be against I at
Mr. Wickfield's.'
'you may think what you like,' say I, still in a tower rage.
'if it be not true, so much the worthy you.'
'and yet I always like you, Copperfield!' he rejoin.
I deign to make he no reply; and, take up my hat, be go
out to bed, when he come between I and the door.
'copperfield,' he say, 'there must be two party to a quarrel.
I willnot be one.'
'you may go to the devil!' say I.
'donot say that!' he reply. 'I know youwill be sorry afterwards.
how can you make yourself so inferior to I, as to show such a bad
spirit? but I forgive you.'
'you forgive I!' I repeat disdainfully.
'I do, and you cannot help yourself,' reply Uriah. 'to think of
your going and attack I, that have always be a friend to you!
but there cannot be a quarrel without two party, and I willnot be
one. I will be a friend to you, in spite of you. so now you know
what youhave get to expect.'
the necessity of carry on this dialogue (his part in which be
very slow; mine very quick) in a low tone, that the house might not
be disturb at an unseasonable hour, do not improve my temper;
though my passion be cool down. merely tell he that I
should expect from he what I always have expect, and have never
yet be disappoint in, I open the door upon he, as if he have
be a great walnut put there to be crack, and go out of the
house. but he sleep out of the house too, at his mother's lodging;
and before I have go many hundred yard, come up with I.
'you know, Copperfield,' he say, in my ear (I do not turn my
head), 'yoube in quite a wrong position'; which I feel to be true,
and that make I chafe the more; 'you cannot make this a brave
thing, and you cannot help be forgive. I donot intend to
mention it to mother, nor to any live soul. Ibe determined to
forgive you. but I do wonder that you should lift your hand
against a person that you know to be so umble!'
I feel only less mean than he. he know I well than I know
myself. if he have retort or openly exasperate I, it would have
be a relief and a justification; but he have put I on a slow
fire, on which I lie torment half the night.
in the morning, when I come out, the early church-bell be ring,
and he be walk up and down with his mother. he address I as
if nothing have happen, and I could do no less than reply. I have
strike he hard enough to give he the toothache, I suppose. at
all event his face be tie up in a black silk handkerchief,
which, with his hat perch on the top of it, be far from
improve his appearance. I hear that he go to a dentist's in
London on the Monday morning, and have a tooth out. I hope it be
a double one.
the Doctor give out that he be not quite well; and remain alone,
for a considerable part of every day, during the remainder of the
visit. Agnes and her father have be go a week, before we
resume our usual work. on the day precede its resumption, the
Doctor give I with his own hand a fold note not seal. it be
address to myself; and lay an injunction on I, in a few
affectionate word, never to refer to the subject of that evening.
I have confide it to my aunt, but to no one else. it be not a
subject I could discuss with Agnes, and Agnes certainly have not the
least suspicion of what have pass.
Neither, I feel convinced, have Mrs. Strong then. several week
elapse before I see the least change in she. it come on slowly,
like a cloud when there be no wind. at first, she seem to wonder
at the gentle compassion with which the Doctor speak to she, and at
his wish that she should have her mother with she, to relieve the
dull monotony of her life. often, when we be at work, and she
be sit by, I would see her pausing and look at he with
that memorable face. afterwards, I sometimes observe her rise,
with her eye full of tear, and go out of the room. gradually, an
unhappy shadow fall upon her beauty, and deepen every day. Mrs.
Markleham be a regular inmate of the cottage then; but she talk
and talk, and see nothing.
as this change steal on Annie, once like sunshine in the Doctor's
house, the doctor become old in appearance, and more grave; but
the sweetness of his temper, the placid kindness of his manner, and
his benevolent solicitude for she, if they be capable of any
increase, be increase. I see he once, early on the morning of
her birthday, when she come to sit in the window while we be at
work (which she have always do, but now begin to do with a timid
and uncertain air that I think very touching), take her forehead
between his hand, kiss it, and go hurriedly away, too much move
to remain. I see she stand where he have leave she, like a statue;
and then bend down her head, and clasp her hand, and weep, I
cannot say how sorrowfully.
sometimes, after that, I fancy that she try to speak even to
I, in interval when we be leave alone. but she never utter a
word. the Doctor always have some new project for her participate
in amusement away from home, with her mother; and Mrs. Markleham,
who be very fond of amusement, and very easily dissatisfied with
anything else, enter into they with great good-will, and be loud
in her commendation. but Annie, in a spiritless unhappy way, only
go whither she be lead, and seem to have no care for anything.
I do not know what to think. neither do my aunt; who must have
walk, at various time, a hundred mile in her uncertainty. what
be strange of all be, that the only real relief which seem to
make its way into the secret region of this domestic unhappiness,
make its way there in the person of Mr. Dick.
what his thought be on the subject, or what his observation be,
I be as unable to explain, as I dare say he would have be to
assist I in the task. but, as I have record in the narrative of
my school day, his veneration for the doctor be unbounded; and
there be a subtlety of perception in real attachment, even when it
be bear towards man by one of the low animal, which leave the
high intellect behind. to this mind of the heart, if I may call
it so, in Mr. Dick, some bright ray of the truth shoot straight.
he have proudly resume his privilege, in many of his spare hour,
of walk up and down the garden with the doctor; as he have be
accustom to pace up and down the doctor's Walk at Canterbury.
but matter be no soon in this state, than he devote all his
spare time (and get up early to make it more) to these
perambulation. if he have never be so happy as when the Doctor
read that marvellous performance, the Dictionary, to he; he be
now quite miserable unless the doctor pull it out of his pocket,
and begin. when the Doctor and I be engage, he now fall into
the custom of walk up and down with Mrs. Strong, and help she
to trim her favourite flower, or weed the bed. I dare say he
rarely speak a dozen word in an hour: but his quiet interest, and
his wistful face, find immediate response in both their breast;
each know that the other like he, and that he love both; and he
become what no one else could be - a link between they.
when I think of he, with his impenetrably wise face, walk up
and down with the Doctor, delight to be batter by the hard
word in the Dictionary; when I think of he carry huge
watering-pot after Annie; kneel down, in very paw of glove,
at patient microscopic work among the little leaf; express as
no philosopher could have express, in everything he do, a
delicate desire to be her friend; shower sympathy, trustfulness,
and affection, out of every hole in the watering-pot; when I think
of he never wander in that well mind of his to which
unhappiness address itself, never bring the unfortunate King
Charles into the garden, never waver in his grateful service,
never divert from his knowledge that there be something wrong,
or from his wish to set it right- I really feel almost ashamed of
have know that he be not quite in his wit, take account of
the utmost I have do with mine.
'nobody but myself, Trot, know what that man be!' my aunt would
proudly remark, when we converse about it. 'Dick will distinguish
himself yet!'
I must refer to one other topic before I close this chapter. while
the visit at the Doctor's be still in progress, I observe that
the postman bring two or three letter every morning for Uriah
Heep, who remain at Highgate until the rest go back, it be
a leisure time; and that these be always direct in a
business-like manner by Mr. Micawber, who now assume a round legal
hand. I be glad to infer, from these slight premise, that Mr.
Micawber be do well; and consequently be much surprised to
receive, about this time, the following letter from his amiable
wife.
'CANTERBURY, Monday Evening.
'you will doubtless be surprised, my dear Mr. Copperfield, to
receive this communication. still more so, by its content. still
more so, by the stipulation of implicit confidence which I beg to
impose. but my feeling as a wife and mother require relief; and
as I do not wish to consult my family (already obnoxious to the
feeling of Mr. Micawber), I know no one of whom I can well ask
advice than my friend and former lodger.
'you may be aware, my dear Mr. Copperfield, that between myself and
Mr. Micawber (whom I will never desert), there have always be
preserve a spirit of mutual confidence. Mr. Micawber may have
occasionally give a bill without consult I, or he may have
mislead I as to the period when that obligation would become due.
this have actually happen. but, in general, Mr. Micawber have have
no secret from the bosom of affection - I allude to his wife - and
have invariably, on our retirement to rest, recall the event of
the day.
'you will picture to yourself, my dear Mr. Copperfield, what the
poignancy of my feeling must be, when I inform you that Mr.
Micawber be entirely change. he be reserve. he be secret. his
life be a mystery to the partner of his joy and sorrow - I again
allude to his wife - and if I should assure you that beyond know
that it be pass from morning to night at the office, I now know
less of it than I do of the man in the south, connect with whose
mouth the thoughtless child repeat an idle tale respect cold
plum porridge, I should adopt a popular fallacy to express an
actual fact.
'but this be not all. Mr. Micawber be morose. he be severe. he
be estranged from our eld son and daughter, he have no pride in
his twin, he look with an eye of coldness even on the unoffending
stranger who last become a member of our circle. the pecuniary
mean of meet our expense, keep down to the utmost farthing,
be obtain from he with great difficulty, and even under fearful
threat that he will settle himself (the exact expression); and he
inexorably refuse to give any explanation whatever of this
distracting policy.
'this be hard to bear. this be heart-breaking. if you will advise
I, know my feeble power such as they be, how you think it
will be good to exert they in a dilemma so unwonted, you will add
another friendly obligation to the many you have already render
I. with love from the child, and a smile from the
happily-unconscious stranger, I remain, dear Mr. Copperfield,
your afflict,
'EMMA MICAWBER.'
I do not feel justified in give a wife of Mrs. Micawber's
experience any other recommendation, than that she should try to
reclaim Mr. Micawber by patience and kindness (as I know she would
in any case); but the letter set I think about he very much.
CHAPTER 43
another retrospect
once again, let I pause upon a memorable period of my life. let
I stand aside, to see the phantom of those day go by I,
accompany the shadow of myself, in dim procession.
week, month, season, pass along. they seem little more than a
summer day and a winter evening. now, the Common where I walk with
Dora be all in bloom, a field of bright gold; and now the unseen
heather lie in mound and bunch underneath a covering of snow.
in a breath, the river that flow through our Sunday walk be
sparkle in the summer sun, be ruffle by the winter wind, or
thicken with drift heap of ice. fast than ever river run
towards the sea, it flash, darken, and roll away.
not a thread change, in the house of the two little bird-like
lady. the clock tick over the fireplace, the weather-glass
hang in the hall. neither clock nor weather-glass be ever right;
but we believe in both, devoutly.
I have come legally to man's estate. I have attain the dignity
of twenty-one. but this be a sort of dignity that may be thrust
upon one. let I think what I have achieve.
I have tame that savage stenographic mystery. I make a
respectable income by it. I be in high repute for my
accomplishment in all pertain to the art, and be join with
eleven other in report the debate in Parliament for a Morning
Newspaper. night after night, I record prediction that never come
to pass, profession that be never fulfil, explanation that
be only mean to mystify. I wallow in word. Britannia, that
unfortunate female, be always before I, like a truss fowl:
skewer through and through with office-pen, and bind hand and
foot with red tape. I be sufficiently behind the scene to know
the worth of political life. I be quite an Infidel about it, and
shall never be convert.
my dear old traddle have try his hand at the same pursuit, but it
be not in Traddles's way. he be perfectly good-humour respect
his failure, and remind I that he always do consider himself
slow. he have occasional employment on the same newspaper, in
get up the fact of dry subject, to be write about and
embellish by more fertile mind. he be call to the bar; and
with admirable industry and self-denial have scrap another hundred
pound together, to fee a conveyancer whose chamber he attend.
a great deal of very hot port wine be consume at his call; and,
consider the figure, I should think the Inner Temple must have
make a profit by it.
I have come out in another way. I have take with fear and
tremble to authorship. I write a little something, in secret,
and send it to a magazine, and it be publish in the magazine.
since then, I have take heart to write a good many trifling
piece. now, I be regularly pay for they. altogether, I be well
off, when I tell my income on the finger of my left hand, I pass
the third finger and take in the fourth to the middle joint.
we have remove, from Buckingham Street, to a pleasant little
cottage very near the one I look at, when my enthusiasm first
come on. my aunt, however (who have sell the house at Dover, to
good advantage), be not go to remain here, but intend remove
herself to a still more tiny cottage close at hand. what do this
portend? my marriage? yes!
yes! I be go to be marry to Dora! Miss Lavinia and Miss
Clarissa have give their consent; and if ever canary bird be in
a flutter, they be. Miss Lavinia, self-charge with the
superintendence of my darling's wardrobe, be constantly cut out
brown-paper cuirass, and differ in opinion from a highly
respectable young man, with a long bundle, and a yard measure under
his arm. a dressmaker, always stab in the breast with a needle
and thread, board and lodge in the house; and seem to I,
eating, drinking, or sleeping, never to take she thimble off. they
make a lay-figure of my dear. they be always send for she to
come and try something on. we cannot be happy together for five
minute in the evening, but some intrusive female knock at the
door, and say, 'oh, if you please, Miss Dora, would you step
upstairs!'
Miss Clarissa and my aunt roam all over London, to find out
article of furniture for Dora and I to look at. it would be
well for they to buy the good at once, without this ceremony of
inspection; for, when we go to see a kitchen fender and
meat-screen, Dora see a chinese house for Jip, with little bell
on the top, and prefer that. and it take a long time to accustom
Jip to his new residence, after we have buy it; whenever he go
in or out, he make all the little bell ring, and be horribly
frightened.
Peggotty come up to make herself useful, and fall to work
immediately. her department appear to be, to clean everything
over and over again. she rub everything that can be rub, until
it shin, like her own honest forehead, with perpetual friction.
and now it be, that I begin to see her solitary brother pass
through the dark street at night, and look, as he go, among
the wandering face. I never speak to he at such an hour. I know
too well, as his grave figure pass onward, what he seek, and
what he dread.
why do traddle look so important when he call upon I this
afternoon in the Commons - where I still occasionally attend, for
form's sake, when I have time? the realization of my boyish
day-dream be at hand. I be go to take out the licence.
it be a little document to do so much; and traddle contemplate
it, as it lie upon my desk, half in admiration, half in awe.
there be the name, in the sweet old visionary connexion, David
Copperfield and Dora Spenlow; and there, in the corner, be that
Parental Institution, the Stamp Office, which be so benignantly
interested in the various transaction of human life, look down
upon our Union; and there be the Archbishop of Canterbury invoke
a blessing on we in print, and do it as cheap as could possibly
be expect.
nevertheless, I be in a dream, a flustered, happy, hurried dream.
I cannot believe that it be go to be; and yet I cannot believe but
that everyone I pass in the street, must have some kind of
perception, that I be to be marry the day after tomorrow. the
Surrogate know I, when I go down to be swear; and dispose of I
easily, as if there be a masonic understanding between we.
traddle be not at all want, but be in attendance as my general
backer.
'I hope the next time you come here, my dear fellow,' I say to
traddle, 'it will be on the same errand for yourself. and I hope
it will be soon.'
'thank you for your good wish, my dear copperfield,' he reply.
'I hope so too. itbe a satisfaction to know that shewill wait for
I any length of time, and that she really be the dear girl -'
'when be you to meet she at the coach?' I ask.
'at seven,' say traddle, look at his plain old silver watch -
the very watch he once take a wheel out of, at school, to make a
water-mill. 'that be about Miss Wickfield's time, be it not?'
'a little early. her time be half past eight.'
'I assure you, my dear boy,' say traddle, 'I be almost as please
as if I be go to be marry myself, to think that this event
be come to such a happy termination. and really the great
friendship and consideration of personally associate Sophy with
the joyful occasion, and invite she to be a bridesmaid in
conjunction with Miss Wickfield, demand my warm thank. I be
extremely sensible of it.'
I hear he, and shake hand with he; and we talk, and walk, and
dine, and so on; but I donot believe it. nothing be real.
Sophy arrive at the house of Dora's aunt, in due course. she have
the most agreeable of face, - not absolutely beautiful, but
extraordinarily pleasant, - and be one of the most genial,
unaffected, frank, engage creature I have ever see. traddle
present she to we with great pride; and rub his hand for ten
minute by the clock, with every individual hair upon his head
stand on tiptoe, when I congratulate he in a corner on his
choice.
I have bring Agnes from the Canterbury coach, and her cheerful
and beautiful face be among we for the second time. Agnes have a
great liking for traddle, and it be capital to see they meet, and
to observe the glory of Traddles as he commend the dear girl in
the world to her acquaintance.
still I donot believe it. we have a delightful evening, and be
supremely happy; but I donot believe it yet. I cannot collect
myself. I cannot check off my happiness as it take place. I feel
in a misty and unsettled kind of state; as if I have get up very
early in the morning a week or two ago, and have never be to bed
since. I cannot make out when yesterday be. I seem to have be
carry the licence about, in my pocket, many month.
next day, too, when we all go in a flock to see the house - our
house - Dora's and mine - I be quite unable to regard myself as its
master. I seem to be there, by permission of somebody else. I
half expect the real master to come home presently, and say he be
glad to see I. such a beautiful little house as it be, with
everything so bright and new; with the flower on the carpet
look as if freshly gather, and the green leaf on the paper
as if they have just come out; with the spotless muslin curtain,
and the blushing rose-colour furniture, and Dora's garden hat
with the blue ribbon - do I remember, now, how I love she in such
another hat when I first know she! - already hang on its little
peg; the guitar-case quite at home on its heel in a corner; and
everybody tumble over Jip's pagoda, which be much too big for the
establishment. another happy evening, quite as unreal as all the
rest of it, and I steal into the usual room before go away.
Dora be not there. I suppose they have not do try on yet.
Miss Lavinia peep in, and tell I mysteriously that she will not
be long. she be rather long, notwithstanding; but by and by I hear
a rustling at the door, and someone tap.
I say, 'come in!' but someone tap again.
I go to the door, wonder who it be; there, I meet a pair of
bright eye, and a blushing face; they be Dora's eye and face,
and Miss Lavinia have dress she in tomorrow's dress, bonnet and
all, for I to see. I take my little wife to my heart; and Miss
Lavinia give a little scream because I tumble the bonnet, and Dora
laugh and cry at once, because I be so pleased; and I believe it
less than ever.
'do you think it pretty, Doady?' say Dora.
Pretty! I should rather think I do.
'and be you sure you like I very much?' say Dora.
the topic be fraught with such danger to the bonnet, that Miss
Lavinia give another little scream, and beg I to understand that
Dora be only to be look at, and on no account to be touch. so
Dora stand in a delightful state of confusion for a minute or two,
to be admire; and then take off her bonnet - look so natural
without it! - and run away with it in her hand; and come dance
down again in her own familiar dress, and ask Jip if I have get a
beautiful little wife, and whether hewill forgive she for be
marry, and kneel down to make he stand upon the cookery-book,
for the last time in her single life.
I go home, more incredulous than ever, to a lodging that I have
hard by; and get up very early in the morning, to ride to the
Highgate road and fetch my aunt.
I have never see my aunt in such state. she be dress in
lavender-colour silk, and have a white bonnet on, and be amazing.
Janet have dress she, and be there to look at I. Peggotty be
ready to go to church, intend to behold the ceremony from the
gallery. Mr. Dick, who be to give my darling to I at the altar,
have have his hair curl. traddle, whom I have take up by
appointment at the turnpike, present a dazzle combination of
cream colour and light blue; and both he and Mr. Dick have a
general effect about they of be all glove.
no doubt I see this, because I know it be so; but I be astray, and
seem to see nothing. nor do I believe anything whatever. still,
as we drive along in an open carriage, this fairy marriage be real
enough to fill I with a sort of wonder pity for the unfortunate
people who have no part in it, but be sweep out the shop, and
go to their daily occupation.
my aunt sit with my hand in hers all the way. when we stop a
little way short of the church, to put down Peggotty, whom we have
bring on the box, she give it a squeeze, and I a kiss.
'God bless you, Trot! my own boy never could be dearer. I think
of poor dear Baby this morning.'
'so do I. and of all I owe to you, dear aunt.'
'tut, child!' say my aunt; and give her hand in overflowing
cordiality to traddle, who then give his to Mr. Dick, who then
give his to I, who then give mine to traddle, and then we come
to the church door.
the church be calm enough, I be sure; but it might be a steam-power
loom in full action, for any sedative effect it have on I. I be
too far go for that.
the rest be all a more or less incoherent dream.
a dream of their come in with Dora; of the pew-opener arranging
we, like a drill-sergeant, before the altar rail; of my wondering,
even then, why pew-opener must always be the most disagreeable
female procurable, and whether there be any religious dread of a
disastrous infection of good-humour which render it indispensable
to set those vessel of vinegar upon the road to Heaven.
of the clergyman and clerk appear; of a few boatman and some
other people stroll in; of an ancient mariner behind I,
strongly flavour the church with rum; of the service begin
in a deep voice, and our all be very attentive.
of Miss Lavinia, who act as a semi-auxiliary bridesmaid, be the
first to cry, and of she do homage (as I take it) to the memory
of Pidger, in sob; of Miss Clarissa apply a smell-bottle; of
Agnes take care of Dora; of my aunt endeavouring to represent
herself as a model of sternness, with tear roll down her face;
of little Dora tremble very much, and make her response in
faint whisper.
of our kneeling down together, side by side; of Dora's trembling
less and less, but always clasp Agnes by the hand; of the
service be get through, quietly and gravely; of our all look
at each other in an April state of smile and tear, when it be
over; of my young wife be hysterical in the vestry, and cry
for her poor papa, her dear papa.
of she soon cheer up again, and our sign the register all
round. of my go into the gallery for Peggotty to bring she to
sign it; of Peggotty's hug I in a corner, and tell I she
see my own dear mother marry; of its be over, and our go
away.
of my walk so proudly and lovingly down the aisle with my sweet
wife upon my arm, through a mist of half-see people, pulpit,
monument, pew, font, organ, and church window, in which there
flutter faint air of association with my childish church at home,
so long ago.
of their whispering, as we pass, what a youthful couple we be, and
what a pretty little wife she be. of our all be so merry and
talkative in the carriage go back. of Sophy tell we that
when she see traddle (whom I have entrust with the licence) ask
for it, she almost faint, have be convince that he would
contrive to lose it, or to have his pocket pick. of Agnes
laugh gaily; and of Dora be so fond of Agnes that she will
not be separate from she, but still keep her hand.
of there be a breakfast, with abundance of thing, pretty and
substantial, to eat and drink, whereof I partake, as I should do in
any other dream, without the least perception of their flavour;
eating and drink, as I may say, nothing but love and marriage,
and no more believe in the viand than in anything else.
of my make a speech in the same dreamy fashion, without have an
idea of what I want to say, beyond such as may be comprehend in
the full conviction that I havenot say it. of our be very
sociably and simply happy (always in a dream though); and of Jip's
have wedding cake, and its not agree with he afterwards.
of the pair of hire post-horse be ready, and of Dora's go
away to change her dress. of my aunt and Miss Clarissa remain
with we; and our walk in the garden; and my aunt, who have make
quite a speech at breakfast touch Dora's aunt, be mightily
amuse with herself, but a little proud of it too.
of Dora's be ready, and of Miss Lavinia's hover about she,
loth to lose the pretty toy that have give she so much pleasant
occupation. of Dora's make a long series of surprised
discovery that she have forget all sort of little thing; and
of everybodybe run everywhere to fetch they.
of their all closing about Dora, when at last she begin to say
good-bye, look, with their bright colour and ribbon, like a
bed of flower. of my darling be almost smothered among the
flower, and come out, laugh and cry both together, to my
jealous arm.
of my wanting to carry Jip (who be to go along with we), and Dora's
say no, that she must carry he, or else hewill think she donot
like he any more, now she be marry, and will break his heart.
of our going, arm in arm, and Dora stop and look back, and
say, 'if I have ever be cross or ungrateful to anybody, donot
remember it!' and burst into tear.
of she wave her little hand, and our go away once more. of
she once more stop, and look back, and hurry to Agnes,
and give Agnes, above all the other, her last kiss and
farewell.
we drive away together, and I awake from the dream. I believe it
at last. it be my dear, dear, little wife beside I, whom I love
so well!
'be you happy now, you foolish boy?' say Dora, 'and sure you
donot repent?'
I have stand aside to see the phantom of those day go by I.
they be go, and I resume the journey of my story.
CHAPTER 44
our housekeeping
it be a strange condition of thing, the honeymoon be over, and
the bridesmaid go home, when I find myself sit down in my
own small house with Dora; quite throw out of employment, as I may
say, in respect of the delicious old occupation of make love.
it seem such an extraordinary thing to have Dora always there.
it be so unaccountable not to be oblige to go out to see she, not
to have any occasion to be torment myself about she, not to have
to write to she, not to be scheme and devise opportunity of
be alone with she. sometimes of an evening, when I look up
from my writing, and see her seat opposite, I would lean back in
my chair, and think how queer it be that there we be, alone
together as a matter of course - nobody's business any more - all
the romance of our engagement put away upon a shelf, to rust - no
one to please but one another - one another to please, for life.
when there be a debate, and I be keep out very late, it seem so
strange to I, as I be walk home, to think that Dora be at
home! it be such a wonderful thing, at first, to have she come
softly down to talk to I as I eat my supper. it be such a
stupendous thing to know for certain that she put her hair in
paper. it be altogether such an astonishing event to see she do
it!
I doubt whether two young bird could have know less about keep
house, than I and my pretty Dora do. we have a servant, of course.
she keep house for we. I have still a latent belief that she must
have be Mrs. Crupp's daughter in disguise, we have such an awful
time of it with Mary Anne.
her name be Paragon. her nature be represent to we, when we
engage she, as be feebly express in her name. she have a
write character, as large as a proclamation; and, accord to
this document, could do everything of a domestic nature that ever
I hear of, and a great many thing that I never do hear of. she
be a woman in the prime of life; of a severe countenance; and
subject (particularly in the arm) to a sort of perpetual measle
or fiery rash. she have a cousin in the Life-Guards, with such long
leg that he look like the afternoon shadow of somebody else.
his shell-jacket be as much too little for he as he be too big
for the premise. he make the cottage small than it need have
be, by be so very much out of proportion to it. besides
which, the wall be not thick, and, whenever he pass the
evening at our house, we always know of it by hear one continual
growl in the kitchen.
our treasure be warrant sober and honest. I be therefore
willing to believe that she be in a fit when we find she under
the boiler; and that the deficient tea-spoon be attributable to
the dustman.
but she prey upon our mind dreadfully. we feel our
inexperience, and be unable to help ourselves. we should have
be at her mercy, if she have have any; but she be a remorseless
woman, and have none. she be the cause of our first little
quarrel.
'my dearest life,' I say one day to Dora, 'do you think Mary Anne
have any idea of time?'
'why, Doady?' inquire Dora, look up, innocently, from she
drawing.
'my love, because itbe five, and we be to have din at four.'
Dora glance wistfully at the clock, and hint that she think it
be too fast.
'on the contrary, my love,' say I, refer to my watch, 'itbe a
few minute too slow.'
my little wife come and sit upon my knee, to coax I to be quiet,
and draw a line with her pencil down the middle of my nose; but I
couldnot dine off that, though it be very agreeable.
'donot you think, my dear,' say I, 'it would be well for you to
remonstrate with Mary Anne?'
'oh no, please! I couldnot, Doady!' say Dora.
'why not, my love?' I gently ask.
'oh, because I be such a little goose,' say Dora, 'and she know
I be!'
I think this sentiment so incompatible with the establishment of
any system of check on Mary Anne, that I frown a little.
'oh, what ugly wrinkle in my bad boy's forehead!' say Dora, and
still be on my knee, she trace they with her pencil; put it
to her rosy lip to make it mark blacker, and work at my
forehead with a quaint little mockery of be industrious, that
quite delight I in spite of myself.
'therebe a good child,' say Dora, 'it make its face so much
pretty to laugh.'
'but, my love,' say I.
'no, no! please!' cry Dora, with a kiss, 'donot be a naughty Blue
Beard! donot be serious!'
'my precious wife,' say I, 'we must be serious sometimes. come!
sit down on this chair, close beside I! give I the pencil!
there! now let we talk sensibly. you know, dear'; what a little
hand it be to hold, and what a tiny wedding-ring it be to see!
'you know, my love, it be not exactly comfortable to have to go out
without one's dinner. now, be it?'
'n-n-no!' reply Dora, faintly.
'my love, how you tremble!'
'because I know yoube go to scold I,' exclaim Dora, in a
piteous voice.
'my sweet, I be only go to reason.'
'oh, but reasoning be bad than scold!' exclaim Dora, in
despair. 'I donot marry to be reason with. if you mean to
reason with such a poor little thing as I be, you ought to have
tell I so, you cruel boy!'
I try to pacify Dora, but she turn away her face, and shake she
curl from side to side, and say, 'you cruel, cruel boy!' so many
time, that I really do not exactly know what to do: so I take a
few turn up and down the room in my uncertainty, and come back
again.
'Dora, my darling!'
'no, I be not your darling. because you must be sorry that you
marry I, or else you wouldnot reason with I!' return Dora.
I feel so injure by the inconsequential nature of this charge,
that it give I courage to be grave.
'now, my own Dora,' say I, 'you be very childish, and be talk
nonsense. you must remember, I be sure, that I be oblige to go
out yesterday when dinner be half over; and that, the day before,
I be make quite unwell by be oblige to eat underdone veal in
a hurry; today, I donot dine at all - and I be afraid to say how
long we wait for breakfast - and then the water donot boil. I
donot mean to reproach you, my dear, but this be not comfortable.'
'oh, you cruel, cruel boy, to say I be a disagreeable wife!' cry
Dora.
'now, my dear Dora, you must know that I never say that!'
'you say, I benot comfortable!' cry Dora.
'I say the housekeeping be not comfortable!'
'itbe exactly the same thing!' cry Dora. and she evidently
think so, for she weep most grievously.
I take another turn across the room, full of love for my pretty
wife, and distract by self-accusatory inclination to knock my
head against the door. I sit down again, and say:
'I be not blame you, Dora. we have both a great deal to learn.
I be only try to show you, my dear, that you must - you really
must' (I be resolve not to give this up) - 'accustom yourself to
look after Mary Anne. likewise to act a little for yourself, and
I.'
'I wonder, I do, at your make such ungrateful speech,' sob
Dora. 'when you know that the other day, when you say you would
like a little bit of fish, I go out myself, mile and mile, and
order it, to surprise you.'
'and it be very kind of you, my own darling,' say I. 'I feel it
so much that I wouldnot on any account have even mention that you
buy a Salmon - which be too much for two. or that it cost one
pound six - which be more than we can afford.'
'you enjoy it very much,' sob Dora. 'and you say I be a
Mouse.'
'and Iwill say so again, my love,' I return, 'a thousand time!'
but I have wound Dora's soft little heart, and she be not to be
comfort. she be so pathetic in her sobbing and bewail, that
I feel as if I have say I donot know what to hurt she. I be
oblige to hurry away; I be keep out late; and I feel all night
such pang of remorse as make I miserable. I have the conscience
of an assassin, and be haunt by a vague sense of enormous
wickedness.
it be two or three hour past midnight when I get home. I find
my aunt, in our house, sit up for I.
'be anything the matter, aunt?' say I, alarm.
'nothing, Trot,' she reply. 'sit down, sit down. little Blossom
have be rather out of spirit, and I have be keep her
company. thatbe all.'
I lean my head upon my hand; and feel more sorry and downcast, as
I sit look at the fire, than I could have suppose possible so
soon after the fulfilment of my bright hope. as I sit
thinking, I happen to meet my aunt's eye, which be rest on
my face. there be an anxious expression in they, but it clear
directly.
'I assure you, aunt,' say I, 'I have be quite unhappy myself all
night, to think of Dora's be so. but I have no other intention
than to speak to her tenderly and lovingly about our home-affair.'
my aunt nod encouragement.
'you must have patience, Trot,' say she.
'of course. Heaven know I donot mean to be unreasonable, aunt!'
'no, no,' say my aunt. 'but little Blossom be a very tender
little blossom, and the wind must be gentle with she.'
I thank my good aunt, in my heart, for her tenderness towards my
wife; and I be sure that she know I do.
'donot you think, aunt,' say I, after some further contemplation
of the fire, 'that you could advise and counsel Dora a little, for
our mutual advantage, now and then?'
'trot,' return my aunt, with some emotion, 'no! donot ask I
such a thing.'
her tone be so very earnest that I raise my eye in surprise.
'I look back on my life, child,' say my aunt, 'and I think of some
who be in their graf, with whom I might have be on kind
term. if I judge harshly of other people's mistake in marriage,
it may have be because I have bitter reason to judge harshly of my
own. let that pass. I have be a grumpy, frumpy, wayward sort of
a woman, a good many year. I be still, and I always shall be.
but you and I have do one another some good, Trot, - at all
event, you have do I good, my dear; and division must not come
between we, at this time of day.'
'division between we!' cry I.
'child, child!' say my aunt, smooth her dress, 'how soon it
might come between we, or how unhappy I might make our little
Blossom, if I meddle in anything, a prophet couldnot say. I want
our pet to like I, and be as gay as a butterfly. remember your
own home, in that second marriage; and never do both I and her the
injury you have hint at!'
I comprehend, at once, that my aunt be right; and I comprehend
the full extent of her generous feeling towards my dear wife.
'these be early day, Trot,' she pursue, 'and Rome be not build
in a day, nor in a year. you have choose freely for yourself'; a
cloud pass over her face for a moment, I think; 'and you have
choose a very pretty and a very affectionate creature. it will be
your duty, and it will be your pleasure too - of course I know
that; I be not deliver a lecture - to estimate she (as you choose
she) by the quality she have, and not by the quality she may not
have. the latter you must develop in she, if you can. and if you
cannot, child,' here my aunt rub her nose, 'you must just
accustom yourself to do without them. but remember, my dear, your
future be between you two. no one can assist you; you be to work
it out for yourself. this be marriage, Trot; and Heaven bless
you both, in it, for a pair of babe in the wood as you be!'
my aunt say this in a sprightly way, and give I a kiss to ratify
the blessing.
'now,' say she, 'light my little lantern, and see I into my
bandbox by the garden path'; for there be a communication between
our cottage in that direction. 'give Betsey Trotwood's love to
Blossom, when you come back; and whatever you do, Trot, never dream
of set Betsey up as a scarecrow, for if I ever see she in the
glass, shebe quite grim enough and gaunt enough in her private
capacity!'
with this my aunt tie her head up in a handkerchief, with which
she be accustomed to make a bundle of it on such occasion; and I
escort her home. as she stand in her garden, hold up her
little lantern to light I back, I think her observation of I
have an anxious air again; but I be too much occupy in ponder
on what she have say, and too much impressed - for the first time,
in reality - by the conviction that Dora and I have indeed to work
out our future for ourselves, and that no one could assist we, to
take much notice of it.
Dora come steal down in her little slipper, to meet I, now
that I be alone; and cry upon my shoulder, and say I have be
hard-hearted and she have be naughty; and I say much the same
thing in effect, I believe; and we make it up, and agree that our
first little difference be to be our last, and that we be never
to have another if we live a hundred year.
the next domestic trial we go through, be the Ordeal of
servant. Mary Anne's cousin desert into our coal-hole, and be
bring out, to our great amazement, by a piquet of his companion
in arm, who take he away handcuffed in a procession that cover
our front-garden with ignominy. this nerve I to get rid of Mary
Anne, who go so mildly, on receipt of wage, that I be
surprised, until I find out about the tea-spoon, and also about
the little sum she have borrow in my name of the tradespeople
without authority. after an interval of Mrs. Kidgerbury - the
old inhabitant of Kentish Town, I believe, who go out charing,
but be too feeble to execute her conception of that art - we
find another treasure, who be one of the most amiable of woman,
but who generally make a point of fall either up or down the
kitchen stair with the tray, and almost plunge into the parlour,
as into a bath, with the tea-thing. the ravage commit by this
unfortunate, render her dismissal necessary, she be succeed
(with interval of Mrs. Kidgerbury) by a long line of incapable;
terminate in a young person of genteel appearance, who go to
Greenwich Fair in Dora's bonnet. after whom I remember nothing but
an average equality of failure.
everybody we have anything to do with seem to cheat we. our
appearance in a shop be a signal for the damage good to be
bring out immediately. if we buy a lobster, it be full of
water. all our meat turn out to be tough, and there be hardly
any crust to our loaf. in search of the principle on which
joint ought to be roast, to be roast enough, and not too much,
I myself refer to the Cookery Book, and find it there
establish as the allowance of a quarter of an hour to every
pound, and say a quarter over. but the principle always fail we
by some curious fatality, and we never could hit any medium between
redness and cinder.
I have reason to believe that in accomplish these failure we
incur a far great expense than if we have achieve a series of
triumph. it appear to I, on look over the tradesman's
book, as if we might have keep the basement storey pave with
butter, such be the extensive scale of our consumption of that
article. I donot know whether the Excise return of the period may
have exhibit any increase in the demand for pepper; but if our
performance do not affect the market, I should say several
family must have leave off use it. and the most wonderful fact
of all be, that we never have anything in the house.
as to the washerwoman pawn the clothe, and come in a state of
penitent intoxication to apologize, I suppose that might have
happen several time to anybody. also the chimney on fire, the
parish engine, and perjury on the part of the Beadle. but I
apprehend that we be personally fortunate in engage a servant
with a taste for cordial, who swell our run account for
porter at the public-house by such inexplicable item as 'quartern
rum shrub (Mrs. C.)'; 'half-quartern gin and clove (Mrs. C.)';
'Glass rum and peppermint (Mrs. C.)' - the parenthesis always
refer to Dora, who be suppose, it appear on explanation, to
have imbibe the whole of these refreshment.
one of our first feat in the housekeeping way be a little dinner
to traddle. I meet he in town, and ask he to walk out with I
that afternoon. he readily consent, I write to Dora, say I
would bring he home. it be pleasant weather, and on the road we
make my domestic happiness the theme of conversation. traddle be
very full of it; and say, that, picture himself with such a
home, and Sophy wait and prepare for he, he could think of
nothing want to complete his bliss.
I could not have wish for a pretty little wife at the opposite
end of the table, but I certainly could have wish, when we sit
down, for a little more room. I do not know how it be, but
though there be only two of we, we be at once always cramp
for room, and yet have always room enough to lose everything in. I
suspect it may have be because nothing have a place of its own,
except Jip's pagoda, which invariably block up the main
thoroughfare. on the present occasion, Traddles be so hem in
by the pagoda and the guitar-case, and Dora's flower-painting, and
my writing-table, that I have serious doubt of the possibility of
his use his knife and fork; but he protest, with his own
good-humour, 'ocean of room, Copperfield! I assure you, Oceans!'
there be another thing I could have wish, namely, that Jip have
never be encourage to walk about the tablecloth during dinner.
I begin to think there be something disorderly in his be there
at all, even if he have not be in the habit of put his foot in
the salt or the melted butter. on this occasion he seem to think
he be introduce expressly to keep traddle at bay; and he bark
at my old friend, and make short run at his plate, with such
undaunted pertinacity, that he may be say to have engross the
conversation.
however, as I know how tender-hearted my dear Dora be, and how
sensitive she would be to any slight upon her favourite, I hint
no objection. for similar reason I make no allusion to the
skirmishing plate upon the floor; or to the disreputable
appearance of the castor, which be all at six and seven, and
look drunk; or to the further blockade of Traddles by wander
vegetable dish and jug. I could not help wonder in my own
mind, as I contemplate the boil leg of mutton before I,
previous to carve it, how it come to pass that our joint of meat
be of such extraordinary shape - and whether our butcher
contract for all the deform sheep that come into the world; but
I keep my reflection to myself.
'my love,' say I to Dora, 'what have you get in that dish?'
I could not imagine why Dora have be make tempting little face
at I, as if she want to kiss I.
'oyster, dear,' say Dora, timidly.
'be that your think?' say I, delight.
'ye-yes, Doady,' say Dora.
'there never be a happy one!' I exclaim, lay down the
carving-knife and fork. 'there be nothing traddle like so much!'
'ye-yes, Doady,' say Dora, 'and so I buy a beautiful little
barrel of they, and the man say they be very good. but I - I be
afraid therebe something the matter with they. they donot seem
right.' here Dora shake her head, and diamond twinkle in her
eye.
'they be only open in both shell,' say I. 'take the top one
off, my love.'
'but it willnot come off!' say Dora, try very hard, and look
very much distressed.
'do you know, Copperfield,' say traddle, cheerfully examine the
dish, 'I think it be in consequence - they be capital oyster, but
I think it be in consequence - of their never have be open.'
they never have be open; and we have no oyster-knife - and
couldnot have use they if we have; so we look at the oyster and
eat the mutton. at least we eat as much of it as be do, and
make up with caper. if I have permit he, I be satisfied that
traddle would have make a perfect savage of himself, and eat a
plateful of raw meat, to express enjoyment of the repast; but I
would hear of no such immolation on the altar of friendship, and we
have a course of bacon instead; there happen, by good fortune, to
be cold bacon in the larder.
my poor little wife be in such affliction when she think I
should be annoy, and in such a state of joy when she find I be
not, that the discomfiture I have subdue, very soon vanish, and
we pass a happy evening; Dora sit with her arm on my chair
while traddle and I discuss a glass of wine, and take every
opportunity of whispering in my ear that it be so good of I not
to be a cruel, cross old boy. by and by she make tea for we; which
it be so pretty to see she do, as if she be busy herself with
a set of doll's tea-thing, that I be not particular about the
quality of the beverage. then traddle and I play a game or two
at cribbage; and Dora singing to the guitar the while, it seem to
I as if our courtship and marriage be a tender dream of mine,
and the night when I first listen to her voice be not yet over.
when traddle go away, and I come back into the parlour from
see he out, my wife plant her chair close to mine, and sit
down by my side. 'I be very sorry,' she say. 'will you try to
teach I, Doady?'
'I must teach myself first, Dora,' say I. 'I be as bad as you,
love.'
'ah! but you can learn,' she return; 'and you be a clever,
clever man!'
'nonsense, mouse!' say I.
'I wish,' resume my wife, after a long silence, 'that I could have
go down into the country for a whole year, and live with Agnes!'
her hand be clasp upon my shoulder, and her chin rest on
they, and her blue eye look quietly into mine.
'why so?' I ask.
'I think she might have improve I, and I think I might have
learn from she,' say Dora.
'all in good time, my love. Agnes have have her father to take care
of for these many year, you should remember. even when she be
quite a child, she be the Agnes whom we know,' say I.
'will you call I a name I want you to call I?' inquire Dora,
without move.
'what be it?' I ask with a smile.
'itbe a stupid name,' she say, shake her curl for a moment.
'child-wife.'
I laughingly ask my child-wife what her fancy be in desire to
be so call. she answer without move, otherwise than as the
arm I twin about she may have bring her blue eye near to I:
'I donot mean, you silly fellow, that you should use the name
instead of Dora. I only mean that you should think of I that way.
when you be go to be angry with I, say to yourself, "itbe only
my child-wife!" when I be very disappointing, say, "I know, a long
time ago, that she would make but a child-wife!" when you miss what
I should like to be, and I think can never be, say, "still my
foolish child-wife love I!" for indeed I do.'
I have not be serious with she; have no idea until now, that she
be serious herself. but her affectionate nature be so happy in
what I now say to she with my whole heart, that her face become a
laugh one before her glitter eye be dry. she be soon my
child-wife indeed; sit down on the floor outside the Chinese
House, ring all the little bell one after another, to punish
Jip for his recent bad behaviour; while Jip lie blink in the
doorway with his head out, even too lazy to be tease.
this appeal of Dora's make a strong impression on I. I look back
on the time I write of; I invoke the innocent figure that I dearly
love, to come out from the mist and shadow of the past, and turn
its gentle head towards I once again; and I can still declare that
this one little speech be constantly in my memory. I may not have
use it to the good account; I be young and inexperienced; but I
never turn a deaf ear to its artless pleading.
Dora tell I, shortly afterwards, that she be go to be a
wonderful housekeeper. accordingly, she polish the tablet,
point the pencil, buy an immense account-book, carefully
stitch up with a needle and thread all the leaf of the Cookery
Book which Jip have tear, and make quite a desperate little attempt
'to be good', as she call it. but the figure have the old
obstinate propensity - they would not add up. when she have enter
two or three laborious item in the account-book, Jip would walk
over the page, wag his tail, and smear they all out. her own
little right-hand middle finger get steep to the very bone in
ink; and I think that be the only decide result obtain.
sometimes, of an evening, when I be at home and at work - for I
write a good deal now, and be begin in a small way to be know
as a writer - I would lay down my pen, and watch my child-wife
try to be good. first of all, she would bring out the immense
account-book, and lie it down upon the table, with a deep sigh.
then she would open it at the place where Jip have make it illegible
last night, and call Jip up, to look at his misdeed. this would
occasion a diversion in Jip's favour, and some inking of his nose,
perhaps, as a penalty. then she would tell Jip to lie down on the
table instantly, 'like a lion' - which be one of his trick,
though I cannot say the likeness be strike - and, if he be in
an obedient humour, he would obey. then she would take up a pen,
and begin to write, and find a hair in it. then she would take up
another pen, and begin to write, and find that it splutter. then
she would take up another pen, and begin to write, and say in a low
voice, 'oh, itbe a talk pen, and will disturb Doady!' and then
she would give it up as a bad job, and put the account-book away,
after pretend to crush the lion with it.
or, if she be in a very sedate and serious state of mind, she
would sit down with the tablet, and a little basket of bill and
other document, which look more like curl-paper than anything
else, and endeavour to get some result out of they. after severely
compare one with another, and make entry on the tablet, and
blot they out, and count all the finger of her left hand
over and over again, backwards and forwards, she would be so vexed
and discourage, and would look so unhappy, that it give I pain to
see her bright face clouded - and for I! - and I would go softly
to she, and say:
'whatbe the matter, Dora?'
Dora would look up hopelessly, and reply, 'they willnot come right.
they make my head ache so. and they willnot do anything I want!'
then I would say, 'now let we try together. let I show you,
Dora.'
then I would commence a practical demonstration, to which Dora
would pay profound attention, perhaps for five minute; when she
would begin to be dreadfully tired, and would lighten the subject
by curl my hair, or try the effect of my face with my
shirt-collar turn down. if I tacitly check this playfulness,
and persist, she would look so scared and disconsolate, as she
become more and more bewildered, that the remembrance of her
natural gaiety when I first stray into her path, and of her be
my child-wife, would come reproachfully upon I; and I would lay
the pencil down, and call for the guitar.
I have a great deal of work to do, and have many anxiety, but the
same consideration make I keep they to myself. I be far from
sure, now, that it be right to do this, but I do it for my
child-wife's sake. I search my breast, and I commit its secret,
if I know they, without any reservation to this paper. the old
unhappy loss or want of something have, I be conscious, some place
in my heart; but not to the embitterment of my life. when I walk
alone in the fine weather, and thought of the summer day when all
the air have be fill with my boyish enchantment, I do miss
something of the realization of my dream; but I think it be a
soften glory of the Past, which nothing could have throw upon
the present time. I do feel, sometimes, for a little while, that
I could have wish my wife have be my counsellor; have have more
character and purpose, to sustain I and improve I by; have be
endow with power to fill up the void which somewhere seem to be
about I; but I feel as if this be an unearthly consummation of
my happiness, that never have be mean to be, and never could have
be.
I be a boyish husband as to year. I have know the soften
influence of no other sorrow or experience than those record in
these leaf. if I do any wrong, as I may have do much, I do
it in mistaken love, and in my want of wisdom. I write the exact
truth. it would avail I nothing to extenuate it now.
thus it be that I take upon myself the toil and care of our
life, and have no partner in they. we live much as before, in
reference to our scramble household arrangement; but I have get
use to those, and Dora I be pleased to see be seldom vex now.
she be bright and cheerful in the old childish way, love I
dearly, and be happy with her old trifle.
when the debate be heavy - I mean as to length, not quality, for
in the last respect they be not often otherwise - and I go home
late, Dora would never rest when she hear my footstep, but would
always come downstairs to meet I. when my evening be
unoccupied by the pursuit for which I have qualify myself with so
much pain, and I be engage in writing at home, she would sit
quietly near I, however late the hour, and be so mute, that I
would often think she have drop asleep. but generally, when I
raise my head, I see her blue eye look at I with the quiet
attention of which I have already speak.
'oh, what a weary boy!' say Dora one night, when I meet her eye as
I be shut up my desk.
'what a weary girl!' say I. 'thatbe more to the purpose. you
must go to bed another time, my love. itbe far too late for you.'
'no, donot send I to bed!' plead Dora, come to my side.
'pray, donot do that!'
'Dora!' to my amazement she be sob on my neck. 'not well, my
dear! not happy!'
'yes! quite well, and very happy!' say Dora. 'but say youwill let
I stop, and see you write.'
'why, what a sight for such bright eye at midnight!' I reply.
'be they bright, though?' return Dora, laugh. 'Ibe so glad
theybe bright.'
'Little vanity!' say I.
but it be not vanity; it be only harmless delight in my
admiration. I know that very well, before she tell I so.
'if you think they pretty, say I may always stop, and see you
write!' say Dora. 'do you think they pretty?'
'very pretty.'
'then let I always stop and see you write.'
'I be afraid that willnot improve their brightness, Dora.'
'yes, it will! because, you clever boy, youwill not forget I then,
while you be full of silent fancy. will you mind it, if I say
something very, very silly? - more than usual?' inquire Dora,
peep over my shoulder into my face.
'what wonderful thing be that?' say I.
'please let I hold the pen,' say Dora. 'I want to have
something to do with all those many hour when you be so
industrious. may I hold the pen?'
the remembrance of her pretty joy when I say yes, bring tear
into my eye. the next time I sit down to write, and regularly
afterwards, she sit in her old place, with a spare bundle of pen
at her side. her triumph in this connexion with my work, and her
delight when I want a new pen - which I very often feign to do
- suggest to I a new way of please my child-wife. I
occasionally make a pretence of want a page or two of manuscript
copy. then Dora be in her glory. the preparation she make for
this great work, the apron she put on, the bib she borrow from
the kitchen to keep off the ink, the time she take, the innumerable
stoppage she make to have a laugh with Jip as if he understand it
all, her conviction that her work be incomplete unless she sign
her name at the end, and the way in which she would bring it to I,
like a school-copy, and then, when I praise it, clasp I round the
neck, be touch recollection to I, simple as they might appear
to other man.
she take possession of the key soon after this, and go jingle
about the house with the whole bunch in a little basket, tie to
her slender waist. I seldom find that the place to which they
belong be lock, or that they be of any use except as a
plaything for Jip - but Dora be pleased, and that please I. she
be quite satisfied that a good deal be effect by this
make-belief of housekeeping; and be as merry as if we have be
keep a baby-house, for a joke.
so we go on. Dora be hardly less affectionate to my aunt than
to I, and often tell she of the time when she be afraid she be
'a cross old thing'. I never see my aunt unbend more
systematically to anyone. she court Jip, though Jip never
respond; listened, day after day, to the guitar, though I be
afraid she have no taste for music; never attack the Incapables,
though the temptation must have be severe; go wonderful
distance on foot to purchase, as surprise, any trifle that she
find out Dora want; and never come in by the garden, and miss
she from the room, but she would call out, at the foot of the
stair, in a voice that sound cheerfully all over the house:
'wherebe Little Blossom?'
CHAPTER 45
MR. DICK FULFILS MY AUNT's prediction
it be some time now, since I have leave the Doctor. live in his
neighbourhood, I see he frequently; and we all go to his house
on two or three occasion to dinner or tea. the Old Soldier be in
permanent quarter under the doctor's roof. she be exactly the
same as ever, and the same immortal butterfly hover over her
cap.
like some other mother, whom I have know in the course of my
life, Mrs. Markleham be far more fond of pleasure than her
daughter be. she require a great deal of amusement, and, like a
deep old soldier, pretend, in consult her own inclination, to
be devote herself to her child. the Doctor's desire that Annie
should be entertain, be therefore particularly acceptable to
this excellent parent; who express unqualified approval of his
discretion.
I have no doubt, indeed, that she probe the Doctor's wound without
know it. mean nothing but a certain mature frivolity and
selfishness, not always inseparable from full-blow year, I think
she confirm he in his fear that he be a constraint upon his
young wife, and that there be no congeniality of feeling between
they, by so strongly commend his design of lighten the load
of her life.
'my dear soul,' she say to he one day when I be present, 'you
know there be no doubt it would be a little pokey for Annie to be
always shut up here.'
the Doctor nod his benevolent head. 'when she come to her
mother's age,' say Mrs. Markleham, with a flourish of her fan,
'then itwill be another thing. you might put I into a jail, with
genteel society and a rubber, and I should never care to come out.
but I be not Annie, you know; and Annie be not her mother.'
'surely, surely,' say the Doctor.
'you be the good of creature - no, I beg your pardon!' for the
doctor make a gesture of deprecation, 'I must say before your face,
as I always say behind your back, you be the good of creature;
but of course you donot - now do you? - enter into the same
pursuit and fancy as Annie?'
'no,' say the Doctor, in a sorrowful tone.
'no, of course not,' retort the Old Soldier. 'take your
Dictionary, for example. what a useful work a Dictionary be! what
a necessary work! the meaning of word! without Doctor Johnson,
or somebody of that sort, we might have be at this present moment
call an italian-iron, a bedstead. but we cannot expect a
Dictionary - especially when itbe make - to interest Annie, can
we?'
the doctor shake his head.
'and thatbe why I so much approve,' say Mrs. Markleham, tap
he on the shoulder with her shut-up fan, 'of your thoughtfulness.
it show that you donot expect, as many elderly people do expect,
old head on young shoulder. you have study Annie's character,
and you understand it. thatbe what I find so charming!'
even the calm and patient face of Doctor Strong express some
little sense of pain, I think, under the infliction of these
compliment.
'therefore, my dear doctor,' say the Old Soldier, give he
several affectionate tap, 'you may command I, at all time and
season. now, do understand that I be entirely at your service.
I be ready to go with Annie to opera, concert, exhibition, all
kind of place; and you shall never find that I be tired. Duty,
my dear Doctor, before every consideration in the universe!'
she be as good as her word. she be one of those people who can
bear a great deal of pleasure, and she never flinch in her
perseverance in the cause. she seldom get hold of the newspaper
(which she settle herself down in the soft chair in the house
to read through an eye-glass, every day, for two hour), but she
find out something that she be certain Annie would like to see.
it be in vain for Annie to protest that she be weary of such
thing. her mother's remonstrance always be, 'now, my dear Annie,
I be sure you know well; and I must tell you, my love, that you
be not make a proper return for the kindness of Doctor Strong.'
this be usually say in the Doctor's presence, and appear to I
to constitute Annie's principal inducement for withdraw she
objection when she make any. but in general she resign herself
to her mother, and go where the Old Soldier would.
it rarely happen now that Mr. Maldon accompany they. sometimes
my aunt and Dora be invite to do so, and accept the
invitation. sometimes Dora only be ask. the time have be,
when I should have be uneasy in she go; but reflection on what
have pass that former night in the Doctor's study, have make a
change in my mistrust. I believe that the doctor be right, and
I have no bad suspicion.
my aunt rub her nose sometimes when she happen to be alone
with I, and say she couldnot make it out; she wish they be
happy; she donot think our military friend (so she always call
the Old Soldier) mend the matter at all. my aunt far
express her opinion, 'that if our military friend would cut off
those butterfly, and give them to the chimney-sweeper for
May-day, it would look like the beginning of something sensible on
her part.'
but her abide reliance be on Mr. Dick. that man have evidently
an idea in his head, she say; and if he could only once pen it up
into a corner, which be his great difficulty, he would distinguish
himself in some extraordinary manner.
Unconscious of this prediction, Mr. Dick continue to occupy
precisely the same ground in reference to the Doctor and to Mrs.
Strong. he seem neither to advance nor to recede. he appear
to have settle into his original foundation, like a building; and
I must confess that my faith in his ever move, be not much
great than if he have be a building.
but one night, when I have be marry some month, Mr. Dick put
his head into the parlour, where I be write alone (Dora have
go out with my aunt to take tea with the two little bird), and
say, with a significant cough:
'you couldnot speak to I without inconvenience yourself,
Trotwood, I be afraid?'
'certainly, Mr. Dick,' say I; 'come in!'
'trotwood,' say Mr. Dick, lay his finger on the side of his
nose, after he have shake hand with I. 'before I sit down, I
wish to make an observation. you know your aunt?'
'a little,' I reply.
'she be the most wonderful woman in the world, sir!'
after the delivery of this communication, which he shoot out of
himself as if he be load with it, Mr. Dick sit down with
great gravity than usual, and look at I.
'now, boy,' say Mr. Dick, 'I be go to put a question to you.'
'as many as you please,' say I.
'what do you consider I, sir?' ask Mr. Dick, fold his arm.
'a dear old friend,' say I.
'thank you, Trotwood,' return Mr. Dick, laughing, and reach
across in high glee to shake hand with I. 'but I mean, boy,'
resume his gravity, 'what do you consider I in this respect?'
touch his forehead.
I be puzzle how to answer, but he help I with a word.
'weak?' say Mr. Dick.
'well,' I reply, dubiously. 'rather so.'
'exactly!' cry Mr. Dick, who seem quite enchant by my reply.
'that be, Trotwood, when they take some of the trouble out of
you-know-whobe head, and put it you know where, there be a -' Mr.
Dick make his two hand revolve very fast about each other a great
number of time, and then bring they into collision, and roll
they over and over one another, to express confusion. 'there be
that sort of thing do to I somehow. eh?'
I nod at he, and he nod back again.
'in short, boy,' say Mr. Dick, drop his voice to a whisper, 'I
be simple.'
I would have qualify that conclusion, but he stop I.
'yes, I be! she pretend I be not. she willnot hear of it; but I
be. I know I be. if she havenot stand my friend, sir, I should
have be shut up, to lead a dismal life these many year. but
Iwill provide for she! I never spend the copying money. I put it
in a box. I have make a will. Iwill leave it all to she. she
shall be rich - noble!'
Mr. Dick take out his pocket-handkerchief, and wipe his eye. he
then fold it up with great care, press it smooth between his
two hand, put it in his pocket, and seem to put my aunt away
with it.
'now you be a scholar, Trotwood,' say Mr. Dick. 'you be a fine
scholar. you know what a learn man, what a great man, the Doctor
be. you know what honour he have always do I. not proud in his
wisdom. humble, humble - condescend even to poor Dick, who be
simple and know nothing. I have send his name up, on a scrap of
paper, to the kite, along the string, when it have be in the sky,
among the lark. the kite have be glad to receive it, sir, and
the sky have be bright with it.'
I delight he by say, most heartily, that the Doctor be
deserve of our good respect and high esteem.
'and his beautiful wife be a star,' say Mr. Dick. 'a shin
star. I have see her shine, sir. but,' bring his chair
nearer, and lay one hand upon my knee - 'cloud, sir - cloud.'
I answer the solicitude which his face express, by convey
the same expression into my own, and shake my head.
'what cloud?' say Mr. Dick.
he look so wistfully into my face, and be so anxious to
understand, that I take great pain to answer he slowly and
distinctly, as I might have enter on an explanation to a child.
'there be some unfortunate division between they,' I reply.
'some unhappy cause of separation. a secret. it may be
inseparable from the discrepancy in their year. it may have grow
up out of almost nothing.'
Mr. Dick, who have tell off every sentence with a thoughtful nod,
pause when I have do, and sit consider, with his eye upon my
face, and his hand upon my knee.
'doctor not angry with she, Trotwood?' he say, after some time.
'no. devote to she.'
'then, I have get it, boy!' say Mr. Dick.
the sudden exultation with which he slap I on the knee, and
lean back in his chair, with his eyebrow lift up as high as he
could possibly lift they, make I think he far out of his wit
than ever. he become as suddenly grave again, and lean forward
as before, say - first respectfully take out his
pocket-handkerchief, as if it really do represent my aunt:
'most wonderful woman in the world, Trotwood. why have she do
nothing to set thing right?'
'too delicate and difficult a subject for such interference,' I
reply.
'fine scholar,' say Mr. Dick, touch I with his finger. 'why
have he do nothing?'
'for the same reason,' I return.
'then, I have get it, boy!' say Mr. Dick. and he stand up before
I, more exultingly than before, nod his head, and strike
himself repeatedly upon the breast, until one might have suppose
that he have nearly nod and strike all the breath out of his
body.
'a poor fellow with a craze, sir,' say Mr. Dick, 'a simpleton, a
weak-minded person - present company, you know!' strike himself
again, 'may do what wonderful people may not do. Iwill bring they
together, boy. Iwill try. theywill not blame I. theywill not
object to I. theywill not mind what I do, if itbe wrong. Ibe only
Mr. Dick. and who mind Dick? Dick's nobody! Whoo!' he blow a
slight, contemptuous breath, as if he blow himself away.
it be fortunate he have proceed so far with his mystery, for we
hear the coach stop at the little garden gate, which bring my
aunt and Dora home.
'not a word, boy!' he pursue in a whisper; 'leave all the blame
with Dick - simple Dick - mad Dick. I have be think, sir, for
some time, that I be get it, and now I have get it. after
what you have say to I, I be sure I have get it. all right!' not
another word do Mr. Dick utter on the subject; but he make a very
telegraph of himself for the next half-hour (to the great
disturbance of my aunt's mind), to enjoin inviolable secrecy on I.
to my surprise, I hear no more about it for some two or three
week, though I be sufficiently interested in the result of his
endeavour; descry a strange gleam of good sense - I say nothing
of good feeling, for that he always exhibit - in the conclusion
to which he have come. at last I begin to believe, that, in the
flighty and unsettled state of his mind, he have either forget
his intention or abandon it.
one fair evening, when Dora be not inclined to go out, my aunt and
I stroll up to the Doctor's cottage. it be autumn, when there
be no debate to vex the evening air; and I remember how the
leaf smell like our garden at Blunderstone as we trod they under
foot, and how the old, unhappy feeling, seem to go by, on the
sighing wind.
it be twilight when we reach the cottage. Mrs. Strong be just
come out of the garden, where Mr. Dick yet linger, busy with
his knife, help the gardener to point some stake. the doctor
be engage with someone in his study; but the visitor would be
go directly, Mrs. Strong say, and beg we to remain and see
he. we go into the drawing-room with she, and sit down by the
darken window. there be never any ceremony about the visit of
such old friend and neighbour as we be.
we have not sit here many minute, when Mrs. Markleham, who usually
contrive to be in a fuss about something, come bustle in, with
her newspaper in her hand, and say, out of breath, 'my goodness
gracious, Annie, why donot you tell I there be someone in the
Study!'
'my dear mama,' she quietly return, 'how could I know that you
desire the information?'
'desire the information!' say Mrs. Markleham, sink on the
sofa. 'I never have such a turn in all my life!'
'have you be to the Study, then, mama?' ask Annie.
'be to the Study, my dear!' she return emphatically. 'indeed
I have! I come upon the amiable creature - if youwill imagine my
feeling, Miss Trotwood and David - in the act of make his will.'
her daughter look round from the window quickly.
'in the act, my dear Annie,' repeat Mrs. Markleham, spread the
newspaper on her lap like a table-cloth, and pat her hand upon
it, 'of make his last Will and Testament. the foresight and
affection of the dear! I must tell you how it be. I really must,
in justice to the darling - for he be nothing less! - tell you how
it be. perhaps you know, Miss Trotwood, that there be never a
candle light in this house, until one's eye be literally
fall out of one's head with be stretch to read the paper.
and that there be not a chair in this house, in which a paper can
be what I call, read, except one in the study. this take I to the
Study, where I see a light. I open the door. in company with
the dear doctor be two professional people, evidently connect
with the law, and they be all three stand at the table: the
darling Doctor pen in hand. "this simply express then," say the
Doctor - Annie, my love, attend to the very word - "this simply
express then, gentleman, the confidence I have in Mrs. Strong,
and give she all unconditionally?" one of the professional people
reply, "and give she all unconditionally." upon that, with the
natural feeling of a mother, I say, "good God, I beg your
pardon!" fall over the door-step, and come away through the little
back passage where the pantry be.'
Mrs. Strong open the window, and go out into the verandah,
where she stand lean against a pillar.
'but now benot it, Miss Trotwood, benot it, David, invigorate,'
say Mrs. Markleham, mechanically follow she with her eye, 'to
find a man at Doctor Strong's time of life, with the strength of
mind to do this kind of thing? it only show how right I be. I
say to Annie, when Doctor Strong pay a very flattering visit to
myself, and make she the subject of a declaration and an offer, I
say, "my dear, there be no doubt whatever, in my opinion, with
reference to a suitable provision for you, that Doctor Strong will
do more than he bind himself to do."'
here the bell ring, and we hear the sound of the visitor' foot as
they go out.
'itbe all over, no doubt,' say the Old Soldier, after listen;
'the dear creature have sign, seal, and deliver, and his
mind's at rest. well it may be! what a mind! Annie, my love, I
be go to the Study with my paper, for I be a poor creature
without news. Miss Trotwood, David, pray come and see the Doctor.'
I be conscious of Mr. Dick's standing in the shadow of the room,
shut up his knife, when we accompany she to the study; and of
my aunt's rub her nose violently, by the way, as a mild vent
for her intolerance of our military friend; but who get first into
the Study, or how Mrs. Markleham settle herself in a moment in her
easy-chair, or how my aunt and I come to be leave together near the
door (unless her eye be quick than mine, and she hold I
back), I have forget, if I ever know. but this I know, - that
we see the doctor before he see we, sit at his table, among the
folio volume in which he delight, rest his head calmly on his
hand. that, in the same moment, we see Mrs. Strong glide in, pale
and tremble. that Mr. Dick support she on his arm. that he
lay his other hand upon the Doctor's arm, cause he to look up
with an abstract air. that, as the Doctor move his head, his
wife drop down on one knee at his foot, and, with her hand
imploringly lift, fix upon his face the memorable look I have
never forget. that at this sight Mrs. Markleham drop the
newspaper, and star more like a figure-head intend for a ship
to be call the Astonishment, than anything else I can think of.
the gentleness of the Doctor's manner and surprise, the dignity
that mingle with the supplicate attitude of his wife, the
amiable concern of Mr. Dick, and the earnestness with which my aunt
say to herself, 'that man mad!' (triumphantly expressive of the
misery from which she have save he) - I see and hear, rather than
remember, as I write about it.
'Doctor!' say Mr. Dick. 'what be it thatbe amiss? look here!'
'Annie!' cry the Doctor. 'not at my foot, my dear!'
'yes!' she say. 'I beg and pray that no one will leave the room!
oh, my husband and father, break this long silence. let we both
know what it be that have come between we!'
Mrs. Markleham, by this time recover the power of speech, and
seem to swell with family pride and motherly indignation, here
exclaim, 'Annie, get up immediately, and donot disgrace everybody
belong to you by humble yourself like that, unless you wish to
see I go out of my mind on the spot!'
'Mama!' return Annie. 'waste no word on I, for my appeal be to
my husband, and even you be nothing here.'
'nothing!' exclaim Mrs. Markleham. 'I, nothing! the child have
take leave of her sens. please to get I a glass of water!'
I be too attentive to the Doctor and his wife, to give any heed to
this request; and it make no impression on anybody else; so Mrs.
Markleham pant, star, and fan herself.
'Annie!' say the Doctor, tenderly take she in his hand. 'my
dear! if any unavoidable change have come, in the sequence of time,
upon our married life, you be not to blame. the fault be mine,
and only mine. there be no change in my affection, admiration, and
respect. I wish to make you happy. I truly love and honour you.
Rise, Annie, pray!'
but she do not rise. after look at he for a little while, she
sink down close to he, lay her arm across his knee, and drop
her head upon it, say:
'if I have any friend here, who can speak one word for I, or for
my husband in this matter; if I have any friend here, who can give
a voice to any suspicion that my heart have sometimes whisper to
I; if I have any friend here, who honour my husband, or have ever
care for I, and have anything within his knowledge, no matter what
it be, that may help to mediate between we, I implore that friend
to speak!'
there be a profound silence. after a few moment of painful
hesitation, I break the silence.
'Mrs. Strong,' I say, 'there be something within my knowledge,
which I have be earnestly entreat by Doctor Strong to conceal,
and have conceal until tonight. but, I believe the time have come
when it would be mistaken faith and delicacy to conceal it any
long, and when your appeal absolve I from his injunction.'
she turn her face towards I for a moment, and I know that I be
right. I could not have resist its entreaty, if the assurance
that it give I have be less convincing.
'our future peace,' she say, 'may be in your hand. I trust it
confidently to your not suppress anything. I know beforehand
that nothing you, or anyone, can tell I, will show my husband's
noble heart in any other light than one. howsoever it may seem to
you to touch I, disregard that. I will speak for myself, before
he, and before God afterwards.'
thus earnestly besought, I make no reference to the Doctor for his
permission, but, without any other compromise of the truth than a
little softening of the coarseness of Uriah Heep, relate plainly
what have pass in that same room that night. the staring of Mrs.
Markleham during the whole narration, and the shrill, sharp
interjection with which she occasionally interrupt it, defy
description.
when I have finish, Annie remain, for some few moment, silent,
with her head bend down, as I have describe. then, she take the
Doctor's hand (he be sit in the same attitude as when we have
enter the room), and press it to her breast, and kiss it.
Mr. Dick softly raise she; and she stand, when she begin to speak,
lean on he, and look down upon her husband - from whom she
never turn her eye.
'all that have ever be in my mind, since I be married,' she say
in a low, submissive, tender voice, 'I will lay bare before you.
I could not live and have one reservation, know what I know
now.'
'Nay, Annie,' say the Doctor, mildly, 'I have never doubt you,
my child. there be no need; indeed there be no need, my dear.'
'there be great need,' she answer, in the same way, 'that I
should open my whole heart before the soul of generosity and truth,
whom, year by year, and day by day, I have love and venerate more
and more, as Heaven know!'
'really,' interrupt Mrs. Markleham, 'if I have any discretion at
all -'
('which you havenot, you marplot,' observe my aunt, in an
indignant whisper.)
- 'I must be permit to observe that it cannot be requisite to
enter into these detail.'
'no one but my husband can judge of that, mama,' say Annie without
remove her eye from his face, 'and he will hear I. if I say
anything to give you pain, mama, forgive I. I have bear pain
first, often and long, myself.'
'upon my word!' gasp Mrs. Markleham.
'when I be very young,' say Annie, 'quite a little child, my
first association with knowledge of any kind be inseparable from
a patient friend and teacher - the friend of my dead father - who
be always dear to I. I can remember nothing that I know, without
remember he. he store my mind with its first treasure, and
stamp his character upon they all. they never could have be,
I think, as good as they have be to I, if I have take they from
any other hand.'
'make her mother nothing!' exclaim Mrs. Markleham.
'not so mama,' say Annie; 'but I make he what he be. I must do
that. as I grow up, he occupy the same place still. I be proud
of his interest: deeply, fondly, gratefully attach to he. I
look up to he, I can hardly describe how - as a father, as a
guide, as one whose praise be different from all other praise, as
one in whom I could have trust and confide, if I have doubt all
the world. you know, mama, how young and inexperienced I be, when
you present he before I, of a sudden, as a lover.'
'I have mention the fact, fifty time at least, to everybody
here!' say Mrs. Markleham.
('then hold your tongue, for the Lord's sake, and donot mention it
any more!' mutter my aunt.)
'it be so great a change: so great a loss, I feel it, at first,'
say Annie, still preserve the same look and tone, 'that I be
agitated and distressed. I be but a girl; and when so great a
change come in the character in which I have so long look up to
he, I think I be sorry. but nothing could have make he what he
use to be again; and I be proud that he should think I so
worthy, and we be marry.'
'- at Saint Alphage, Canterbury,' observe Mrs. Markleham.
('confound the woman!' say my aunt, 'she won't be quiet!')
'I never think,' proceed Annie, with a heighten colour, 'of
any worldly gain that my husband would bring to I. my young heart
have no room in its homage for any such poor reference. Mama,
forgive I when I say that it be you who first present to my
mind the thought that anyone could wrong I, and wrong he, by such
a cruel suspicion.'
'I!' cry Mrs. Markleham.
('ah! you, to be sure!' observe my aunt, 'and you cannot fan it
away, my military friend!')
'it be the first unhappiness of my new life,' say Annie. 'it be
the first occasion of every unhappy moment I have know. these
moment have be more, of late, than I can count; but not - my
generous husband! - not for the reason you suppose; for in my heart
there be not a thought, a recollection, or a hope, that any power
could separate from you!'
she raise her eye, and clasp her hand, and look as beautiful
and true, I think, as any Spirit. the Doctor look on she,
henceforth, as steadfastly as she on he.
'Mama be blameless,' she go on, 'of have ever urge you for
herself, and she be blameless in intention every way, I be sure, -
but when I see how many importunate claim be press upon you in
my name; how you be trade on in my name; how generous you be,
and how Mr. Wickfield, who have your welfare very much at heart,
resent it; the first sense of my exposure to the mean suspicion
that my tenderness be buy - and sell to you, of all man on
earth - fall upon I like unmerited disgrace, in which I force you
to participate. I cannot tell you what it be - mama cannot
imagine what it be - to have this dread and trouble always on my
mind, yet know in my own soul that on my marriage-day I crown the
love and honour of my life!'
'a speciman of the thank one get,' cry Mrs. Markleham, in
tear, 'for take care of one's family! I wish I be a Turk!'
('I wish you be, with all my heart - and in your native country!'
say my aunt.)
'it be at that time that mama be most solicitous about my Cousin
Maldon. I have like he': she speak softly, but without any
hesitation: 'very much. we have be little lover once. if
circumstance have not happen otherwise, I might have come to
persuade myself that I really love he, and might have marry
he, and be most wretched. there can be no disparity in marriage
like unsuitability of mind and purpose.'
I ponder on those word, even while I be studiously attend to
what follow, as if they have some particular interest, or some
strange application that I could not divine. 'there can be no
disparity in marriage like unsuitability of mind and purpose' -'no
disparity in marriage like unsuitability of mind and purpose.'
'there be nothing,' say Annie, 'that we have in common. I have
long find that there be nothing. if I be thankful to my husband
for no more, instead of for so much, I should be thankful to he
for have save I from the first mistaken impulse of my
undisciplined heart.'
she stand quite still, before the Doctor, and speak with an
earnestness that thrill I. yet her voice be just as quiet as
before.
'when he be wait to be the object of your munificence, so
freely bestow for my sake, and when I be unhappy in the
mercenary shape I be make to wear, I think it would have become
he well to have work his own way on. I think that if I have
be he, I would have try to do it, at the cost of almost any
hardship. but I think no bad of he, until the night of his
departure for India. that night I know he have a false and
thankless heart. I see a double meaning, then, in Mr. Wickfield's
scrutiny of I. I perceive, for the first time, the dark
suspicion that shadow my life.'
'Suspicion, Annie!' say the Doctor. 'no, no, no!'
'in your mind there be none, I know, my husband!' she return.
'and when I come to you, that night, to lay down all my load of
shame and grief, and know that I have to tell that, underneath your
roof, one of my own kindre, to whom you have be a benefactor, for
the love of I, have speak to I word that should have find no
utterance, even if I have be the weak and mercenary wretch he
think I - my mind revolt from the taint the very tale
convey. it die upon my lip, and from that hour till now have
never pass they.'
Mrs. Markleham, with a short groan, lean back in her easy-chair;
and retire behind her fan, as if she be never come out any
more.
'I have never, but in your presence, interchange a word with he
from that time; then, only when it have be necessary for the
avoidance of this explanation. year have pass since he know,
from I, what his situation here be. the kindness you have
secretly do for his advancement, and then disclose to I, for my
surprise and pleasure, have be, you will believe, but
aggravation of the unhappiness and burden of my secret.'
she sink down gently at the Doctor's foot, though he do his utmost
to prevent she; and say, look up, tearfully, into his face:
'do not speak to I yet! let I say a little more! right or
wrong, if this be to be do again, I think I should do just the
same. you never can know what it be to be devoted to you, with
those old association; to find that anyone could be so hard as to
suppose that the truth of my heart be barter away, and to be
surround by appearance confirm that belief. I be very
young, and have no adviser. between mama and I, in all relate to
you, there be a wide division. if I shrunk into myself, hiding
the disrespect I have undergo, it be because I honour you so
much, and so much wish that you should honour I!'
'Annie, my pure heart!' say the Doctor, 'my dear girl!'
'a little more! a very few word more! I use to think there be
so many whom you might have marry, who would not have bring
such charge and trouble on you, and who would have make your home
a worthy home. I use to be afraid that I have well have
remain your pupil, and almost your child. I use to fear that I
be so unsuited to your learning and wisdom. if all this make I
shrink within myself (as indeed it do), when I have that to tell,
it be still because I honour you so much, and hop that you
might one day honour I.'
'that day have shine this long time, Annie,' say the Doctor, and
can have but one long night, my dear.'
'another word! I afterwards mean - steadfastly mean, and
purpose to myself - to bear the whole weight of know the
unworthiness of one to whom you have be so good. and now a last
word, dearest and good of friend! the cause of the late change in
you, which I have see with so much pain and sorrow, and have
sometimes refer to my old apprehension - at other time to
linger supposition near to the truth - have be make clear
tonight; and by an accident I have also come to know, tonight, the
full measure of your noble trust in I, even under that mistake.
I do not hope that any love and duty I may render in return, will
ever make I worthy of your priceless confidence; but with all this
knowledge fresh upon I, I can lift my eye to this dear face,
revere as a father's, love as a husband's, sacred to I in my
childhood as a friend's, and solemnly declare that in my light
thought I have never wrong you; never waver in the love and the
fidelity I owe you!'
she have her arm around the doctor's neck, and he leant his head
down over she, mingle his grey hair with her dark brown tress.
'oh, hold I to your heart, my husband! never cast I out! do not
think or speak of disparity between we, for there be none, except
in all my many imperfection. every succeed year I have know
this well, as I have esteem you more and more. oh, take I to
your heart, my husband, for my love be found on a rock, and it
endure!'
in the silence that ensue, my aunt walk gravely up to Mr. Dick,
without at all hurry herself, and give he a hug and a sound
kiss. and it be very fortunate, with a view to his credit, that
she do so; for I be confident that I detect he at that moment
in the act of make preparation to stand on one leg, as an
appropriate expression of delight.
'you be a very remarkable man, Dick!' say my aunt, with an air of
unqualified approbation; 'and never pretend to be anything else,
for I know well!'
with that, my aunt pull he by the sleeve, and nod to I; and
we three steal quietly out of the room, and come away.
'thatbe a settler for our military friend, at any rate,' say my
aunt, on the way home. 'I should sleep the well for that, if
there be nothing else to be glad of!'
'she be quite overcome, I be afraid,' say Mr. Dick, with great
commiseration.
'what! do you ever see a crocodile overcome?' inquire my aunt.
'I donot think I ever see a crocodile,' return Mr. Dick, mildly.
'there never would have be anything the matter, if it havenot be
for that old Animal,' say my aunt, with strong emphasis. 'itbe
very much to be wish that some mother would leave their
daughter alone after marriage, and not be so violently
affectionate. they seem to think the only return that can be make
they for bring an unfortunate young woman into the world - God
bless my soul, as if she ask to be bring, or want to come! -
be full liberty to worry she out of it again. what be you
think of, Trot?'
I be think of all that have be say. my mind be still
run on some of the expression use. 'there can be no
disparity in marriage like unsuitability of mind and purpose.'
'the first mistaken impulse of an undisciplined heart.' 'my love
be found on a rock.' but we be at home; and the trodden
leaf be lie under-foot, and the autumn wind be blow.
CHAPTER 46
INTELLIGENCE
I must have be marry, if I may trust to my imperfect memory for
date, about a year or so, when one evening, as I be return
from a solitary walk, think of the book I be then write - for
my success have steadily increase with my steady application, and
I be engage at that time upon my first work of fiction - I come
past Mrs. Steerforth's house. I have often pass it before, during
my residence in that neighbourhood, though never when I could
choose another road. Howbeit, it do sometimes happen that it be
not easy to find another, without make a long circuit; and so I
have pass that way, upon the whole, pretty often.
I have never do more than glance at the house, as I go by with
a quickened step. it have be uniformly gloomy and dull. none of
the good room abut on the road; and the narrow, heavily-frame
old-fashioned window, never cheerful under any circumstance,
look very dismal, close shut, and with their blind always draw
down. there be a covered way across a little paved court, to an
entrance that be never use; and there be one round staircase
window, at odd with all the rest, and the only one unshade by a
blind, which have the same unoccupied blank look. I do not remember
that I ever see a light in all the house. if I have be a casual
passer-by, I should have probably suppose that some childless
person lie dead in it. if I have happily possess no knowledge of
the place, and have see it often in that changeless state, I should
have please my fancy with many ingenious speculation, I dare say.
as it be, I think as little of it as I might. but my mind could
not go by it and leave it, as my body do; and it usually awaken
a long train of meditation. come before I, on this particular
evening that I mention, mingle with the childish recollection and
later fancy, the ghost of half-form hope, the broken shadow
of disappointment dimly see and understand, the blending of
experience and imagination, incidental to the occupation with which
my thought have be busy, it be more than commonly suggestive.
I fall into a brown study as I walk on, and a voice at my side
make I start.
it be a woman's voice, too. I be not long in recollect Mrs.
Steerforth's little parlour-maid, who have formerly wear blue
ribbon in her cap. she have take they out now, to adapt herself,
I suppose, to the altered character of the house; and wear but one
or two disconsolate bow of sober brown.
'if you please, sir, would you have the goodness to walk in, and
speak to Miss Dartle?'
'have Miss Dartle send you for I?' I inquire.
'not tonight, sir, but itbe just the same. Miss Dartle see you
pass
a night or two ago; and I be to sit at work on the staircase, and
when I see you pass again, to ask you to step in and speak to she.'
I turn back, and inquire of my conductor, as we go along, how
Mrs. Steerforth be. she say her lady be but poorly, and keep
her own room a good deal.
when we arrive at the house, I be direct to Miss Dartle in the
garden, and leave to make my presence know to her myself. she be
sit on a seat at one end of a kind of terrace, overlook the
great city. it be a sombre evening, with a lurid light in the
sky; and as I see the prospect scowl in the distance, with here
and there some large object start up into the sullen glare, I
fancy it be no inapt companion to the memory of this fierce
woman.
she see I as I advance, and rise for a moment to receive I. I
think she, then, still more colourless and thin than when I have
see she last; the flash eye still bright, and the scar still
plainer.
our meeting be not cordial. we have part angrily on the last
occasion; and there be an air of disdain about she, which she take
no pain to conceal.
'I be tell you wish to speak to I, Miss Dartle,' say I, stand
near she, with my hand upon the back of the seat, and decline her
gesture of invitation to sit down.
'if you please,' say she. 'pray have this girl be find?'
'no.'
'and yet she have run away!'
I see her thin lip work while she look at I, as if they be
eager to load she with reproach.
'run away?' I repeat.
'yes! from he,' she say, with a laugh. 'if she be not find,
perhaps she never will be find. she may be dead!'
the vaunt cruelty with which she meet my glance, I never see
express in any other face that ever I have see.
'to wish her dead,' say I, 'may be the kind wish that one of
her own sex could bestow upon she. I be glad that time have
soften you so much, Miss Dartle.'
she condescend to make no reply, but, turn on I with another
scornful laugh, say:
'the friend of this excellent and much-injure young lady be
friend of your. you be their champion, and assert their right.
do you wish to know what be know of she?'
'yes,' say I.
she rise with an ill-favour smile, and take a few step towards
a wall of holly that be near at hand, divide the lawn from a
kitchen-garden, say, in a loud voice, 'come here!' - as if she
be call to some unclean beast.
'you will restrain any demonstrative championship or vengeance in
this place, of course, Mr. Copperfield?' say she, look over her
shoulder at I with the same expression.
I incline my head, without know what she mean; and she say,
'come here!' again; and return, follow by the respectable Mr.
Littimer, who, with undiminished respectability, make I a bow, and
take up his position behind she. the air of wicked grace: of
triumph, in which, strange to say, there be yet something feminine
and alluring: with which she recline upon the seat between we, and
look at I, be worthy of a cruel Princess in a Legend.
'now,' say she, imperiously, without glance at he, and touch
the old wound as it throb: perhaps, in this instance, with
pleasure rather than pain. 'tell Mr. Copperfield about the
flight.'
'Mr. James and myself, ma'am -'
'donot address yourself to I!' she interrupt with a frown.
'Mr. James and myself, sir -'
'nor to I, if you please,' say I.
Mr. Littimer, without be at all discompose, signify by a
slight obeisance, that anything that be most agreeable to we be
most agreeable to he; and begin again.
'Mr. James and myself have be abroad with the young woman, ever
since she leave Yarmouth under Mr. james's protection. we have be
in a variety of place, and see a deal of foreign country. we
have be in France, Switzerland, Italy, in fact, almost all
part.'
he look at the back of the seat, as if he be address himself
to that; and softly play upon it with his hand, as if he be
strike chord upon a dumb piano.
'Mr. James take quite uncommonly to the young woman; and be more
settle, for a length of time, than I have know he to be since I
have be in his service. the young woman be very improvable, and
speak the language; and wouldnot have be know for the same
country-person. I notice that she be much admired wherever we
go.'
Miss Dartle put her hand upon her side. I see he steal a glance
at she, and slightly smile to himself.
'very much admire, indeed, the young woman be. what with her
dress; what with the air and sun; what with be make so much of;
what with this, that, and the other; her merit really attract
general notice.'
he make a short pause. her eye wander restlessly over the
distant prospect, and she bite her nether lip to stop that busy
mouth.
take his hand from the seat, and place one of they within the
other, as he settle himself on one leg, Mr. Littimer proceed,
with his eye cast down, and his respectable head a little
advanced, and a little on one side:
'the young woman go on in this manner for some time, be
occasionally low in her spirit, until I think she begin to weary
Mr. James by give way to her low spirit and temper of that
kind; and thing be not so comfortable. Mr. James he begin to be
restless again. the more restless he get, the bad she get; and
I must say, for myself, that I have a very difficult time of it
indeed between the two. still matter be patch up here, and
make good there, over and over again; and altogether last, I be
sure, for a long time than anybody could have expect.'
recall her eye from the distance, she look at I again now,
with her former air. Mr. Littimer, clear his throat behind his
hand with a respectable short cough, change leg, and go on:
'at last, when there have be, upon the whole, a good many word
and reproach, Mr. James he set off one morning, from the
neighbourhood of Naples, where we have a villa (the young woman
be very partial to the sea), and, under pretence of come back
in a day or so, leave it in charge with I to break it out, that,
for the general happiness of all concern, he be' - here an
interruption of the short cough - 'go. but Mr. James, I must
say, certainly do behave extremely honourable; for he propose
that the young woman should marry a very respectable person, who
be fully prepared to overlook the past, and who be, at least, as
good as anybody the young woman could have aspire to in a regular
way: her connexion be very common.'
he change leg again, and wet his lip. I be convince that
the scoundrel speak of himself, and I see my conviction reflect
in Miss Dartle's face.
'this I also have it in charge to communicate. I be willing to do
anything to relieve Mr. James from his difficulty, and to restore
harmony between himself and an affectionate parent, who have
undergo so much on his account. therefore I undertake the
commission. the young woman's violence when she come to, after I
break the fact of his departure, be beyond all expectation. she
be quite mad, and have to be hold by force; or, if she couldnot
have get to a knife, or get to the sea, shewould have beat her head
against the marble floor.'
Miss Dartle, lean back upon the seat, with a light of exultation
in her face, seem almost to caress the sound this fellow have
utter.
'but when I come to the second part of what have be entrust to
I,' say Mr. Littimer, rub his hand uneasily, 'which anybody
might have suppose would have be, at all event, appreciate as
a kind intention, then the young woman come out in her true
colour. a more outrageous person I never do see. her conduct
be surprisingly bad. she have no more gratitude, no more feeling,
no more patience, no more reason in she, than a stock or a stone.
if I havenot be upon my guard, I be convinced she would have have
my blood.'
'I think the well of she for it,' say I, indignantly.
Mr. Littimer bend his head, as much as to say, 'indeed, sir? but
yoube young!' and resume his narrative.
'it be necessary, in short, for a time, to take away everything
nigh she, that she could do herself, or anybody else, an injury
with, and to shut she up close. notwithstanding which, she get out
in the night; force the lattice of a window, that I have nail up
myself; drop on a vine that be trail below; and never have
be see or hear of, to my knowledge, since.'
'she be dead, perhaps,' say Miss Dartle, with a smile, as if she
could have spurn the body of the ruin girl.
'she may have drown herself, miss,' return Mr. Littimer,
catch at an excuse for address himself to somebody. 'itbe
very possible. or, she may have have assistance from the boatman,
and the boatman's wife and child. be give to low company,
she be very much in the habit of talk to they on the beach,
Miss Dartle, and sit by their boat. I have know she do it,
when Mr. James have be away, whole day. Mr. James be far from
pleased to find out, once, that she have tell the child she be
a boatman's daughter, and that in her own country, long ago, she
have roam about the beach, like they.'
oh, Emily! unhappy beauty! what a picture rise before I of she
sit on the far-off shore, among the child like herself when
she be innocent, listen to little voice such as might have
call her Mother have she be a poor man's wife; and to the great
voice of the sea, with its eternal 'never more!'
'when it be clear that nothing could be do, Miss Dartle -'
'do I tell you not to speak to I?' she say, with stern contempt.
'you speak to I, miss,' he reply. 'I beg your pardon. but it
be my service to obey.'
'do your service,' she return. 'finish your story, and go!'
'when it be clear,' he say, with infinite respectability and an
obedient bow, 'that she be not to be find, I go to Mr. James,
at the place where it have be agree that I should write to he,
and inform he of what have occur. word pass between we in
consequence, and I feel it due to my character to leave he. I
could bear, and I have bear, a great deal from Mr. James; but he
insult I too far. he hurt I. know the unfortunate
difference between himself and his mother, and what her anxiety of
mind be likely to be, I take the liberty of come home to
England, and relate -'
'for money which I pay he,' say Miss Dartle to I.
'just so, ma'am - and relate what I know. I be not aware,' say
Mr. Littimer, after a moment's reflection, 'that there be anything
else. I be at present out of employment, and should be happy to
meet with a respectable situation.'
Miss Dartle glance at I, as though she would inquire if there
be anything that I desire to ask. as there be something which
have occur to my mind, I say in reply:
'I could wish to know from this - creature,' I could not bring
myself to utter any more conciliatory word, 'whether they
intercept a letter that be write to she from home, or whether
he suppose that she receive it.'
he remain calm and silent, with his eye fix on the ground, and
the tip of every finger of his right hand delicately poise against
the tip of every finger of his left.
Miss Dartle turn her head disdainfully towards he.
'I beg your pardon, miss,' he say, awakening from his abstraction,
'but, however submissive to you, I have my position, though a
servant. Mr. Copperfield and you, miss, be different people. if
Mr. Copperfield wish to know anything from I, I take the liberty
of remind Mr. Copperfield that he can put a question to I. I
have a character to maintain.'
after a momentary struggle with myself, I turn my eye upon he,
and say, 'you have hear my question. consider it address to
yourself, if you choose. what answer do you make?'
'Sir,' he rejoin, with an occasional separation and reunion of
those delicate tip, 'my answer must be qualified; because, to
betray Mr. james's confidence to his mother, and to betray it to
you, be two different action. it be not probable, I consider,
that Mr. James would encourage the receipt of letter likely to
increase low spirit and unpleasantness; but far than that,
sir, I should wish to avoid go.'
'be that all?' inquire Miss Dartle of I.
I indicate that I have nothing more to say. 'except,' I add, as
I see he move off, 'that I understand this fellow's part in the
wicked story, and that, as I shall make it know to the honest man
who have be her father from her childhood, I would recommend he
to avoid go too much into public.'
he have stop the moment I begin, and have listen with his usual
repose of manner.
'thank you, sir. but youwill excuse I if I say, sir, that there
be neither slave nor slave-driver in this country, and that
people be not allow to take the law into their own hand. if
they do, it be more to their own peril, I believe, than to other
people's. consequently speak, I be not at all afraid of go
wherever I may wish, sir.'
with that, he make a polite bow; and, with another to Miss Dartle,
go away through the arch in the wall of holly by which he have
come. Miss Dartle and I regard each other for a little while in
silence; her manner be exactly what it be, when she have
produce the man.
'he say besides,' she observe, with a slow curling of her lip,
'that his master, as he hear, be coast Spain; and this do, be
away to gratify his seafaring taste till he be weary. but this be
of no interest to you. between these two proud person, mother and
son, there be a wide breach than before, and little hope of its
healing, for they be one at heart, and time make each more
obstinate and imperious. neither be this of any interest to you;
but it introduce what I wish to say. this devil whom you make an
angel of. I mean this low girl whom he pick out of the
tide-mud,' with her black eye full upon I, and her passionate
finger up, 'may be alive, - for I believe some common thing be
hard to die. if she be, you will desire to have a pearl of such
price find and take care of. we desire that, too; that he may
not by any chance be make her prey again. so far, we be unite in
one interest; and that be why I, who would do she any mischief that
so coarse a wretch be capable of feeling, have send for you to hear
what you have hear.'
I see, by the change in her face, that someone be advance behind
I. it be Mrs. Steerforth, who give I her hand more coldly than
of yore, and with an augmentation of her former stateliness of
manner, but still, I perceive - and I be touch by it - with an
ineffaceable remembrance of my old love for her son. she be
greatly alter. her fine figure be far less upright, her
handsome face be deeply marked, and her hair be almost white.
but when she sit down on the seat, she be a handsome lady still;
and well I know the bright eye with its lofty look, that have be
a light in my very dream at school.
'be Mr. Copperfield inform of everything, Rosa?'
'yes.'
'and have he hear Littimer himself?'
'yes; I have tell he why you wish it.'
'you be a good girl. I have have some slight correspondence with
your former friend, sir,' address I, 'but it have not restore
his sense of duty or natural obligation. therefore I have no other
object in this, than what Rosa have mention. if, by the course
which may relieve the mind of the decent man you bring here (for
whom I be sorry - I can say no more), my son may be save from
again fall into the snare of a design enemy, well!'
she draw herself up, and sit look straight before she, far away.
'Madam,' I say respectfully, 'I understand. I assure you I be in
no danger of put any strained construction on your motif.
but I must say, even to you, have know this injure family from
childhood, that if you suppose the girl, so deeply wrong, have not
be cruelly delude, and would not rather die a hundred death
than take a cup of water from your son's hand now, you cherish a
terrible mistake.'
'well, Rosa, well!' say Mrs. Steerforth, as the other be about to
interpose, 'it be no matter. let it be. you be married, sir, I
be tell?'
I answer that I have be some time marry.
'and be do well? I hear little in the quiet life I lead, but
I understand you be begin to be famous.'
'I have be very fortunate,' I say, 'and find my name connect
with some praise.'
'you have no mother?' - in a softened voice.
'no.'
'it be a pity,' she return. 'she would have be proud of you.
good night!'
I take the hand she hold out with a dignified, unbend air, and
it be as calm in mine as if her breast have be at peace. her
pride could still its very pulse, it appear, and draw the placid
veil before her face, through which she sit look straight before
she on the far distance.
as I move away from they along the terrace, I could not help
observe how steadily they both sit gaze on the prospect, and
how it thicken and close around they. here and there, some
early lamp be see to twinkle in the distant city; and in the
eastern quarter of the sky the lurid light still hover. but,
from the great part of the broad valley interpose, a mist be
rise like a sea, which, mingle with the darkness, make it seem
as if the gathering water would encompass they. I have reason to
remember this, and think of it with awe; for before I look upon
those two again, a stormy sea have rise to their foot.
reflect on what have be thus tell I, I feel it right that it
should be communicate to Mr. Peggotty. on the following evening
I go into London in quest of he. he be always wander about
from place to place, with his one object of recover his niece
before he; but be more in London than elsewhere. often and
often, now, have I see he in the dead of night pass along the
street, search, among the few who loiter out of door at
those untimely hour, for what he dread to find.
he keep a lodging over the little chandler's shop in Hungerford
Market, which I have have occasion to mention more than once, and
from which he first go forth upon his errand of mercy. Hither I
direct my walk. on make inquiry for he, I learn from the
people of the house that he have not go out yet, and I should find
he in his room upstairs.
he be sit read by a window in which he keep a few plant.
the room be very neat and orderly. I see in a moment that it be
always keep prepared for her reception, and that he never go out
but he think it possible he might bring her home. he have not
hear my tap at the door, and only raise his eye when I lay my
hand upon his shoulder.
'Mas'r Davy! Thankee, sir! thankee hearty, for this visit! sit ye
down. yoube kindly welcome, sir!'
'Mr. Peggotty,' say I, take the chair he hand I, 'donot
expect much! I have hear some news.'
'of Em'ly!'
he put his hand, in a nervous manner, on his mouth, and turn
pale, as he fix his eye on mine.
'it give no clue to where she be; but she be not with he.'
he sit down, look intently at I, and listen in profound
silence to all I have to tell. I well remember the sense of
dignity, beauty even, with which the patient gravity of his face
impress I, when, have gradually remove his eye from mine, he
sit look downward, lean his forehead on his hand. he offer
no interruption, but remain throughout perfectly still. he
seem to pursue her figure through the narrative, and to let every
other shape go by he, as if it be nothing.
when I have do, he shade his face, and continue silent. I
look out of the window for a little while, and occupy myself
with the plant.
'how do you fare to feel about it, Mas'r Davy?' he inquire at
length.
'I think that she be live,' I reply.
'I doen't know. maybe the first shock be too rough, and in the
wildness of her art -! that there blue water as she use to speak
on. could she have thowt o' that so many year, because it be to
be her grave!'
he say this, musing, in a low, frightened voice; and walk across
the little room.
'and yet,' he add, 'Mas'r Davy, I have feel so sure as she be
live - I have know'd, awake and sleeping, as it be so trew that
I should find she - I have be so lead on by it, and hold up by it
- that I doen't believe I can have be deceive. no! Em'ly's
alive!'
he put his hand down firmly on the table, and set his sunburnt face
into a resolute expression.
'my niece, Em'ly, be alive, sir!' he say, steadfastly. 'I doen't
know wheer it come from, or how 'tis, but I be tell as shebe
alive!'
he look almost like a man inspire, as he say it. I wait for
a few moment, until he could give I his undivided attention; and
then proceed to explain the precaution, that, it have occur to
I last night, it would be wise to take.
'now, my dear friend -'I begin.
'Thankee, thankee, kind sir,' he say, grasp my hand in both of
his.
'if she should make her way to London, which be likely - for where
could she lose herself so readily as in this vast city; and what
would she wish to do, but lose and hide herself, if she do not go
home? -'
'and she willnot go home,' he interpose, shake his head
mournfully. 'if she have leave of her own accord, she might; not as
it be, sir.'
'if she should come here,' say I, 'I believe there be one person,
here, more likely to discover she than any other in the world. do
you remember - hear what I say, with fortitude - think of your
great object! - do you remember Martha?'
'of our town?'
I need no other answer than his face.
'do you know that she be in London?'
'I have see she in the street,' he answer, with a shiver.
'but you donot know,' say I, 'that Emily be charitable to she,
with Ham's help, long before she flee from home. nor, that, when
we meet one night, and speak together in the room yonder, over the
way, she listen at the door.'
'Mas'r Davy!' he reply in astonishment. 'that night when it snew
so hard?'
'that night. I have never see she since. I go back, after
parting from you, to speak to she, but she be go. I be
unwilling to mention she to you then, and I be now; but she be the
person of whom I speak, and with whom I think we should
communicate. do you understand?'
'too well, sir,' he reply. we have sink our voice, almost to a
whisper, and continue to speak in that tone.
'you say you have see she. do you think that you could find she?
I could only hope to do so by chance.'
'I think, Mas'r Davy, I know wheer to look.'
'it be dark. be together, shall we go out now, and try to find
she tonight?'
he assent, and prepare to accompany I. without appear to
observe what he be do, I see how carefully he adjust the
little room, put a candle ready and the mean of light it,
arrange the bed, and finally take out of a drawer one of her
dress (I remember to have see she wear it), neatly fold with
some other garment, and a bonnet, which he place upon a chair.
he make no allusion to these clothe, neither do I. there they
have be wait for she, many and many a night, no doubt.
'the time be, Mas'r Davy,' he say, as we come downstairs, 'when
I thowt this girl, Martha, a'most like the dirt underneath my
Em'ly's foot. God forgive I, theer's a difference now!'
as we go along, partly to hold he in conversation, and partly to
satisfy myself, I ask he about Ham. he say, almost in the same
word as formerly, that Ham be just the same, 'wear away his
life with kiender no care nohow for 't; but never murmur, and
like by all'.
I ask he what he think Ham's state of mind be, in reference
to the cause of their misfortune? whether he believe it be
dangerous? what he suppose, for example, Ham would do, if he and
Steerforth ever should encounter?
'I doen't know, sir,' he reply. 'I have thowt of it oftentime,
but I cannot awize myself of it, no matter.'
I recall to his remembrance the morning after her departure, when
we be all three on the beach. 'do you recollect,' say I, 'a
certain wild way in which he look out to sea, and speak about
"the end of it"?'
'sure I do!' say he.
'what do you suppose he mean?'
'Mas'r Davy,' he reply, 'Ihave put the question to myself a mort
o' time, and never find no answer. and theer's one curious thing
- that, though he be so pleasant, I wouldnot fare to feel
comfortable to try and get his mind upon 't. he never say a wure
to I as warn't as dootiful as dootiful could be, and it benot
likely as hewould begin to speak any other way now; but itbe fur from
be fleet water in his mind, where they thowts lay. itbe deep,
sir, and I cannot see down.'
'you be right,' say I, 'and that have sometimes make I anxious.'
'and I too, Mas'r Davy,' he rejoin. 'even more so, I do assure
you, than his ventersome way, though both belong to the
alteration in he. I doen't know as hewould do violence under any
circumstance, but I hope as they two may be kep asunder.'
we have come, through Temple Bar, into the city. converse no more
now, and walk at my side, he yield himself up to the one aim
of his devoted life, and go on, with that hush concentration of
his faculty which would have make his figure solitary in a
multitude. we be not far from Blackfriars Bridge, when he turn
his head and point to a solitary female figure flit along the
opposite side of the street. I know it, readily, to be the figure
that we seek.
we cross the road, and be press on towards she, when it
occur to I that she might be more disposed to feel a woman's
interest in the lose girl, if we speak to she in a quieter place,
aloof from the crowd, and where we should be less observed. I
advise my companion, therefore, that we should not address she
yet, but follow she; consult in this, likewise, an indistinct
desire I have, to know where she go.
he acquiesce, we follow at a distance: never lose sight of
she, but never care to come very near, as she frequently look
about. once, she stop to listen to a band of music; and then we
stop too.
she go on a long way. still we go on. it be evident, from
the manner in which she hold her course, that she be go to some
fix destination; and this, and her keep in the busy street,
and I suppose the strange fascination in the secrecy and mystery of
so follow anyone, make I adhere to my first purpose. at length
she turn into a dull, dark street, where the noise and crowd be
lose; and I say, 'we may speak to she now'; and, mend our pace,
we go after she.
CHAPTER 47
MARTHA
we be now down in Westminster. we have turn back to follow she,
have encounter she come towards we; and Westminster Abbey be
the point at which she pass from the light and noise of the
lead street. she proceed so quickly, when she get free of
the two current of passenger set towards and from the bridge,
that, between this and the advance she have of we when she strike
off, we be in the narrow water-side street by Millbank before we
come up with she. at that moment she cross the road, as if to
avoid the footstep that she hear so close behind; and, without
look back, pass on even more rapidly.
a glimpse of the river through a dull gateway, where some waggon
be house for the night, seem to arrest my foot. I touch my
companion without speak, and we both forbear to cross after she,
and both follow on that opposite side of the way; keep as
quietly as we could in the shadow of the house, but keep very
near she.
there be, and be when I write, at the end of that low-lie
street, a dilapidated little wooden building, probably an obsolete
old ferry-house. its position be just at that point where the
street cease, and the road begin to lie between a row of house
and the river. as soon as she come here, and see the water, she
stop as if she have come to her destination; and presently go
slowly along by the brink of the river, look intently at it.
all the way here, I have suppose that she be go to some house;
indeed, I have vaguely entertain the hope that the house might be
in some way associate with the lose girl. but that one dark
glimpse of the river, through the gateway, have instinctively
prepare I for she go no far.
the neighbourhood be a dreary one at that time; as oppressive,
sad, and solitary by night, as any about London. there be
neither wharf nor house on the melancholy waste of road near the
great blank Prison. a sluggish ditch deposit its mud at the
prison wall. coarse grass and rank weed straggle over all the
marshy land in the vicinity. in one part, carcase of house,
inauspiciously begin and never finish, rot away. in another,
the ground be cumber with rusty iron monster of steam-boiler,
wheel, crank, pipe, furnace, paddle, anchor, diving-bell,
windmill-sail, and I know not what strange object, accumulate by
some speculator, and grovel in the dust, underneath which -
have sink into the soil of their own weight in wet weather - they
have the appearance of vainly try to hide themselves. the clash
and glare of sundry fiery work upon the river-side, arise by night
to disturb everything except the heavy and unbroken smoke that
pour out of their chimney. Slimy gap and causeway, wind
among old wooden pile, with a sickly substance cling to the
latter, like green hair, and the rag of last year's handbill
offer reward for drowned man flutter above high-water mark,
lead down through the ooze and slush to the ebb-tide. there be a
story that one of the pit dig for the dead in the time of the
Great Plague be hereabout; and a blight influence seem to
have proceed from it over the whole place. or else it look as
if it have gradually decompose into that nightmare condition, out
of the overflowing of the polluted stream.
as if she be a part of the refuse it have cast out, and leave to
corruption and decay, the girl we have follow stray down to the
river's brink, and stand in the midst of this night-picture, lonely
and still, look at the water.
there be some boat and barge astrand in the mud, and these
enable we to come within a few yard of she without be see.
I then sign to Mr. Peggotty to remain where he be, and emerge
from their shade to speak to she. I do not approach her solitary
figure without tremble; for this gloomy end to her determined
walk, and the way in which she stand, almost within the cavernous
shadow of the iron bridge, look at the light crookedly
reflect in the strong tide, inspire a dread within I.
I think she be talk to herself. I be sure, although absorb
in gaze at the water, that her shawl be off her shoulder, and
that she be muffle her hand in it, in an unsettled and
bewildered way, more like the action of a sleep-walker than a
wake person. I know, and never can forget, that there be that
in her wild manner which give I no assurance but that she would
sink before my eye, until I have her arm within my grasp.
at the same moment I say 'Martha!'
she utter a terrified scream, and struggle with I with such
strength that I doubt if I could have hold she alone. but a
strong hand than mine be lay upon she; and when she raise she
frightened eye and see whose it be, she make but one more effort
and drop down between we. we carry she away from the water to
where there be some dry stone, and there lay she down, cry
and moaning. in a little while she sit among the stone, hold
her wretched head with both her hand.
'oh, the river!' she cry passionately. 'oh, the river!'
'hush, hush!' say I. 'Calm yourself.'
but she still repeat the same word, continually exclaim, 'oh,
the river!' over and over again.
'I know itbe like I!' she exclaim. 'I know that I belong to it.
I know that itbe the natural company of such as I be! it come from
country place, where there be once no harm in it - and it creep
through the dismal street, defile and miserable - and it go
away, like my life, to a great sea, that be always troubled - and
I feel that I must go with it!'
I have never know what despair be, except in the tone of those
word.
'I cannot keep away from it. I cannot forget it. it haunt I day
and night. itbe the only thing in all the world that I be fit for,
or thatbe fit for I. oh, the dreadful river!'
the thought pass through my mind that in the face of my
companion, as he look upon she without speech or motion, I might
have read his niece's history, if I have know nothing of it. I
never see, in any painting or reality, horror and compassion so
impressively blend. he shake as if he would have fall; and his
hand - I touch it with my own, for his appearance alarm I -
be deadly cold.
'she be in a state of frenzy,' I whisper to he. 'she will speak
differently in a little time.'
I donot know what he would have say in answer. he make some
motion with his mouth, and seem to think he have speak; but he
have only point to she with his outstretched hand.
a new burst of crying come upon she now, in which she once more hide
her face among the stone, and lie before we, a prostrate image of
humiliation and ruin. know that this state must pass, before we
could speak to she with any hope, I venture to restrain he when
he would have raise she, and we stand by in silence until she
become more tranquil.
'Martha,' say I then, lean down, and help she to rise - she
seem to want to rise as if with the intention of go away, but
she be weak, and lean against a boat. 'do you know who this be,
who be with I?'
she say faintly, 'yes.'
'do you know that we have follow you a long way tonight?'
she shake her head. she look neither at he nor at I, but stand
in a humble attitude, hold her bonnet and shawl in one hand,
without appear conscious of they, and press the other,
clench, against her forehead.
'be you compose enough,' say I, 'to speak on the subject which
so interested you - I hope Heaven may remember it! - that snowy
night?'
her sob break out afresh, and she murmur some inarticulate
thank to I for not have drive she away from the door.
'I want to say nothing for myself,' she say, after a few moment.
'I be bad, I be lose. I have no hope at all. but tell he, sir,'
she have shrink away from he, 'if you donot feel too hard to I to
do it, that I never be in any way the cause of his misfortune.'
'it have never be attribute to you,' I return, earnestly
respond to her earnestness.
'it be you, if I donot deceive myself,' she say, in a break
voice, 'that come into the kitchen, the night she take such pity on
I; be so gentle to I; donot shrink away from I like all the
rest, and give I such kind help! be it you, sir?'
'it be,' say I.
'I should have be in the river long ago,' she say, glance at
it with a terrible expression, 'if any wrong to she have be upon
my mind. I never could have keep out of it a single winter's
night, if I have not be free of any share in that!'
'the cause of her flight be too well understand,' I say. 'you be
innocent of any part in it, we thoroughly believe, - we know.'
'oh, I might have be much the well for she, if I have have a
well heart!' exclaim the girl, with most forlorn regret; 'for
she be always good to I! she never speak a word to I but what
be pleasant and right. be it likely I would try to make she what
I be myself, know what I be myself, so well? when I lose
everything that make life dear, the bad of all my thought be
that I be part for ever from she!'
Mr. Peggotty, stand with one hand on the gunwale of the boat,
and his eye cast down, put his disengaged hand before his face.
'and when I hear what have happen before that snowy night, from
some belong to our town,' cry Martha, 'the bitter thought
in all my mind be, that the people would remember she once keep
company with I, and would say I have corrupt she! when, Heaven
know, I would have die to have bring back her good name!'
long unused to any self-control, the pierce agony of her remorse
and grief be terrible.
'to have die, would not have be much - what can I say? - I
would have live!' she cry. 'I would have live to be old, in
the wretched street - and to wander about, avoid, in the dark -
and to see the day break on the ghastly line of house, and
remember how the same sun use to shine into my room, and wake I
once - I would have do even that, to save she!'
sink on the stone, she take some in each hand, and clench
they up, as if she would have grind they. she writhe into some
new posture constantly: stiffen her arm, twist they before
her face, as though to shut out from her eye the little light
there be, and droop her head, as if it be heavy with
insupportable recollection.
'what shall I ever do!' she say, fight thus with her despair.
'how can I go on as I be, a solitary curse to myself, a living
disgrace to everyone I come near!' suddenly she turn to my
companion. 'stamp upon I, kill I! when she be your pride, you
would have think I have do her harm if I have brush against she
in the street. you cannot believe - why should you? - a syllable
that come out of my lip. it would be a burn shame upon you,
even now, if she and I exchange a word. I donot complain. I
donot say she and I be alike - I know there be a long, long way
between we. I only say, with all my guilt and wretchedness upon my
head, that I be grateful to she from my soul, and love she. oh,
donot think that all the power I have of love anything be quite
wear out! throw I away, as all the world do. kill I for be
what I be, and have ever know she; but donot think that of I!'
he look upon she, while she make this supplication, in a wild
distract manner; and, when she be silent, gently raise she.
'Martha,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'God forbid as I should judge you.
forbid as I, of all man, should do that, my girl! you doen't know
half the change thatbe come, in course of time, upon I, when you
think it likely. well!' he pause a moment, then go on. 'you
doen't understand how 'tis that this here gentleman and I have
wish to speak to you. you doen't understand what 'tis we have
afore we. listen now!'
his influence upon she be complete. she stand, shrinkingly,
before he, as if she be afraid to meet his eye; but she
passionate sorrow be quite hush and mute.
'if you heerd,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'owt of what pass between
Mas'r Davy and I, th' night when it snew so hard, you know as I
have be - wheer not - fur to seek my dear niece. my dear niece,'
he repeat steadily. 'Fur shebe more dear to I now, Martha, than
she be dear afore.'
she put her hand before her face; but otherwise remain quiet.
'I have heerd she tell,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'as you be early leave
fatherless and motherless, with no friend fur to take, in a rough
seafaring-way, their place. maybe you can guess that if youhave have
such a friend, youwould have get into a way of be fond of he in
course of time, and that my niece be kiender daughter-like to I.'
as she be silently tremble, he put her shawl carefully about
she, take it up from the ground for that purpose.
'Whereby,' say he, 'I know, both as she would go to the wureld's
furd end with I, if she could once see I again; and that she
would fly to the wureld's furd end to keep off see I. for
though she benot no call to doubt my love, and doen't - and
doen't,' he repeat, with a quiet assurance of the truth of what
he say, 'therebe shame step in, and keep betwixt we.'
I read, in every word of his plain impressive way of deliver
himself, new evidence of his have thought of this one topic, in
every feature it present.
'accord to our reckoning,' he proceed, 'Mas'r Davy's here, and
mine, she be like, one day, to make her own poor solitary course to
London. we believe - Mas'r Davy, I, and all of we - that you be
as innocent of everything that have befall she, as the unborn child.
youhave speak of her be pleasant, kind, and gentle to you. bless
she, I know she be! I know she always be, to all. yoube
thankful to she, and you love she. help we all you can to find
she, and may Heaven reward you!'
she look at he hastily, and for the first time, as if she be
doubtful of what he have say.
'will you trust I?' she ask, in a low voice of astonishment.
'full and free!' say Mr. Peggotty.
'to speak to she, if I should ever find she; shelter she, if I have
any shelter to divide with she; and then, without her knowledge,
come to you, and bring you to she?' she ask hurriedly.
we both reply together, 'yes!'
she lift up her eye, and solemnly declare that she would devote
herself to this task, fervently and faithfully. that she would
never waver in it, never be divert from it, never relinquish it,
while there be any chance of hope. if she be not true to it,
might the object she now have in life, which bind she to something
devoid of evil, in its pass away from she, leave she more
forlorn and more despairing, if that be possible, than she have
be upon the river's brink that night; and then might all help,
human and Divine, renounce she evermore!
she do not raise her voice above her breath, or address we, but
say this to the night sky; then stand profoundly quiet, look at
the gloomy water.
we judge it expedient, now, to tell she all we know; which I
recount at length. she listen with great attention, and with
a face that often change, but have the same purpose in all its
varying expression. her eye occasionally fill with tear, but
those she repress. it seem as if her spirit be quite
alter, and she could not be too quiet.
she ask, when all be tell, where we be to be communicate
with, if occasion should arise. under a dull lamp in the road, I
write our two address on a leaf of my pocket-book, which I tore
out and give to she, and which she put in her poor bosom. I ask
she where she live herself. she say, after a pause, in no place
long. it be well not to know.
Mr. Peggotty suggest to I, in a whisper, what have already
occur to myself, I take out my purse; but I could not prevail
upon she to accept any money, nor could I exact any promise from
she that she would do so at another time. I represent to she
that Mr. Peggotty could not be call, for one in his condition,
poor; and that the idea of she engage in this search, while
depend on her own resource, shock we both. she continue
steadfast. in this particular, his influence upon she be equally
powerless with mine. she gratefully thank he but remain
inexorable.
'there may be work to be get,' she say. 'Iwill try.'
'at least take some assistance,' I return, 'until you have
try.'
'I could not do what I have promise, for money,' she reply. 'I
could not take it, if I be starve. to give I money would be to
take away your trust, to take away the object that you have give
I, to take away the only certain thing that save I from the
river.'
'in the name of the great judge,' say I, 'before whom you and all
of we must stand at his dread time, dismiss that terrible idea! we
can all do some good, if we will.'
she tremble, and her lip shake, and her face be pale, as she
answer:
'it have be put into your heart, perhaps, to save a wretched
creature for repentance. I be afraid to think so; it seem too
bold. if any good should come of I, I might begin to hope; for
nothing but harm have ever come of my deed yet. I be to be
trust, for the first time in a long while, with my miserable
life, on account of what you have give I to try for. I know no
more, and I can say no more.'
again she repress the tear that have begin to flow; and, put
out her trembling hand, and touch Mr. Peggotty, as if there be
some heal virtue in he, go away along the desolate road. she
have be ill, probably for a long time. I observe, upon that
close opportunity of observation, that she be wear and haggard,
and that her sunken eye express privation and endurance.
we follow she at a short distance, our way lie in the same
direction, until we come back into the lighted and populous
street. I have such implicit confidence in her declaration, that
I then put it to Mr. Peggotty, whether it would not seem, in the
onset, like distrust she, to follow she any far. he be
of the same mind, and equally reliant on she, we suffer she to
take her own road, and take our, which be towards Highgate. he
accompany I a good part of the way; and when we part, with a
prayer for the success of this fresh effort, there be a new and
thoughtful compassion in he that I be at no loss to interpret.
it be midnight when I arrive at home. I have reach my own gate,
and be stand listen for the deep bell of St. Paul's, the
sound of which I think have be bear towards I among the
multitude of striking clock, when I be rather surprised to see
that the door of my aunt's cottage be open, and that a faint light
in the entry be shin out across the road.
think that my aunt might have relapse into one of her old
alarm, and might be watch the progress of some imaginary
conflagration in the distance, I go to speak to she. it be with
very great surprise that I see a man stand in her little garden.
he have a glass and bottle in his hand, and be in the act of
drinking. I stop short, among the thick foliage outside, for
the moon be up now, though obscure; and I recognize the man whom
I have once suppose to be a delusion of Mr. Dick's, and have once
encounter with my aunt in the street of the city.
he be eat as well as drinking, and seem to eat with a hungry
appetite. he seem curious regard the cottage, too, as if it
be the first time he have see it. after stoop to put the
bottle on the ground, he look up at the window, and look
about; though with a covert and impatient air, as if he be anxious
to be go.
the light in the passage be obscure for a moment, and my aunt
come out. she be agitated, and tell some money into his hand. I
hear it chink.
'whatbe the use of this?' he demand.
'I can spare no more,' return my aunt.
'then I cannot go,' say he. 'here! you may take it back!'
'you bad man,' return my aunt, with great emotion; 'how can you
use I so? but why do I ask? it be because you know how weak I
be! what have I to do, to free myself for ever of your visit, but
to abandon you to your desert?'
'and why donot you abandon I to my desert?' say he.
'you ask I why!' return my aunt. 'what a heart you must have!'
he stand moodily rattle the money, and shake his head, until at
length he say:
'be this all you mean to give I, then?'
'it be all I can give you,' say my aunt. 'you know I have have
loss, and be poor than I use to be. I have tell you so.
have get it, why do you give I the pain of look at you for
another moment, and see what you have become?'
'I have become shabby enough, if you mean that,' he say. 'I lead
the life of an owl.'
'you strip I of the great part of all I ever have,' say my
aunt. 'you close my heart against the whole world, year and
year. you treat I falsely, ungratefully, and cruelly. go, and
repent of it. donot add new injury to the long, long list of
injury you have do I!'
'aye!' he return. 'itbe all very fine - well! I must do the good
I can, for the present, I suppose.'
in spite of himself, he appear abash by my aunt's indignant
tear, and come slouch out of the garden. take two or three
quick step, as if I have just come up, I meet he at the gate, and
go in as he come out. we eye one another narrowly in pass,
and with no favour.
'Aunt,' say I, hurriedly. 'this man alarm you again! let I
speak to he. who be he?'
'child,' return my aunt, take my arm, 'come in, and donot speak
to I for ten minute.'
we sit down in her little parlour. my aunt retire behind the
round green fan of former day, which be screw on the back of a
chair, and occasionally wipe her eye, for about a quarter of an
hour. then she come out, and take a seat beside I.
'trot,' say my aunt, calmly, 'itbe my husband.'
'your husband, aunt? I think he have be dead!'
'dead to I,' return my aunt, 'but live.'
I sit in silent amazement.
'Betsey Trotwood donot look a likely subject for the tender
passion,' say my aunt, composedly, 'but the time be, Trot, when
she believe in that man most entirely. when she love he, Trot,
right well. when there be no proof of attachment and affection
that she would not have give he. he repay she by break her
fortune, and nearly break her heart. so she put all that sort
of sentiment, once and for ever, in a grave, and fill it up, and
flatten it down.'
'my dear, good aunt!'
'I leave he,' my aunt proceed, lay her hand as usual on the
back of mine, 'generously. I may say at this distance of time,
Trot, that I leave he generously. he have be so cruel to I, that
I might have effect a separation on easy term for myself; but I
do not. he soon make duck and drake of what I give he, sink
low and low, marry another woman, I believe, become an
adventurer, a gambler, and a cheat. what he be now, you see. but
he be a fine-look man when I marry he,' say my aunt, with
an echo of her old pride and admiration in her tone; 'and I
believe he - I be a fool! - to be the soul of honour!'
she give my hand a squeeze, and shake her head.
'he be nothing to I now, trot- less than nothing. but, soon
than have he punish for his offence (as he would be if he
prowl about in this country), I give he more money than I can
afford, at interval when he reappear, to go away. I be a fool
when I marry he; and I be so far an incurable fool on that
subject, that, for the sake of what I once believe he to be, I
wouldnot have even this shadow of my idle fancy hardly deal with.
for I be in earnest, Trot, if ever a woman be.'
my aunt dismiss the matter with a heavy sigh, and smooth she
dress.
'there, my dear!' she say. 'now you know the beginning, middle,
and end, and all about it. we willnot mention the subject to one
another any more; neither, of course, will you mention it to
anybody else. this be my grumpy, frumpy story, and wewill keep it
to ourselves, Trot!'
CHAPTER 48
DOMESTIC
I labour hard at my book, without allow it to interfere with
the punctual discharge of my newspaper duty; and it come out and
be very successful. I be not stun by the praise which sound
in my ear, notwithstanding that I be keenly alive to it, and
think well of my own performance, I have little doubt, than
anybody else do. it have always be in my observation of human
nature, that a man who have any good reason to believe in himself
never flourish himself before the face of other people in order
that they may believe in he. for this reason, I retain my
modesty in very self-respect; and the more praise I get, the more
I try to deserve.
it be not my purpose, in this record, though in all other
essential it be my write memory, to pursue the history of my own
fiction. they express themselves, and I leave they to themselves.
when I refer to they, incidentally, it be only as a part of my
progress.
have some foundation for believe, by this time, that nature and
accident have make I an author, I pursue my vocation with
confidence. without such assurance I should certainly have leave it
alone, and bestow my energy on some other endeavour. I should
have try to find out what nature and accident really have make I,
and to be that, and nothing else.
I have be write, in the newspaper and elsewhere, so
prosperously, that when my new success be achieve, I consider
myself reasonably entitle to escape from the dreary debate. one
joyful night, therefore, I note down the music of the
parliamentary bagpipe for the last time, and I have never hear it
since; though I still recognize the old drone in the newspaper,
without any substantial variation (except, perhaps, that there be
more of it), all the livelong session.
I now write of the time when I have be marry, I suppose, about
a year and a half. after several variety of experiment, we have
give up the housekeeping as a bad job. the house keep itself, and
we keep a page. the principal function of this retainer be to
quarrel with the cook; in which respect he be a perfect
Whittington, without his cat, or the remote chance of be make
Lord Mayor.
he appear to I to have live in a hail of saucepan-lid. his
whole existence be a scuffle. he would shriek for help on the
most improper occasion, - as when we have a little dinner-party, or
a few friend in the evening, - and would come tumble out of the
kitchen, with iron missile fly after he. we want to get rid
of he, but he be very much attach to we, and wouldnot go. he
be a tearful boy, and break into such deplorable lamentation,
when a cessation of our connexion be hint at, that we be
oblige to keep he. he have no mother - no anything in the way of
a relative, that I could discover, except a sister, who flee to
America the moment we have take he off her hand; and he become
quarter on we like a horrible young changeling. he have a lively
perception of his own unfortunate state, and be always rub his
eye with the sleeve of his jacket, or stoop to blow his nose on
the extreme corner of a little pocket-handkerchief, which he never
would take completely out of his pocket, but always economize and
secrete.
this unlucky page, engage in an evil hour at six pound ten per
annum, be a source of continual trouble to I. I watch he as
he grow - and he grow like scarlet bean - with painful
apprehension of the time when he would begin to shave; even of the
day when he would be bald or grey. I see no prospect of ever
get rid of he; and, project myself into the future, use to
think what an inconvenience he would be when he be an old man.
I never expect anything less, than this unfortunate's manner of
get I out of my difficulty. he steal Dora's watch, which,
like everything else belong to we, have no particular place of
its own; and, convert it into money, spend the produce (he be
always a weak-minded boy) in incessantly rid up and down between
London and Uxbridge outside the coach. he be take to Bow Street,
as well as I remember, on the completion of his fifteenth journey;
when four-and-sixpence, and a second-hand fife which he couldnot
play, be find upon his person.
the surprise and its consequence would have be much less
disagreeable to I if he have not be penitent. but he be very
penitent indeed, and in a peculiar way - not in the lump, but by
instalment. for example: the day after that on which I be
oblige to appear against he, he make certain revelation touch
a hamper in the cellar, which we believe to be full of wine, but
which have nothing in it except bottle and cork. we suppose he
have now ease his mind, and tell the bad he know of the cook;
but, a day or two afterwards, his conscience sustain a new
twinge, and he disclose how she have a little girl, who, early
every morning, take away our bread; and also how he himself have
be suborn to maintain the milkman in coal. in two or three
day more, I be inform by the authority of his have lead to
the discovery of sirloin of beef among the kitchen-stuff, and
sheet in the rag-bag. a little while afterwards, he break out in
an entirely new direction, and confess to a knowledge of
burglarious intention as to our premise, on the part of the
pot-boy, who be immediately take up. I get to be so ashamed of
be such a victim, that I would have give he any money to hold
his tongue, or would have offer a round bribe for his being
permit to run away. it be an aggravating circumstance in the
case that he have no idea of this, but conceive that he be make
I amend in every new discovery: not to say, heap obligation
on my head.
at last I run away myself, whenever I see an emissary of the police
approach with some new intelligence; and live a stealthy life
until he be try and order to be transport. even then he
couldnot be quiet, but be always write we letter; and want so
much to see Dora before he go away, that Dora go to visit he,
and faint when she find herself inside the iron bar. in short,
I have no peace of my life until he be expatriate, and make (as I
afterwards hear) a shepherd of, 'up the country' somewhere; I have
no geographical idea where.
all this lead I into some serious reflection, and present our
mistake in a new aspect; as I could not help communicate to Dora
one evening, in spite of my tenderness for she.
'my love,' say I, 'it be very painful to I to think that our want
of system and management, involve not only ourselves (which we
have get use to), but other people.'
'you have be silent for a long time, and now you be go to be
cross!' say Dora.
'no, my dear, indeed! let I explain to you what I mean.'
'I think I donot want to know,' say Dora.
'but I want you to know, my love. put Jip down.'
Dora put his nose to mine, and say 'Boh!' to drive my seriousness
away; but, not succeed, order he into his Pagoda, and sit
look at I, with her hand fold, and a most resign little
expression of countenance.
'the fact be, my dear,' I begin, 'there be contagion in we. we
infect everyone about we.'
I might have go on in this figurative manner, if Dora's face have
not admonish I that she be wonder with all her might whether
I be go to propose any new kind of vaccination, or other
medical remedy, for this unwholesome state of our. therefore I
check myself, and make my meaning plainer.
'it be not merely, my pet,' say I, 'that we lose money and
comfort, and even temper sometimes, by not learn to be more
careful; but that we incur the serious responsibility of spoil
everyone who come into our service, or have any dealing with we.
I begin to be afraid that the fault be not entirely on one side,
but that these people all turn out ill because we donot turn out
very well ourselves.'
'oh, what an accusation,' exclaim Dora, open her eye wide;
'to say that you ever see I take gold watch! oh!'
'my dearest,' I remonstrate, 'donot talk preposterous nonsense!
who have make the least allusion to gold watch?'
'you do,' return Dora. 'you know you do. you say I havenot
turn out well, and compare I to he.'
'to whom?' I ask.
'to the page,' sob Dora. 'oh, you cruel fellow, to compare your
affectionate wife to a transport page! why donot you tell I
your opinion of I before we be marry? why donot you say, you
hard-hearted thing, that you be convinced I be bad than a
transport page? oh, what a dreadful opinion to have of I! oh,
my goodness!'
'now, Dora, my love,' I return, gently try to remove the
handkerchief she press to her eye, 'this be not only very
ridiculous of you, but very wrong. in the first place, itbe not
true.'
'you always say he be a story-teller,' sob Dora. 'and now you
say the same of I! oh, what shall I do! what shall I do!'
'my darling girl,' I retort, 'I really must entreat you to be
reasonable, and listen to what I do say, and do say. my dear
Dora, unless we learn to do our duty to those whom we employ, they
will never learn to do their duty to we. I be afraid we present
opportunity to people to do wrong, that never ought to be
present. even if we be as lax as we be, in all our
arrangement, by choice - which we be not - even if we like it,
and find it agreeable to be so - which we donot - I be persuade
we should have no right to go on in this way. we be positively
corrupt people. we be bind to think of that. I cannot help
think of it, Dora. it be a reflection I be unable to dismiss,
and it sometimes make I very uneasy. there, dear, thatbe all.
come now. donot be foolish!'
Dora would not allow I, for a long time, to remove the
handkerchief. she sit sob and murmur behind it, that, if I
be uneasy, why have I ever be marry? why havenot I say, even
the day before we go to church, that I know I should be uneasy,
and I would rather not? if I couldnot bear she, why donot I send
she away to her aunt at Putney, or to Julia Mills in India? Julia
would be glad to see she, and would not call she a transported
page; Julia never have call she anything of the sort. in short,
Dora be so afflict, and so afflict I by be in that
condition, that I feel it be of no use repeat this kind of
effort, though never so mildly, and I must take some other course.
what other course be leave to take? to 'form her mind'? this be
a common phrase of word which have a fair and promising sound, and
I resolve to form Dora's mind.
I begin immediately. when Dora be very childish, and I would have
infinitely prefer to humour she, I try to be grave - and
disconcert she, and myself too. I talk to she on the subject
which occupy my thought; and I read Shakespeare to she - and
fatigue she to the last degree. I accustom myself to give
she, as it be quite casually, little scrap of useful
information, or sound opinion - and she start from they when I
let they off, as if they have be cracker. no matter how
incidentally or naturally I endeavour to form my little wife's
mind, I could not help see that she always have an instinctive
perception of what I be about, and become a prey to the keen
apprehension. in particular, it be clear to I, that she think
shakespeare a terrible fellow. the formation go on very slowly.
I press traddle into the service without his knowledge; and
whenever he come to see we, explode my mine upon he for the
edification of Dora at second hand. the amount of practical wisdom
I bestow upon traddle in this manner be immense, and of the
good quality; but it have no other effect upon Dora than to depress
her spirit, and make she always nervous with the dread that it
would be her turn next. I find myself in the condition of a
schoolmaster, a trap, a pitfall; of always play spider to Dora's
fly, and always pounce out of my hole to her infinite
disturbance.
still, look forward through this intermediate stage, to the time
when there should be a perfect sympathy between Dora and I, and
when I should have 'form her mind' to my entire satisfaction, I
persevere, even for month. find at last, however, that,
although I have be all this time a very porcupine or hedgehog,
bristle all over with determination, I have effect nothing, it
begin to occur to I that perhaps Dora's mind be already form.
on further consideration this appear so likely, that I abandon
my scheme, which have have a more promising appearance in word than
in action; resolve henceforth to be satisfied with my child-wife,
and to try to change she into nothing else by any process. I be
heartily tired of be sagacious and prudent by myself, and of
see my darling under restraint; so I buy a pretty pair of
ear-ring for she, and a collar for Jip, and go home one day to
make myself agreeable.
Dora be delighted with the little present, and kiss I
joyfully; but there be a shadow between we, however slight, and I
have make up my mind that it should not be there. if there must be
such a shadow anywhere, I would keep it for the future in my own
breast.
I sit down by my wife on the sofa, and put the ear-ring in her
ear; and then I tell she that I fear we have not be quite as
good company lately, as we use to be, and that the fault be mine.
which I sincerely feel, and which indeed it be.
'the truth be, Dora, my life,' I say; 'I have be try to be
wise.'
'and to make I wise too,' say Dora, timidly. 'havenot you,
Doady?'
I nod assent to the pretty inquiry of the raise eyebrow, and
kiss the part lip.
'itbe of not a bit of use,' say Dora, shake her head, until the
ear-ring rang again. 'you know what a little thing I be, and what
I want you to call I from the first. if you cannot do so, I be
afraid youwill never like I. be you sure you donot think,
sometimes, it would have be well to have -'
'done what, my dear?' for she make no effort to proceed.
'nothing!' say Dora.
'nothing?' I repeat.
she put her arm round my neck, and laugh, and call herself by
her favourite name of a goose, and hide her face on my shoulder in
such a profusion of curl that it be quite a task to clear they
away and see it.
'donot I think it would have be well to have do nothing, than
to have try to form my little wife's mind?' say I, laugh at
myself. 'be that the question? yes, indeed, I do.'
'be that what you have be try?' cry Dora. 'oh what a
shocking boy!'
'but I shall never try any more,' say I. 'for I love she dearly
as she be.'
'without a story - really?' inquire Dora, creep close to I.
'why should I seek to change,' say I, 'what have be so precious
to I for so long! you never can show well than as your own
natural self, my sweet Dora; and wewill try no conceited
experiment, but go back to our old way, and be happy.'
'and be happy!' return Dora. 'yes! all day! and you willnot mind
thing go a tiny morsel wrong, sometimes?'
'no, no,' say I. 'we must do the good we can.'
'and you willnot tell I, any more, that we make other people bad,'
coax Dora; 'will you? because you know itbe so dreadfully
cross!'
'no, no,' say I.
'itbe well for I to be stupid than uncomfortable, benot it?'
say Dora.
'well to be naturally Dora than anything else in the world.'
'in the world! ah, Doady, itbe a large place!'
she shake her head, turn she delighted bright eye up to mine,
kiss I, break into a merry laugh, and spring away to put on
Jip's new collar.
so end my last attempt to make any change in Dora. I have be
unhappy in try it; I could not endure my own solitary wisdom; I
could not reconcile it with her former appeal to I as my
child-wife. I resolve to do what I could, in a quiet way, to
improve our proceeding myself, but I foresaw that my utmost would
be very little, or I must degenerate into the spider again, and be
for ever lie in wait.
and the shadow I have mention, that be not to be between we any
more, but be to rest wholly on my own heart? how do that fall?
the old unhappy feeling pervade my life. it be deepen, if it
be change at all; but it be as undefined as ever, and address
I like a strain of sorrowful music faintly hear in the night. I
love my wife dearly, and I be happy; but the happiness I have
vaguely anticipate, once, be not the happiness I enjoy, and
there be always something want.
in fulfilment of the compact I have make with myself, to reflect my
mind on this paper, I again examine it, closely, and bring its
secret to the light. what I miss, I still regard - I always
regard - as something that have be a dream of my youthful fancy;
that be incapable of realization; that I be now discover to be
so, with some natural pain, as all man do. but that it would have
be well for I if my wife could have help I more, and share
the many thought in which I have no partner; and that this might
have be; I know.
between these two irreconcilable conclusion: the one, that what I
feel be general and unavoidable; the other, that it be particular
to I, and might have be different: I balance curiously, with no
distinct sense of their opposition to each other. when I think
of the airy dream of youth that be incapable of realization, I
think of the well state precede manhood that I have outgrow;
and then the contented day with Agnes, in the dear old house,
arise before I, like spectre of the dead, that might have some
renewal in another world, but never more could be reanimate here.
sometimes, the speculation come into my thought, what might have
happen, or what would have happen, if Dora and I have never
know each other? but she be so incorporated with my existence,
that it be the idlest of all fancy, and would soon rise out of
my reach and sight, like gossamer float in the air.
I always love she. what I be describe, slumber, and half
awake, and sleep again, in the innermost recess of my mind.
there be no evidence of it in I; I know of no influence it have in
anything I say or do. I bear the weight of all our little care,
and all my project; Dora hold the pen; and we both feel that our
share be adjust as the case require. she be truly fond of
I, and proud of I; and when Agnes write a few earnest word in
her letter to Dora, of the pride and interest with which my old
friend hear of my grow reputation, and read my book as if they
hear I speak its content, Dora read they out to I with tear
of joy in her bright eye, and say I be a dear old clever, famous
boy.
'the first mistaken impulse of an undisciplined heart.' those
word of Mrs. Strong's be constantly recur to I, at this
time; be almost always present to my mind. I awake with they,
often, in the night; I remember to have even read they, in dream,
inscribe upon the wall of house. for I know, now, that my own
heart be undisciplined when it first love Dora; and that if it
have be discipline, it never could have feel, when we be
married, what it have feel in its secret experience.
'there can be no disparity in marriage, like unsuitability of mind
and purpose.' those word I remember too. I have endeavour to
adapt Dora to myself, and find it impracticable. it remain for
I to adapt myself to Dora; to share with she what I could, and be
happy; to bear on my own shoulder what I must, and be happy still.
this be the discipline to which I try to bring my heart, when I
begin to think. it make my second year much happy than my first;
and, what be well still, make Dora's life all sunshine.
but, as that year wear on, Dora be not strong. I have hop that
light hand than mine would help to mould her character, and that
a baby-smile upon her breast might change my child-wife to a woman.
it be not to be. the spirit flutter for a moment on the
threshold of its little prison, and, unconscious of captivity, take
wing.
'when I can run about again, as I use to do, aunt,' say Dora, 'I
shall make Jip race. he be get quite slow and lazy.'
'I suspect, my dear,' say my aunt quietly work by her side, 'he
have a bad disorder than that. Age, Dora.'
'do you think he be old?' say Dora, astonish. 'oh, how strange
it seem that Jip should be old!'
'itbe a complaint we be all liable to, Little One, as we get on in
life,' say my aunt, cheerfully; 'I donot feel more free from it
than I use to be, I assure you.'
'but Jip,' say Dora, look at he with compassion, 'even little
Jip! oh, poor fellow!'
'I dare say hewill last a long time yet, Blossom,' say my aunt,
pat Dora on the cheek, as she lean out of her couch to look
at Jip, who respond by stand on his hind leg, and baulk
himself in various asthmatic attempt to scramble up by the head
and shoulder. 'he must have a piece of flannel in his house this
winter, and I shouldnot wonder if he come out quite fresh again,
with the flower in the spring. bless the little dog!' exclaim
my aunt, 'if he have as many life as a cat, and be on the point of
lose them all, hewould bark at I with his last breath, I believe!'
Dora have help he up on the sofa; where he really be defy my
aunt to such a furious extent, that he couldnot keep straight, but
bark himself sideways. the more my aunt look at he, the more
he reproach she; for she have lately take to spectacle, and for
some inscrutable reason he consider the glass personal.
Dora make he lie down by she, with a good deal of persuasion; and
when he be quiet, draw one of his long ear through and through
her hand, repeat thoughtfully, 'even little Jip! oh, poor
fellow!'
'his lung be good enough,' say my aunt, gaily, 'and his dislike
be not at all feeble. he have a good many year before he, no
doubt. but if you want a dog to race with, Little Blossom, he have
live too well for that, and Iwill give you one.'
'thank you, aunt,' say Dora, faintly. 'but donot, please!'
'no?' say my aunt, take off her spectacle.
'I couldnot have any other dog but Jip,' say Dora. 'it would be
so unkind to Jip! besides, I couldnot be such friend with any
other dog but Jip; because he wouldnot have know I before I be
married, and wouldnot have bark at Doady when he first come to
our house. I couldnot care for any other dog but Jip, I be afraid,
aunt.'
'to be sure!' say my aunt, pat her cheek again. 'you be
right.'
'you be not offend,' say Dora. 'be you?'
'why, what a sensitive pet it be!' cry my aunt, bend over she
affectionately. 'to think that I could be offend!'
'no, no, I donot really think so,' return Dora; 'but I be a
little tired, and it make I silly for a moment - I be always a
silly little thing, you know, but it make I more silly - to talk
about Jip. he have know I in all that have happen to I, havenot
you, Jip? and I couldnot bear to slight he, because he be a
little altered - could I, Jip?'
Jip nestle close to his mistress, and lazily lick her hand.
'you be not so old, Jip, be you, that youwill leave your mistress
yet?' say Dora. 'we may keep one another company a little
long!'
my pretty Dora! when she come down to dinner on the ensue Sunday,
and be so glad to see old traddle (who always din with we on
Sunday), we think she would be 'run about as she use to do',
in a few day. but they say, wait a few day more; and then, wait
a few day more; and still she neither run nor walk. she look
very pretty, and be very merry; but the little foot that use to
be so nimble when they dance round Jip, be dull and motionless.
I begin to carry she downstairs every morning, and upstairs every
night. she would clasp I round the neck and laugh, the while, as
if I do it for a wager. Jip would bark and caper round we, and go
on before, and look back on the landing, breathe short, to see
that we be come. my aunt, the good and most cheerful of
nurse, would trudge after we, a move mass of shawl and pillow.
Mr. Dick would not have relinquish his post of candle-bearer to
anyone alive. traddle would be often at the bottom of the
staircase, look on, and take charge of sportive message from
Dora to the dear girl in the world. we make quite a gay
procession of it, and my child-wife be the gayest there.
but, sometimes, when I take she up, and feel that she be light
in my arm, a dead blank feeling come upon I, as if I be
approach to some frozen region yet unseen, that numb my life.
I avoid the recognition of this feeling by any name, or by any
communing with myself; until one night, when it be very strong
upon I, and my aunt have leave she with a parting cry of 'good
night, Little Blossom,' I sit down at my desk alone, and cry to
think, oh what a fatal name it be, and how the blossom wither in
its bloom upon the tree!
CHAPTER 49
I be involve in MYSTERY
I receive one morning by the post, the follow letter, date
Canterbury, and address to I at Doctor's Commons; which I read
with some surprise:
'MY DEAR SIR,
'circumstance beyond my individual control have, for a
considerable lapse of time, effect a severance of that intimacy
which, in the limit opportunity concede to I in the midst of
my professional duty, of contemplate the scene and event of
the past, ting by the prismatic hue of memory, have ever afford
I, as it ever must continue to afford, gratify emotion of no
common description. this fact, my dear sir, combine with the
distinguished elevation to which your talent have raise you,
deter I from presume to aspire to the liberty of address the
companion of my youth, by the familiar appellation of Copperfield!
it be sufficient to know that the name to which I do myself the
honour to refer, will ever be treasure among the muniment of our
house (I allude to the archive connect with our former lodger,
preserve by Mrs. Micawber), with sentiment of personal esteem
amounting to affection.
'it be not for one, situate, through his original error and a
fortuitous combination of unpropitious event, as be the foundered
Bark (if he may be allow to assume so maritime a denomination),
who now take up the pen to address you - it be not, I repeat, for
one so circumstanced, to adopt the language of compliment, or of
congratulation. that he leave to abler and to pure hand.
'if your more important avocation should admit of your ever
trace these imperfect character thus far - which may be, or may
not be, as circumstance arise - you will naturally inquire by what
object be I influence, then, in indite the present missive?
allow I to say that I fully defer to the reasonable character of
that inquiry, and proceed to develop it; premise that it be not
an object of a pecuniary nature.
'without more directly refer to any latent ability that may
possibly exist on my part, of wield the thunderbolt, or
direct the devouring and avenge flame in any quarter, I may be
permit to observe, in pass, that my bright vision be for
ever dispel - that my peace be shatter and my power of
enjoyment destroy - that my heart be no long in the right place
- and that I no more walk erect before my fellow man. the canker
be in the flower. the cup be bitter to the brim. the worm be at
his work, and will soon dispose of his victim. the soon the
well. but I will not digress.
'place in a mental position of peculiar painfulness, beyond the
assuaging reach even of Mrs. Micawber's influence, though exercise
in the tripartite character of woman, wife, and mother, it be my
intention to fly from myself for a short period, and devote a
respite of eight-and-forty hour to revisit some metropolitan
scene of past enjoyment. among other haven of domestic
tranquillity and peace of mind, my foot will naturally tend towards
the King's Bench Prison. in state that I shall be (D. V.) on the
outside of the south wall of that place of incarceration on civil
process, the day after tomorrow, at seven in the evening,
precisely, my object in this epistolary communication be
accomplish.
'I do not feel warrant in solicit my former friend Mr.
Copperfield, or my former friend Mr. Thomas traddle of the Inner
Temple, if that gentleman be still existent and forthcoming, to
condescend to meet I, and renew (so far as may be) our past
relation of the olden time. I confine myself to throw out the
observation, that, at the hour and place I have indicate, may be
find such ruin vestige as yet
'remain,
'of
'a
'Fallen Tower,
'WILKINS MICAWBER.
'P.S. it may be advisable to superadd to the above, the statement
that Mrs. Micawber be not in confidential possession of my
intention.'
I read the letter over several time. make due allowance for Mr.
Micawber's lofty style of composition, and for the extraordinary
relish with which he sit down and write long letter on all
possible and impossible occasion, I still believe that something
important lay hide at the bottom of this roundabout
communication. I put it down, to think about it; and take it up
again, to read it once more; and be still pursue it, when
traddle find I in the height of my perplexity.
'my dear fellow,' say I, 'I never be well pleased to see you.
you come to give I the benefit of your sober judgement at a most
opportune time. I have receive a very singular letter, traddle,
from Mr. Micawber.'
'no?' cry traddle. 'you donot say so? and I have receive one
from Mrs. Micawber!'
with that, Traddles, who be flush with walking, and whose hair,
under the combined effect of exercise and excitement, stand on end
as if he see a cheerful ghost, produce his letter and make an
exchange with I. I watch he into the heart of Mr. Micawber's
letter, and return the elevation of eyebrow with which he say
"'wield the thunderbolt, or direct the devouring and avenge
flame!" bless I, Copperfield!'- and then enter on the perusal of
Mrs. Micawber's epistle.
it run thus:
'my good regard to Mr. Thomas Traddles, and if he should still
remember one who formerly have the happiness of be well
acquaint with he, may I beg a few moment of his leisure time?
I assure Mr. T. T. that I would not intrude upon his kindness, be
I in any other position than on the confine of distraction.
'though harrowing to myself to mention, the alienation of Mr.
Micawber (formerly so domesticate) from his wife and family, be
the cause of my address my unhappy appeal to Mr. Traddles, and
solicit his good indulgence. Mr. T. can form no adequate idea
of the change in Mr. Micawber's conduct, of his wildness, of his
violence. it have gradually augment, until it assume the
appearance of aberration of intellect. scarcely a day pass, I
assure Mr. Traddles, on which some paroxysm do not take place.
Mr. T. will not require I to depict my feeling, when I inform he
that I have become accustomed to hear Mr. Micawber assert that he
have sell himself to the D. Mystery and secrecy have long be his
principal characteristic, have long replace unlimited confidence.
the slight provocation, even be ask if there be anything he
would prefer for dinner, cause he to express a wish for a
separation. last night, on be childishly solicit for
twopence, to buy 'lemon-stunner' - a local sweetmeat - he
present an oyster-knife at the twin!
'I entreat Mr. Traddles to bear with I in enter into these
detail. without they, Mr. T. would indeed find it difficult to
form the faint conception of my heart-rend situation.
'may I now venture to confide to Mr. T. the purport of my letter?
will he now allow I to throw myself on his friendly consideration?
oh yes, for I know his heart!
'the quick eye of affection be not easily blind, when of the
female sex. Mr. Micawber be go to London. though he studiously
conceal his hand, this morning before breakfast, in write the
direction-card which he attach to the little brown valise of
happy day, the eagle-glance of matrimonial anxiety detect, d,
o, n, distinctly trace. the West-end destination of the coach, be
the Golden Cross. dare I fervently implore Mr. T. to see my
misguided husband, and to reason with he? dare I ask Mr. T. to
endeavour to step in between Mr. Micawber and his agonized family?
oh no, for that would be too much!
'if Mr. Copperfield should yet remember one unknown to fame, will
Mr. T. take charge of my unalterable regard and similar
entreaty? in any case, he will have the benevolence to consider
this communication strictly private, and on no account whatever to
be allude to, however distantly, in the presence of Mr. Micawber.
if Mr. T. should ever reply to it (which I cannot but feel to be
most improbable), a letter address to M. E., Post Office,
Canterbury, will be fraught with less painful consequence than any
address immediately to one, who subscribe herself, in extreme
distress,
'Mr. Thomas Traddles's respectful friend and suppliant,
'EMMA MICAWBER.'
'what do you think of that letter?' say traddle, cast his eye
upon I, when I have read it twice.
'what do you think of the other?' say I. for he be still read
it with knit brow.
'I think that the two together, Copperfield,' reply Traddles,
'mean more than Mr. and Mrs. Micawber usually mean in their
correspondence - but I donot know what. they be both write in
good faith, I have no doubt, and without any collusion. poor
thing!' he be now allude to Mrs. Micawber's letter, and we be
stand side by side compare the two; 'it will be a charity to
write to she, at all event, and tell she that we will not fail to
see Mr. Micawber.'
I accede to this the more readily, because I now reproach myself
with have treat her former letter rather lightly. it have set
I think a good deal at the time, as I have mention in its
place; but my absorption in my own affair, my experience of the
family, and my hear nothing more, have gradually end in my
dismiss the subject. I have often think of the Micawbers, but
chiefly to wonder what 'pecuniary liability' they be
establish in Canterbury, and to recall how shy Mr. Micawber be
of I when he become clerk to Uriah Heep.
however, I now write a comforting letter to Mrs. Micawber, in our
joint name, and we both sign it. as we walk into town to post
it, Traddles and I hold a long conference, and launch into a
number of speculation, which I need not repeat. we take my aunt
into our counsel in the afternoon; but our only decide conclusion
be, that we would be very punctual in keep Mr. Micawber's
appointment.
although we appear at the stipulate place a quarter of an hour
before the time, we find Mr. Micawber already there. he be
stand with his arm fold, over against the wall, look at
the spike on the top, with a sentimental expression, as if they
be the interlace bough of tree that have shade he in his
youth.
when we accost he, his manner be something more confused, and
something less genteel, than of yore. he have relinquish his
legal suit of black for the purpose of this excursion, and wear
the old surtout and tight, but not quite with the old air. he
gradually pick up more and more of it as we converse with he;
but, his very eye-glass seem to hang less easily, and his
shirt-collar, though still of the old formidable dimension, rather
droop.
'gentleman!' say Mr. Micawber, after the first salutation, 'you
be friend in need, and friend indeed. allow I to offer my
inquiry with reference to the physical welfare of Mrs.
Copperfield in esse, and Mrs. Traddles in posse, - presuming, that
be to say, that my friend Mr. Traddles be not yet unite to the
object of his affection, for weal and for woe.'
we acknowledge his politeness, and make suitable reply. he then
direct our attention to the wall, and be begin, 'I assure
you, gentleman,' when I venture to object to that ceremonious form
of address, and to beg that he would speak to we in the old way.
'my dear copperfield,' he return, press my hand, 'your
cordiality overpower I. this reception of a shattered fragment
of the Temple once call Man - if I may be permit so to express
myself - bespeak a heart that be an honour to our common nature.
I be about to observe that I again behold the serene spot where
some of the happy hour of my existence fleet by.'
'make so, I be sure, by Mrs. Micawber,' say I. 'I hope she be
well?'
'thank you,' return Mr. Micawber, whose face cloud at this
reference, 'she be but so-so. and this,' say Mr. Micawber,
nod his head sorrowfully, 'be the Bench! where, for the first
time in many revolving year, the overwhelming pressure of
pecuniary liability be not proclaim, from day to day, by
importune voice decline to vacate the passage; where there be
no knocker on the door for any creditor to appeal to; where
personal service of process be not require, and detainee be
merely lodge at the gate! gentleman,' say Mr. Micawber, 'when the
shadow of that iron-work on the summit of the brick structure have
be reflect on the gravel of the Parade, I have see my child
thread the maze of the intricate pattern, avoid the dark mark.
I have be familiar with every stone in the place. if I betray
weakness, you will know how to excuse I.'
'we have all get on in life since then, Mr. Micawber,' say I.
'Mr. Copperfield,' return Mr. Micawber, bitterly, 'when I be an
inmate of that retreat I could look my fellow-man in the face, and
punch his head if he offend I. my fellow-man and myself be no
long on those glorious term!'
turn from the building in a downcast manner, Mr. Micawber
accept my proffered arm on one side, and the proffered arm of
traddle on the other, and walk away between we.
'there be some landmark,' observe Mr. Micawber, look fondly
back over his shoulder, 'on the road to the tomb, which, but for
the impiety of the aspiration, a man would wish never to have
pass. such be the Bench in my chequered career.'
'oh, you be in low spirit, Mr. Micawber,' say traddle.
'I be, sir,' interpose Mr. Micawber.
'I hope,' say traddle, 'it be not because you have conceive a
dislike to the law - for I be a lawyer myself, you know.'
Mr. Micawber answer not a word.
'how be our friend Heep, Mr. Micawber?' say I, after a silence.
'my dear copperfield,' return Mr. Micawber, burst into a state
of much excitement, and turn pale, 'if you ask after my employer
as your friend, I be sorry for it; if you ask after he as MY
friend, I sardonically smile at it. in whatever capacity you ask
after my employer, I beg, without offence to you, to limit my reply
to this - that whatever his state of health may be, his appearance
be foxy: not to say diabolical. you will allow I, as a private
individual, to decline pursue a subject which have lash I to
the utmost verge of desperation in my professional capacity.'
I express my regret for have innocently touch upon a theme
that rouse he so much. 'may I ask,' say I, 'without any hazard
of repeat the mistake, how my old friend Mr. and Miss Wickfield
be?'
'Miss Wickfield,' say Mr. Micawber, now turn red, 'be, as she
always be, a pattern, and a bright example. my dear Copperfield,
she be the only starry spot in a miserable existence. my respect
for that young lady, my admiration of her character, my devotion to
she for her love and truth, and goodness! - take I,' say Mr.
Micawber, 'down a turning, for, upon my soul, in my present state
of mind I be not equal to this!'
we wheel he off into a narrow street, where he take out his
pocket-handkerchief, and stand with his back to a wall. if I
look as gravely at he as Traddles do, he must have find our
company by no mean inspirit.
'it be my fate,' say Mr. Micawber, unfeignedly sob, but do
even that, with a shadow of the old expression of do something
genteel; 'it be my fate, gentleman, that the fine feeling of our
nature have become reproach to I. my homage to Miss Wickfield,
be a flight of arrow in my bosom. you have well leave I, if you
please, to walk the earth as a vagabond. the worm will settle my
business in double-quick time.'
without attend to this invocation, we stand by, until he put up
his pocket-handkerchief, pull up his shirt-collar, and, to delude
any person in the neighbourhood who might have be observe he,
hum a tune with his hat very much on one side. I then mention
- not know what might be lose if we lose sight of he yet - that
it would give I great pleasure to introduce he to my aunt, if he
would ride out to Highgate, where a bed be at his service.
'you shall make we a glass of your own punch, Mr. Micawber,' say
I, 'and forget whatever you have on your mind, in pleasanter
reminiscence.'
'or, if confide anything to friend will be more likely to
relieve you, you shall impart it to we, Mr. Micawber,' say
traddle, prudently.
'gentleman,' return Mr. Micawber, 'do with I as you will! I be
a straw upon the surface of the deep, and be toss in all
direction by the elephant - I beg your pardon; I should have say
the element.'
we walk on, arm-in-arm, again; find the coach in the act of
start; and arrive at Highgate without encounter any
difficulty by the way. I be very uneasy and very uncertain in
my mind what to say or do for the good - so be traddle,
evidently. Mr. Micawber be for the most part plunge into deep
gloom. he occasionally make an attempt to smarten himself, and hum
the fag-end of a tune; but his relapse into profound melancholy
be only make the more impressive by the mockery of a hat
exceedingly on one side, and a shirt-collar pull up to his eye.
we go to my aunt's house rather than to mine, because of Dora's
not be well. my aunt present herself on be send for, and
welcome Mr. Micawber with gracious cordiality. Mr. Micawber
kiss her hand, retire to the window, and pull out his
pocket-handkerchief, have a mental wrestle with himself.
Mr. Dick be at home. he be by nature so exceedingly
compassionate of anyone who seem to be ill at ease, and be so
quick to find any such person out, that he shake hand with Mr.
Micawber, at least half-a-dozen time in five minute. to Mr.
Micawber, in his trouble, this warmth, on the part of a stranger,
be so extremely touching, that he could only say, on the occasion
of each successive shake, 'my dear sir, you overpower I!' which
gratify Mr. Dick so much, that he go at it again with great
vigour than before.
'the friendliness of this gentleman,' say Mr. Micawber to my aunt,
'if you will allow I, ma'am, to cull a figure of speech from the
vocabulary of our coarser national sports - floor I. to a man
who be struggle with a complicated burden of perplexity and
disquiet, such a reception be try, I assure you.'
'my friend Mr. Dick,' reply my aunt proudly, 'be not a common
man.'
'that I be convince of,' say Mr. Micawber. 'my dear sir!' for
Mr. Dick be shake hand with he again; 'I be deeply sensible of
your cordiality!'
'how do you find yourself?' say Mr. Dick, with an anxious look.
'Indifferent, my dear sir,' return Mr. Micawber, sigh.
'you must keep up your spirit,' say Mr. Dick, 'and make yourself
as comfortable as possible.'
Mr. Micawber be quite overcome by these friendly word, and by
find Mr. Dick's hand again within his own. 'it have be my
lot,' he observe, 'to meet, in the diversified panorama of human
existence, with an occasional oasis, but never with one so green,
so gush, as the present!'
at another time I should have be amuse by this; but I feel that
we be all constrain and uneasy, and I watch Mr. Micawber so
anxiously, in his vacillation between an evident disposition to
reveal something, and a counter-disposition to reveal nothing, that
I be in a perfect fever. traddle, sit on the edge of his
chair, with his eye wide open, and his hair more emphatically
erect than ever, star by turn at the ground and at Mr. Micawber,
without so much as attempt to put in a word. my aunt, though I
see that her shrewd observation be concentrate on her new
guest, have more useful possession of her wit than either of we;
for she hold he in conversation, and make it necessary for he to
talk, whether he like it or not.
'you be a very old friend of my nephew's, Mr. Micawber,' say my
aunt. 'I wish I have have the pleasure of see you before.'
'Madam,' return Mr. Micawber, 'I wish I have have the honour of
know you at an early period. I be not always the wreck you
at present behold.'
'I hope Mrs. Micawber and your family be well, sir,' say my aunt.
Mr. Micawber incline his head. 'they be as well, ma'am,' he
desperately observe after a pause, 'as Aliens and Outcasts can
ever hope to be.'
'Lord bless you, sir!' exclaim my aunt, in her abrupt way. 'what
be you talk about?'
'the subsistence of my family, ma'am,' return Mr. Micawber,
'tremble in the balance. my employer -'
here Mr. Micawber provokingly leave off; and begin to peel the
lemon that have be under my direction set before he, together
with all the other appliance he use in make punch.
'your employer, you know,' say Mr. Dick, jog his arm as a
gentle reminder.
'my good sir,' return Mr. Micawber, 'you recall I, I be oblige
to you.' they shake hand again. 'my employer, ma'am - Mr. Heep
- once do I the favour to observe to I, that if I be not in
the receipt of the stipendiary emolument appertain to my
engagement with he, I should probably be a mountebank about the
country, swallow a sword-blade, and eat the devouring
element. for anything that I can perceive to the contrary, it be
still probable that my child may be reduce to seek a livelihood
by personal contortion, while Mrs. Micawber abet their unnatural
feat by play the barrel-organ.'
Mr. Micawber, with a random but expressive flourish of his knife,
signify that these performance might be expect to take place
after he be no more; then resume his peeling with a desperate
air.
my aunt lean her elbow on the little round table that she usually
keep beside she, and eye he attentively. notwithstanding the
aversion with which I regard the idea of entrap he into any
disclosure he be not prepared to make voluntarily, I should have
take he up at this point, but for the strange proceeding in
which I see he engage; whereof his put the lemon-peel into
the kettle, the sugar into the snuffer-tray, the spirit into the
empty jug, and confidently attempt to pour boiling water out of
a candlestick, be among the most remarkable. I see that a crisis
be at hand, and it come. he clatter all his mean and
implement together, rise from his chair, pull out his
pocket-handkerchief, and burst into tear.
'my dear copperfield,' say Mr. Micawber, behind his handkerchief,
'this be an occupation, of all other, require an untroubled
mind, and self-respect. I cannot perform it. it be out of the
question.'
'Mr. Micawber,' say I, 'what be the matter? pray speak out. you
be among friend.'
'among friend, sir!' repeat Mr. Micawber; and all he have
reserve come break out of he. 'Good heaven, it be
principally because I be among friend that my state of mind be
what it be. what be the matter, gentleman? what be not the
matter? Villainy be the matter; baseness be the matter; deception,
fraud, conspiracy, be the matter; and the name of the whole
atrocious mass be - heep!'
my aunt clap her hand, and we all start up as if we be
possess.
'the struggle be over!' say Mr. Micawber violently gesticulate
with his pocket-handkerchief, and fairly strike out from time to
time with both arm, as if he be swim under superhuman
difficulty. 'I will lead this life no long. I be a wretched
being, cut off from everything that make life tolerable. I have
be under a Taboo in that infernal scoundrel's service. give I
back my wife, give I back my family, substitute Micawber for the
petty wretch who walk about in the boot at present on my foot,
and call upon I to swallow a sword tomorrow, and Iwill do it. with
an appetite!'
I never see a man so hot in my life. I try to calm he, that we
might come to something rational; but he get hotter and hotter, and
wouldnot hear a word.
'Iwill put my hand in no man's hand,' say Mr. Micawber, gasp,
puffing, and sobbing, to that degree that he be like a man
fighting with cold water, 'until I have - blow to fragment - the
- a - detestable - serpent - HEEP! Iwill partake of no one's
hospitality, until I have - a - move Mount Vesuvius - to eruption
- on - a - the abandon rascal - HEEP! refreshment - a -
underneath this roof - particularly punch - would - a - choke I -
unless - I have - previously - choke the eye - out of the head -
a - of - interminable cheat, and liar - HEEP! I - a- Iwill know
nobody - and - a - say nothing - and - a - live nowhere - until I
have crush - to - a - undiscoverable atom - the - transcendent
and immortal hypocrite and perjurer - HEEP!'
I really have some fear of Mr. Micawber's die on the spot. the
manner in which he struggle through these inarticulate sentence,
and, whenever he find himself get near the name of Heep,
fight his way on to it, dash at it in a fainting state, and
bring it out with a vehemence little less than marvellous, be
frightful; but now, when he sink into a chair, steaming, and look
at we, with every possible colour in his face that have no business
there, and an endless procession of lump follow one another in
hot haste up his throat, whence they seem to shoot into his
forehead, he have the appearance of be in the last extremity. I
would have go to his assistance, but he wave I off, and
wouldnot hear a word.
'no, Copperfield! - no communication - a - until - Miss Wickfield
- a - redress from wrong inflict by consummate scoundrel -
HEEP!' (I be quite convinced he could not have utter three word,
but for the amazing energy with which this word inspire he when
he feel it come.) 'inviolable secret - a - from the whole world
- a - no exception - this day week - a - at breakfast-time - a -
everybody present - include aunt - a - and extremely friendly
gentleman - to be at the hotel at Canterbury - a - where - Mrs.
Micawber and myself - Auld Lang Syne in chorus - and - a - will
expose intolerable ruffian - HEEP! no more to say - a - or listen
to persuasion - go immediately - not capable - a - bear society -
upon the track of devoted and doom traitor - HEEP!'
with this last repetition of the magic word that have keep he go
at all, and in which he surpass all his previous effort, Mr.
Micawber rush out of the house; leave we in a state of
excitement, hope, and wonder, that reduce we to a condition little
well than his own. but even then his passion for write letter
be too strong to be resist; for while we be yet in the height
of our excitement, hope, and wonder, the follow pastoral note
be bring to I from a neighbouring tavern, at which he have
call to write it: -
'most secret and confidential.
'MY DEAR SIR,
'I beg to be allow to convey, through you, my apology to your
excellent aunt for my late excitement. an explosion of a
smoulder volcano long suppress, be the result of an internal
contest more easily conceive than describe.
'I trust I render tolerably intelligible my appointment for the
morning of this day week, at the house of public entertainment at
Canterbury, where Mrs. Micawber and myself have once the honour of
unite our voice to your, in the well-know strain of the
immortal exciseman nurture beyond the Tweed.
'the duty do, and act of reparation perform, which can alone
enable I to contemplate my fellow mortal, I shall be know no
more. I shall simply require to be deposit in that place of
universal resort, where
each in his narrow cell for ever lay,
the rude forefather of the hamlet sleep,
'- with the plain Inscription,
'WILKINS MICAWBER.'
CHAPTER 50
Mr. PEGGOTTY'S DREAM come true
by this time, some month have pass since our interview on the
bank of the river with Martha. I have never see she since, but she
have communicate with Mr. Peggotty on several occasion. nothing
have come of her zealous intervention; nor could I infer, from what
he tell I, that any clue have be obtain, for a moment, to
Emily's fate. I confess that I begin to despair of her recovery,
and gradually to sink deeply and deep into the belief that she
be dead.
his conviction remain unchanged. so far as I know - and I
believe his honest heart be transparent to I - he never waver
again, in his solemn certainty of find she. his patience never
tired. and, although I tremble for the agony it might one day be
to he to have his strong assurance shiver at a blow, there be
something so religious in it, so affectingly expressive of its
anchor be in the pure depth of his fine nature, that the
respect and honour in which I hold he be exalt every day.
his be not a lazy trustfulness that hop, and do no more. he
have be a man of sturdy action all his life, and he know that in
all thing wherein he want help he must do his own part
faithfully, and help himself. I have know he set out in the
night, on a misgiving that the light might not be, by some
accident, in the window of the old boat, and walk to Yarmouth. I
have know he, on read something in the newspaper that might
apply to she, take up his stick, and go forth on a journey of
three- or four-score mile. he make his way by sea to Naples, and
back, after hear the narrative to which Miss Dartle have assist
I. all his journey be ruggedly perform; for he be always
steadfast in a purpose of save money for Emily's sake, when she
should be find. in all this long pursuit, I never hear he
repine; I never hear he say he be fatigue, or out of heart.
Dora have often see he since our marriage, and be quite fond of
he. I fancy his figure before I now, stand near her sofa,
with his rough cap in his hand, and the blue eye of my child-wife
raise, with a timid wonder, to his face. sometimes of an evening,
about twilight, when he come to talk with I, I would induce he to
smoke his pipe in the garden, as we slowly pace to and fro
together; and then, the picture of his deserted home, and the
comfortable air it use to have in my childish eye of an evening
when the fire be burn, and the wind moan round it, come most
vividly into my mind.
one evening, at this hour, he tell I that he have find Martha
wait near his lodging on the precede night when he come out,
and that she have ask he not to leave London on any account,
until he should have see she again.
'do she tell you why?' I inquire.
'I ask she, Mas'r Davy,' he reply, 'but it be but few word as
she ever say, and she on'y get my promise and so go away.'
'do she say when you might expect to see she again?' I demand.
'no, Mas'r Davy,' he return, draw his hand thoughtfully down
his face. 'I ask that too; but it be more (she say) than she
could tell.'
as I have long forborne to encourage he with hope that hang on
thread, I make no other comment on this information than that I
suppose he would see she soon. such speculation as it engender
within I I keep to myself, and those be faint enough.
I be walk alone in the garden, one evening, about a fortnight
afterwards. I remember that evening well. it be the second in
Mr. Micawber's week of suspense. there have be rain all day, and
there be a damp feeling in the air. the leaf be thick upon
the tree, and heavy with wet; but the rain have cease, though the
sky be still dark; and the hopeful bird be sing cheerfully.
as I walk to and fro in the garden, and the twilight begin to
close around I, their little voice be hush; and that peculiar
silence which belong to such an evening in the country when the
light tree be quite still, save for the occasional dropping
from their bough, prevail.
there be a little green perspective of trelli-work and ivy at the
side of our cottage, through which I could see, from the garden
where I be walk, into the road before the house. I happen to
turn my eye towards this place, as I be think of many thing;
and I see a figure beyond, dress in a plain cloak. it be
bend eagerly towards I, and beckoning.
'Martha!' say I, go to it.
'can you come with I?' she inquire, in an agitated whisper. 'I
have be to he, and he be not at home. I write down where he be
to come, and leave it on his table with my own hand. they say he
would not be out long. I have tiding for he. can you come
directly?'
my answer be, to pass out at the gate immediately. she make a
hasty gesture with her hand, as if to entreat my patience and my
silence, and turn towards London, whence, as her dress betoken,
she have come expeditiously on foot.
I ask she if that be not our destination? on her motioning
Yes, with the same hasty gesture as before, I stop an empty
coach that be come by, and we get into it. when I ask she
where the coachman be to drive, she answer, 'anywhere near
Golden Square! and quick!' - then shrunk into a corner, with one
trembling hand before her face, and the other make the former
gesture, as if she could not bear a voice.
now much disturbed, and dazzle with conflicting gleam of hope and
dread, I look at she for some explanation. but see how
strongly she desire to remain quiet, and feel that it be my
own natural inclination too, at such a time, I do not attempt to
break the silence. we proceed without a word be speak.
sometimes she glance out of the window, as though she think we
be go slowly, though indeed we be go fast; but otherwise
remain exactly as at first.
we alight at one of the entrance to the Square she have
mention, where I direct the coach to wait, not know but that
we might have some occasion for it. she lay her hand on my arm,
and hurry I on to one of the sombre street, of which there be
several in that part, where the house be once fair dwelling in
the occupation of single family, but have, and have, long
degenerate into poor lodging let off in room. enter at the
open door of one of these, and release my arm, she beckon I to
follow she up the common staircase, which be like a tributary
channel to the street.
the house swarm with inmate. as we go up, door of room be
open and people's head put out; and we pass other people on
the stair, who be come down. in glance up from the outside,
before we enter, I have see woman and child loll at the
window over flower-pot; and we seem to have attract their
curiosity, for these be principally the observer who look out
of their door. it be a broad panel staircase, with massive
balustrade of some dark wood; cornice above the door, ornament
with carve fruit and flower; and broad seat in the window. but
all these token of past grandeur be miserably decay and dirty;
rot, damp, and age, have weaken the flooring, which in many place
be unsound and even unsafe. some attempt have be make, I
notice, to infuse new blood into this dwindle frame, by
repair the costly old wood-work here and there with common deal;
but it be like the marriage of a reduce old noble to a plebeian
pauper, and each party to the ill-assorted union shrink away from
the other. several of the back window on the staircase have be
darken or wholly block up. in those that remain, there be
scarcely any glass; and, through the crumble frame by which the
bad air seem always to come in, and never to go out, I see,
through other glassless window, into other house in a similar
condition, and look giddily down into a wretched yard, which be
the common dust-heap of the mansion.
we proceed to the top-storey of the house. two or three time,
by the way, I think I observe in the indistinct light the skirt
of a female figure go up before we. as we turn to ascend the
last flight of stair between we and the roof, we catch a full
view of this figure pause for a moment, at a door. then it
turn the handle, and go in.
'whatbe this!' say Martha, in a whisper. 'she have go into my
room. I donot know she!'
I know she. I have recognize she with amazement, for Miss Dartle.
I say something to the effect that it be a lady whom I have see
before, in a few word, to my conductress; and have scarcely do
so, when we hear her voice in the room, though not, from where we
stand, what she be say. Martha, with an astonished look,
repeat her former action, and softly lead I up the stair; and
then, by a little back-door which seem to have no lock, and which
she push open with a touch, into a small empty garret with a low
sloping roof, little well than a cupboard. between this, and the
room she have call her, there be a small door of communication,
stand partly open. here we stop, breathless with our ascent,
and she place her hand lightly on my lip. I could only see, of
the room beyond, that it be pretty large; that there be a bed in
it; and that there be some common picture of ship upon the
wall. I could not see Miss Dartle, or the person whom we have
hear her address. certainly, my companion could not, for my
position be the good.
a dead silence prevail for some moment. Martha keep one hand on
my lip, and raise the other in a listening attitude.
'it matter little to I she not be at home,' say Rosa Dartle
haughtily, 'I know nothing of she. it be you I come to see.'
'I?' reply a soft voice.
at the sound of it, a thrill go through my frame. for it be
Emily's!
'yes,' return Miss Dartle, 'I have come to look at you. what?
you be not ashamed of the face that have do so much?'
the resolute and unrelenting hatred of her tone, its cold stern
sharpness, and its master rage, present she before I, as if I
have see she stand in the light. I see the flash black eye,
and the passion-waste figure; and I see the scar, with its white
track cut through her lip, quiver and throbbing as she
speak.
'I have come to see,' she say, 'James Steerforth's fancy; the girl
who run away with he, and be the town-talk of the commonest people
of her native place; the bold, flaunting, practise companion of
person like James Steerforth. I want to know what such a thing be
like.'
there be a rustle, as if the unhappy girl, on whom she heap
these taunt, run towards the door, and the speaker swiftly
interpose herself before it. it be succeed by a moment's
pause.
when Miss Dartle speak again, it be through her set tooth, and
with a stamp upon the ground.
'stay there!' she say, 'or Iwill proclaim you to the house, and the
whole street! if you try to evade I, Iwill stop you, if itbe by the
hair, and raise the very stone against you!'
a frightened murmur be the only reply that reach my ear. a
silence succeed. I do not know what to do. much as I desire
to put an end to the interview, I feel that I have no right to
present myself; that it be for Mr. Peggotty alone to see she and
recover she. would he never come? I think impatiently.
'so!' say Rosa Dartle, with a contemptuous laugh, 'I see she at
last! why, he be a poor creature to be take by that delicate
mock-modesty, and that hang head!'
'oh, for Heaven's sake, spare I!' exclaim Emily. 'whoever you
be, you know my pitiable story, and for Heaven's sake spare I, if
you would be spar yourself!'
'if I would be spar!' return the other fiercely; 'what be there
in common between US, do you think!'
'nothing but our sex,' say Emily, with a burst of tear.
'and that,' say Rosa Dartle, 'be so strong a claim, prefer by
one so infamous, that if I have any feeling in my breast but scorn
and abhorrence of you, it would freeze it up. our sex! you be an
honour to our sex!'
'I have deserve this,' say Emily, 'but itbe dreadful! dear, dear
lady, think what I have suffer, and how I be fall! oh, Martha,
come back! oh, home, home!'
Miss Dartle place herself in a chair, within view of the door, and
look downward, as if Emily be crouch on the floor before
she. be now between I and the light, I could see she curl
lip, and her cruel eye intently fix on one place, with a greedy
triumph.
'listen to what I say!' she say; 'and reserve your false art for
your dupe. do you hope to move I by your tear? no more than
you could charm I by your smile, you purchase slave.'
'oh, have some mercy on I!' cry Emily. 'show I some
compassion, or I shall die mad!'
'it would be no great penance,' say Rosa Dartle, 'for your crime.
do you know what you have do? do you ever think of the home you
have lay waste?'
'oh, be there ever night or day, when I donot think of it!' cry
emily; and now I could just see she, on her knee, with her head
throw back, her pale face look upward, her hand wildly clasp
and hold out, and her hair stream about she. 'have there ever
be a single minute, wake or sleep, when it havenot be
before I, just as it use to be in the lose day when I turn my
back upon it for ever and for ever! oh, home, home! oh dear, dear
uncle, if you ever could have know the agony your love would cause
I when I fall away from good, you never would have show it to I
so constant, much as you feel it; but would have be angry to I,
at least once in my life, that I might have have some comfort! I
have none, none, no comfort upon earth, for all of they be always
fond of I!' she drop on her face, before the imperious figure
in the chair, with an imploring effort to clasp the skirt of her
dress.
Rosa Dartle sit look down upon she, as inflexible as a figure of
brass. her lip be tightly compressed, as if she know that she
must keep a strong constraint upon herself - I write what I
sincerely believe - or she would be tempt to strike the beautiful
form with her foot. I see she, distinctly, and the whole power of
her face and character seem force into that expression. - would
he never come?
'the miserable vanity of these earth-worm!' she say, when she have
so far control the angry heaving of her breast, that she could
trust herself to speak. 'your home! do you imagine that I bestow
a thought on it, or suppose you could do any harm to that low
place, which money would not pay for, and handsomely? your home!
you be a part of the trade of your home, and be buy and sell
like any other vendible thing your people deal in.'
'oh, not that!' cry Emily. 'say anything of I; but donot visit
my disgrace and shame, more than I have do, on folk who be as
honourable as you! have some respect for they, as you be a lady,
if you have no mercy for I.'
'I speak,' she say, not deign to take any heed of this appeal,
and draw away her dress from the contamination of Emily's touch,
'I speak of his home - where I live. here,' she say, stretch
out her hand with her contemptuous laugh, and look down upon the
prostrate girl, 'be a worthy cause of division between lady-mother
and gentleman-son; of grief in a house where she wouldnot have be
admit as a kitchen-girl; of anger, and repine, and reproach.
this piece of pollution, pick up from the water-side, to be make
much of for an hour, and then toss back to her original place!'
'no! no!' cry Emily, clasp her hand together. 'when he first
come into my way - that the day have never dawn upon I, and he
have meet I be carry to my grave! - I have be bring up as
virtuous as you or any lady, and be go to be the wife of as
good a man as you or any lady in the world can ever marry. if you
live in his home and know he, you know, perhaps, what his power
with a weak, vain girl might be. I donot defend myself, but I know
well, and he know well, or he will know when he come to die, and
his mind be trouble with it, that he use all his power to deceive
I, and that I believe he, trust he, and love he!'
Rosa Dartle spring up from her seat; recoil; and in recoiling
strike at she, with a face of such malignity, so darkened and
disfigure by passion, that I have almost throw myself between
they. the blow, which have no aim, fall upon the air. as she now
stand pant, look at she with the utmost detestation that she
be capable of express, and tremble from head to foot with
rage and scorn, I think I have never see such a sight, and never
could see such another.
'you love he? you?' she cry, with she clench hand, quiver
as if it only want a weapon to stab the object of her wrath.
Emily have shrink out of my view. there be no reply.
'and tell that to I,' she add, 'with your shameful lip? why
donot they whip these creature? if I could order it to be do,
I would have this girl whip to death.'
and so she would, I have no doubt. I would not have trust she
with the rack itself, while that furious look last.
she slowly, very slowly, break into a laugh, and point at Emily
with her hand, as if she be a sight of shame for god and man.
'she love!' she say. 'that carrion! and he ever care for she,
shewould tell I. ha, ha! the liar that these trader be!'
her mockery be bad than her undisguised rage. of the two, I
would have much prefer to be the object of the latter. but,
when she suffer it to break loose, it be only for a moment. she
have chain it up again, and however it might tear she within, she
subdue it to herself.
'I come here, you pure fountain of love,' she say, 'to see - as I
begin by tell you - what such a thing as you be like. I be
curious. I be satisfied. also to tell you, that you have good seek
that home of your, with all speed, and hide your head among those
excellent people who be expect you, and whom your money will
console. when itbe all go, you can believe, and trust, and love
again, you know! I think you a broken toy that have last its
time; a worthless spangle that be tarnish, and throw away.
but, find you true gold, a very lady, and an ill-use innocent,
with a fresh heart full of love and trustfulness - which you look
like, and be quite consistent with your story! - I have something
more to say. attend to it; for what I say Iwill do. do you hear
I, you fairy spirit? what I say, I mean to do!'
her rage get the well of she again, for a moment; but it pass
over her face like a spasm, and leave her smile.
'hide yourself,' she pursue, 'if not at home, somewhere. let it
be somewhere beyond reach; in some obscure life - or, well still,
in some obscure death. I wonder, if your love heart will not
break, you have find no way of help it to be still! I have
hear of such mean sometimes. I believe they may be easily
find.'
a low crying, on the part of Emily, interrupt she here. she
stop, and listen to it as if it be music.
'I be of a strange nature, perhaps,' Rosa Dartle go on; 'but I
cannot breathe freely in the air you breathe. I find it sickly.
therefore, I will have it clear; I will have it purify of you.
if you live here tomorrow, Iwill have your story and your character
proclaim on the common stair. there be decent woman in the
house, I be tell; and it be a pity such a light as you should be
among they, and conceal. if, leave here, you seek any refuge
in this town in any character but your true one (which you be
welcome to bear, without molestation from I), the same service
shall be do you, if I hear of your retreat. be assist by a
gentleman who not long ago aspire to the favour of your hand, I be
sanguine as to that.'
would he never, never come? how long be I to bear this? how long
could I bear it?
'oh I, oh I!' exclaim the wretched Emily, in a tone that might
have touch the hard heart, I should have think; but there
be no relenting in Rosa Dartle's smile. 'what, what, shall I do!'
'do?' return the other. 'live happy in your own reflection!
consecrate your existence to the recollection of James Steerforth's
tenderness - he would have make you his serve-man's wife, would
he not? - or to feel grateful to the upright and deserve
creature who would have take you as his gift. or, if those proud
remembrance, and the consciousness of your own virtue, and the
honourable position to which they have raise you in the eye of
everything that wear the human shape, will not sustain you, marry
that good man, and be happy in his condescension. if this will not
do either, die! there be doorway and dust-heap for such death,
and such despair - find one, and take your flight to Heaven!'
I hear a distant foot upon the stair. I know it, I be certain.
it be his, thank God!
she move slowly from before the door when she say this, and
pass out of my sight.
'but mark!' she add, slowly and sternly, open the other door
to go away, 'I be resolve, for reason that I have and hatred
that I entertain, to cast you out, unless you withdraw from my
reach altogether, or drop your pretty mask. this be what I have to
say; and what I say, I mean to do!'
the foot upon the stair come near - nearer - pass she as she
go down - rush into the room!
'Uncle!'
a fearful cry follow the word. I pause a moment, and look
in, see he support her insensible figure in his arm. he gaze
for a few second in the face; then stoop to kiss it - oh, how
tenderly! - and draw a handkerchief before it.
'Mas'r Davy,' he say, in a low tremulous voice, when it be
cover, 'I thank my heav'nly Father as my dream's come true! I
thank he hearty for have guide of I, in his own way, to my
darling!'
with those word he take she up in his arm; and, with the veil
face lie on his bosom, and address towards his own, carry
she, motionless and unconscious, down the stair.
CHAPTER 51
the beginning of a long journey
it be yet early in the morning of the follow day, when, as I
be walk in my garden with my aunt (who take little other
exercise now, be so much in attendance on my dear Dora), I be
tell that Mr. Peggotty desire to speak with I. he come into the
garden to meet I half-way, on my go towards the gate; and bar
his head, as it be always his custom to do when he see my aunt,
for whom he have a high respect. I have be tell she all that
have happen overnight. without say a word, she walk up with
a cordial face, shake hand with he, and pat he on the arm.
it be so expressively do, that she have no need to say a word.
Mr. Peggotty understand she quite as well as if she have say a
thousand.
'Iwill go in now, Trot,' say my aunt, 'and look after little
Blossom, who will be get up presently.'
'not along of my being heer, ma'am, I hope?' say Mr. Peggotty.
'unless my wit be go a bahd's neezing' - by which Mr. Peggotty
mean to say, bird's-nesting - 'this morning, 'tis along of I as
yoube a-go to quit we?'
'you have something to say, my good friend,' return my aunt, 'and
will do well without I.'
'by your leave, ma'am,' return Mr. Peggotty, 'I should take it
kind, pervise you doen't mind my clicketten, if youwould bide heer.'
'would you?' say my aunt, with short good-nature. 'then I be sure
I will!'
so, she draw her arm through Mr. Peggotty's, and walk with he to
a leafy little summer-house there be at the bottom of the garden,
where she sit down on a bench, and I beside she. there be a seat
for Mr. Peggotty too, but he prefer to stand, lean his hand
on the small rustic table. as he stand, look at his cap for a
little while before begin to speak, I could not help observe
what power and force of character his sinewy hand express, and
what a good and trusty companion it be to his honest brow and
iron-grey hair.
'I take my dear child away last night,' Mr. Peggotty begin, as he
raise his eye to ours, 'to my lodging, wheer I have a long time
be expect of she and prepare fur she. it be hour afore
she know I right; and when she do, she kneel down at my foot,
and kiender say to I, as if it be her prayer, how it all come
to be. you may believe I, when I heerd her voice, as I have heerd
at home so playful - and see she humble, as it might be in the
dust our Saviour write in with his blessed hand - I feel a wownd go
to my 'art, in the midst of all its thankfulness.'
he draw his sleeve across his face, without any pretence of
conceal why; and then clear his voice.
'it warn't for long as I feel that; for she be find. I have on'y
to think as she be find, and it be go. I doen't know why I do
so much as mention of it now, Ibe sure. I donot have it in my
mind a minute ago, to say a word about myself; but it come up so
nat'ral, that I yield to it afore I be aweer.'
'you be a self-deny soul,' say my aunt, 'and will have your
reward.'
Mr. Peggotty, with the shadow of the leaf play athwart his
face, make a surprised inclination of the head towards my aunt, as
an acknowledgement of her good opinion; then take up the thread he
have relinquish.
'when my Em'ly take flight,' he say, in stern wrath for the
moment, 'from the house wheer she be make a prisoner by that theer
spot snake as Mas'r Davy see, - and his story's trew, and may
GOD confound he! - she take flight in the night. it be a dark
night, with a many star a-shining. she be wild. she run along
the sea beach, believe the old boat be theer; and call out to
we to turn away our face, for she be a-come by. she heerd
herself a-cry out, like as if it be another person; and cut
herself on they sharp-pinte stone and rock, and feel it no more
than if she have be rock herself. ever so fur she run, and there
be fire afore her eye, and roaring in her ear. of a sudden -
or so she thowt, you unnerstand - the day break, wet and windy, and
she be lie b'low a heap of stone upon the shore, and a woman be
a-speak to she, say, in the language of that country, what
be it as have go so much amiss?'
he see everything he relate. it pass before he, as he speak,
so vividly, that, in the intensity of his earnestness, he present
what he describe to I, with great distinctness than I can
express. I can hardly believe, write now long afterwards, but
that I be actually present in these scene; they be impress
upon I with such an astonishing air of fidelity.
'as Em'ly's eye - which be heavy - see this woman well,' Mr.
Peggotty go on, 'she know'd as she be one of they as she have
often talk to on the beach. Fur, though she have run (as I have
say) ever so fur in the night, she have oftentime wander long
way, partly afoot, partly in boat and carriage, and know'd all
that country, 'long the coast, mile and mile. she havenot no
child of her own, this woman, be a young wife; but she be a-
look to have one afore long. and may my prayer go up to Heaven
that 'twill be a happiness to she, and a comfort, and a honour, all
her life! may it love she and be dootiful to she, in her old age;
helpful of she at the last; a Angel to her heer, and heerafter!'
'amen!' say my aunt.
'she have be summat timorous and down,' say Mr. Peggotty, and have
sit, at first, a little way off, at her spinning, or such work as
it be, when Em'ly talk to the child. but Em'ly have take
notice of she, and have go and speak to she; and as the young
woman be partial to the child herself, they have soon make
friend. Sermuchser, that when Em'ly go that way, she always giv
Em'ly flower. this be she as now ask what it be that have go
so much amiss. Em'ly tell she, and she - take her home. she do
indeed. she take her home,' say Mr. Peggotty, cover his face.
he be more affect by this act of kindness, than I have ever see
he affect by anything since the night she go away. my aunt
and I do not attempt to disturb he.
'it be a little cottage, you may suppose,' he say, presently,
'but she find space for Em'ly in it, - her husband be away at
sea, - and she kep it secret, and prevail upon such neighbour as
she have (they be not many near) to keep it secret too. Em'ly be
take bad with fever, and, what be very strange to I be, - maybe
'tis not so strange to scholar, - the language of that country
go out of her head, and she could only speak her own, that no one
unnerstood. she recollect, as if she have dream it, that she lie
there always a-talk her own tongue, always believe as the old
boat be round the next pint in the bay, and beg and imploring
of them to send theer and tell how she be die, and bring back a
message of forgiveness, if it be on'y a wure. a'most the whole
time, she thowt, - now, that he as I make mention on just now be
lurk for her unnerneath the winder; now that he as have bring
she to this be in the room, - and cry to the good young woman
not to give she up, and know'd, at the same time, that she couldnot
unnerstand, and dread that she must be take away. likewise the
fire be afore her eye, and the roaring in her ear; and theer
be no today, nor yesterday, nor yet tomorrow; but everything in
her life as ever have be, or as ever could be, and everything as
never have be, and as never could be, be a crowding on she all at
once, and nothing clear nor welcome, and yet she sing and laugh
about it! how long this last, I doen't know; but then theer come
a sleep; and in that sleep, from be a many time strong than
her own self, she fall into the weakness of the little child.'
here he stop, as if for relief from the terror of his own
description. after be silent for a few moment, he pursue his
story.
'it be a pleasant arternoon when she awake; and so quiet, that
there warn't a sound but the rippling of that blue sea without a
tide, upon the shore. it be her belief, at first, that she be at
home upon a Sunday morning; but the vine leave as she see at the
winder, and the hill beyond, warn't home, and contradict of she.
then, come in her friend to watch alongside of her bed; and then
she know'd as the old boat warn't round that next pint in the bay
no more, but be fur off; and know'd where she be, and why; and
break out a-cry on that good young woman's bosom, wheer I hope
her baby be a-lie now, a-cheering of she with its pretty eye!'
he could not speak of this good friend of Emily's without a flow of
tear. it be in vain to try. he break down again, endeavour
to bless she!
'that do my Em'ly good,' he resume, after such emotion as I
could not behold without share in; and as to my aunt, she weep
with all her heart; 'that do Em'ly good, and she begin to mend.
but, the language of that country be quite go from she, and she
be force to make sign. so she go on, get well from day
to day, slow, but sure, and try to learn the name of common
thing - name as she seem never to have heerd in all her life -
till one evening come, when she be a-setting at her window,
look at a little girl at play upon the beach. and of a sudden
this child hold out her hand, and say, what would be in English,
"Fisherman's daughter, herebe a shell!" - for you be to unnerstand
that they use at first to call she "Pretty lady", as the general
way in that country be, and that she have teach them to call she
"Fisherman's daughter" instead. the child say of a sudden,
"Fisherman's daughter, herebe a shell!" then Em'ly unnerstand she;
and she answer, burst out a-crying; and it all come back!
'when Em'ly get strong again,' say Mr. Peggotty, after another
short interval of silence, 'she cast about to leave that good young
creetur, and get to her own country. the husband be come home,
then; and the two together put she aboard a small trader bind to
Leghorn, and from that to France. she have a little money, but it
be less than little as they would take for all they do. Ibe
a'most glad on it, though they be so poor! what they do, be lay
up wheer neither moth or rust doth corrupt, and wheer thief do
not break through nor steal. Mas'r Davy, itwill outlast all the
treasure in the wureld.
'Em'ly get to France, and take service to wait on travel lady
at a inn in the port. Theer, theer come, one day, that snake. -
let he never come nigh I. I doen't know what hurt I might do
he! - soon as she see he, without he see she, all her fear
and wildness return upon she, and she flee afore the very breath
he draw'd. she come to England, and be set ashore at Dover.
'I doen't know,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'for sure, when her 'art begin
to fail she; but all the way to England she have thowt to come to
her dear home. soon as she get to England she turn her face
tow'rd it. but, fear of not be forgiv, fear of be pinte
at, fear of some of we be dead along of she, fear of many
thing, turn she from it, kiender by force, upon the road:
"Uncle, uncle," she say to I, "the fear of not be worthy to do
what my torn and bleed breast so long to do, be the most
fright'ning fear of all! I turn back, when my 'art be full of
prayer that I might crawl to the old door-step, in the night, kiss
it, lie my wicked face upon it, and theer be find dead in the
morning."
'she come,' say Mr. Peggotty, drop his voice to an
awe-stricken whisper, 'to London. she - as have never see it in
her life - alone - without a penny - young - so pretty - come to
London. a'most the moment as she light heer, all so desolate,
she find (as she believe) a friend; a decent woman as speak to
she about the needle-work as she have be bring up to do, about
find plenty of it fur she, about a lodge fur the night, and
make secret inquiration concern of I and all at home,
tomorrow. when my child,' he say aloud, and with an energy of
gratitude that shake he from head to foot, 'stand upon the brink
of more than I can say or think on - Martha, trew to her promise,
save she.'
I could not repress a cry of joy.
'Mas'r Davy!' say he, grip my hand in that strong hand of his,
'it be you as first make mention of she to I. I thankee, sir!
she be arn. she have know'd of her bitter knowledge wheer to
watch and what to do. she have do it. and the Lord be above
all! she come, white and hurried, upon Em'ly in her sleep. she
say to she, "rise up from bad than death, and come with I!"
they belong to the house would have stop she, but they might
as soon have stop the sea. "stand away from I," she say, "I
be a ghost that call she from beside her open grave!" she tell
Em'ly she have see I, and know'd I love she, and forgive she.
she wrap she, hasty, in her clothe. she take she, faint and
trembling, on her arm. she heed no more what they say, than if
she have have no ear. she walk among them with my child, mind
only she; and bring she safe out, in the dead of the night, from
that black pit of ruin!
'she attend on Em'ly,' say Mr. Peggotty, who have release my
hand, and put his own hand on his heaving chest; 'she attend to
my Em'ly, lie weary out, and wander betwixt while, till
late next day. then she go in search of I; then in search of
you, Mas'r Davy. she donot tell Em'ly what she come out fur, lest
her 'art should fail, and she should think of hiding of herself.
how the cruel lady know'd of her be theer, I cannot say. whether
he as I have speak so much of, chance to see them go theer, or
whether (which be most like, to my thinking) he have heerd it from
the woman, I doen't greatly ask myself. my niece be find.
'all night long,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'we have be together, Em'ly
and I. 'tis little (consider the time) as she have say, in
wured, through they break-hearted tear; 'tis less as I have see
of her dear face, as grow'd into a woman's at my hearth. but, all
night long, her arm have be about my neck; and her head have lay
heer; and we know full well, as we can put our trust in one
another, ever more.'
he cease to speak, and his hand upon the table rest there in
perfect repose, with a resolution in it that might have conquer
lion.
'it be a gleam of light upon I, Trot,' say my aunt, dry her
eye, 'when I form the resolution of be godmother to your
sister Betsey Trotwood, who disappoint I; but, next to that,
hardly anything would have give I great pleasure, than to be
godmother to that good young creature's baby!'
Mr. Peggotty nod his understanding of my aunt's feeling, but
could not trust himself with any verbal reference to the subject of
her commendation. we all remain silent, and occupy with our
own reflection (my aunt dry her eye, and now sob
convulsively, and now laugh and call herself a fool); until
I speak.
'you have quite make up your mind,' say I to Mr. Peggotty, 'as to
the future, good friend? I need scarcely ask you.'
'quite, Mas'r Davy,' he return; 'and tell Em'ly. Theer's mighty
country, fur from heer. our future life lay over the sea.'
'they will emigrate together, aunt,' say I.
'yes!' say Mr. Peggotty, with a hopeful smile. 'no one cannot
reproach my darling in Australia. we will begin a new life over
theer!'
I ask he if he yet propose to himself any time for go away.
'I be down at the dock early this morning, sir,' he return, 'to
get information concern of they ship. in about six week or
two month from now, therewill be one sailing - I see she this
morning - go aboard - and we shall take our passage in she.'
'quite alone?' I ask.
'Aye, Mas'r Davy!' he return. 'my sister, you see, shebe that
fond of you and yourn, and that accustomed to think on'y of her own
country, that it wouldnot be hardly fair to let she go. besides
which, theer's one she have in charge, Mas'r Davy, as doen't ought
to be forget.'
'Poor ham!' say I.
'my good sister take care of his house, you see, ma'am, and he
take kindly to she,' Mr. Peggotty explain for my aunt's well
information. 'hewill set and talk to she, with a calm spirit, wen
itbe like he couldnot bring himself to open his lip to another.
poor fellow!' say Mr. Peggotty, shake his head, 'theerbe not so
much leave he, that he could spare the little as he have!'
'and Mrs. Gummidge?' say I.
'well, Ihave have a mort of consideration, I do tell you,' return
Mr. Peggotty, with a perplexed look which gradually clear as he
go on, 'concern of Missis Gummidge. you see, wen Missis
Gummidge fall a-thinking of the old 'un, she an't what you may
call good company. Betwixt you and I, Mas'r Davy - and you, ma'am
- wen Mrs. Gummidge take to wimicking,' - our old country word for
cry, - 'shebe liable to be consider to be, by they as donot
know the old 'un, peevish-like. now I do know the old 'un,' say
Mr. Peggotty, 'and I know'd his merit, so I unnerstan' she; but
'tan't entirely so, you see, with other - nat'rally cannot be!'
my aunt and I both acquiesce.
'Wheerby,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'my sister might - I doen't say she
would, but might - find Missis Gummidge give she a leetle trouble
now-and-again. Theerfur 'tan't my intention to moor Missis
Gummidge 'long with they, but to find a Beein' fur her wheer she
can fisherate for herself.' (a Beein' signifie, in that dialect,
a home, and to fisherate be to provide.) 'fur which purpose,' say
Mr. Peggotty, 'I mean to make she a 'lowance afore I go, as'll
leave she pretty comfort'ble. shebe the faithfull of creetur.
'tan't to be expect, of course, at her time of life, and be
lone and lorn, as the good old Mawther be to be knock about
aboardship, and in the wood and wild of a new and fur-away
country. so thatbe what Ibe a-go to do with she.'
he forget nobody. he think of everybody's claim and striving,
but his own.
'Em'ly,' he continue, 'will keep along with I - poor child, shebe
sore in need of peace and rest! - until such time as we go upon
our voyage. shewill work at they clothe, as must be make; and I
hope her trouble will begin to seem long ago than they be, wen
she find herself once more by her rough but love uncle.'
my aunt nod confirmation of this hope, and impart great
satisfaction to Mr. Peggotty.
'Theer's one thing furder, Mas'r Davy,' say he, put his hand
in his breast-pocket, and gravely take out the little paper
bundle I have see before, which he unroll on the table. 'Theer's
these here banknote - fifty pound, and ten. to they I wish to add
the money as she come away with. Ihave ask she about that (but
not say why), and have add of it up. I an't a scholar. would
you be so kind as see how 'tis?'
he hand I, apologetically for his scholarship, a piece of paper,
and observe I while I look it over. it be quite right.
'Thankee, sir,' he say, take it back. 'this money, if you
doen't see objection, Mas'r Davy, I shall put up jest afore I go,
in a cover direct to he; and put that up in another, direct to
his mother. I shall tell she, in no more wured than I speak to
you, what itbe the price on; and that Ibe go, and past receive
of it back.'
I tell he that I think it would be right to do so - that I be
thoroughly convince it would be, since he feel it to be right.
'I say that theer be on'y one thing furder,' he proceed with a
grave smile, when he have make up his little bundle again, and put
it in his pocket; 'but theer be two. I warn't sure in my mind,
wen I come out this morning, as I could go and break to Ham, of my
own self, what have so thankfully happen. so I writ a letter
while I be out, and put it in the post-office, tell of them how
all be as 'tis; and that I should come down tomorrow to unload my
mind of what little need a-doing of down theer, and, most-like,
take my farewell leave of Yarmouth.'
'and do you wish I to go with you?' say I, see that he leave
something unsaid.
'if you could do I that kind favour, Mas'r Davy,' he reply. 'I
know the sight on you would cheer them up a bit.'
my little Dora be in good spirit, and very desirous that I
should go - as I find on talk it over with she - I readily
pledge myself to accompany he in accordance with his wish. next
morning, consequently, we be on the Yarmouth coach, and again
travel over the old ground.
as we pass along the familiar street at night - Mr. Peggotty, in
despite of all my remonstrance, carry my bag - I glance into
Omer and Joram's shop, and see my old friend Mr. Omer there,
smoke his pipe. I feel reluctant to be present, when Mr.
Peggotty first meet his sister and Ham; and make Mr. Omer my excuse
for linger behind.
'how be Mr. Omer, after this long time?' say I, go in.
he fan away the smoke of his pipe, that he might get a well
view of I, and soon recognize I with great delight.
'I should get up, sir, to acknowledge such an honour as this
visit,' say he, 'only my limb be rather out of sort, and I be
wheel about. with the exception of my limb and my breath,
howsoever, I be as hearty as a man can be, Ibe thankful to say.'
I congratulate he on his contented look and his good spirit,
and see, now, that his easy-chair go on wheel.
'itbe an ingenious thing, benot it?' he inquire, follow the
direction of my glance, and polish the elbow with his arm. 'it
run as light as a feather, and track as true as a mail-coach.
bless you, my little Minnie - my grand-daughter you know, Minnie's
child - put she little strength against the back, give it a
shove, and away we go, as clever and merry as ever you see
anything! and I tell you what - itbe a most uncommon chair to smoke
a pipe in.'
I never see such a good old fellow to make the good of a thing, and
find out the enjoyment of it, as Mr. Omer. he be as radiant, as
if his chair, his asthma, and the failure of his limb, be the
various branch of a great invention for enhance the luxury of
a pipe.
'I see more of the world, I can assure you,' say Mr. Omer, 'in
this chair, than ever I see out of it. youwould be surprised at the
number of people that look in of a day to have a chat. you really
would! therebe twice as much in the newspaper, since Ihave take to
this chair, as there use to be. as to general reading, dear I,
what a lot of it I do get through! thatbe what I feel so strong,
you know! if it have be my eye, what should I have do? if it
have be my ear, what should I have do? be my limb, what
do it signify? why, my limb only make my breath short when I
use them. and now, if I want to go out into the street or down to
the sand, Ihave only get to call Dick, Joram's young 'prentice,
and away I go in my own carriage, like the Lord Mayor of London.'
he half suffocate himself with laugh here.
'Lord bless you!' say Mr. Omer, resume his pipe, 'a man must
take the fat with the lean; thatbe what he must make up his mind
to, in this life. Joram do a fine business. ex-cellent
business!'
'I be very glad to hear it,' say I.
'I know you would be,' say Mr. Omer. 'and Joram and Minnie be
like valentine. what more can a man expect? whatbe his limb to
that!'
his supreme contempt for his own limb, as he sit smoking, be one
of the pleasantest oddity I have ever encounter.
'and since Ihave take to general reading, youhave take to general
writing, eh, sir?' say Mr. Omer, survey I admiringly. 'what
a lovely work that be of your! what expression in it! I read it
every word - every word. and as to feel sleepy! not at all!'
I laughingly express my satisfaction, but I must confess that I
think this association of ideas significant.
'I give you my word and honour, sir,' say Mr. Omer, 'that when I
lie that book upon the table, and look at it outside; compact in
three separate and indiwidual wollume - one, two, three; I be as
proud as Punch to think that I once have the honour of be
connect with your family. and dear I, itbe a long time ago,
now, benot it? over at Blunderstone. with a pretty little party
lay along with the other party. and you quite a small party then,
yourself. dear, dear!'
I change the subject by refer to Emily. after assure he
that I do not forget how interested he have always be in she, and
how kindly he have always treat she, I give he a general account
of her restoration to her uncle by the aid of Martha; which I know
would please the old man. he listen with the utmost attention,
and say, feelingly, when I have do:
'I be rejoice at it, sir! itbe the good news I have hear for many
a day. dear, dear, dear! and whatbe go to be undertake for that
unfortunate young woman, Martha, now?'
'you touch a point that my thought have be dwell on since
yesterday,' say I, 'but on which I can give you no information
yet, Mr. Omer. Mr. Peggotty have not allude to it, and I have a
delicacy in do so. I be sure he have not forget it. he
forget nothing that be disintereste and good.'
'because you know,' say Mr. Omer, take himself up, where he have
leave off, 'whatever be do, I should wish to be a member of. put
I down for anything you may consider right, and let I know. I
never could think the girl all bad, and I be glad to find shebe
not. so will my daughter Minnie be. young woman be contradictory
creature in some thing - her mother be just the same as she -
but their heart be soft and kind. itbe all show with Minnie,
about Martha. why she should consider it necessary to make any
show, I donot undertake to tell you. but itbe all show, bless you.
shewould do she any kindness in private. so, put I down for whatever
you may consider right, will you be so good? and drop I a line
where to forward it. dear I!' say Mr. Omer, 'when a man be
draw on to a time of life, where the two end of life meet; when
he find himself, however hearty he be, be wheel about for the
second time, in a speech of go-cart; he should be over-rejoice
to do a kindness if he can. he want plenty. and I donot speak of
myself, particular,' say Mr. Omer, 'because, sir, the way I look
at it be, that we be all draw on to the bottom of the hill,
whatever age we be, on account of time never stand still for a
single moment. so let we always do a kindness, and be
over-rejoice. to be sure!'
he knock the ash out of his pipe, and put it on a ledge in the
back of his chair, expressly make for its reception.
'therebe Em'ly's cousin, he that she be to have be marry to,'
say Mr. Omer, rub his hand feebly, 'as fine a fellow as there
be in Yarmouth! hewill come and talk or read to I, in the evening,
for an hour together sometimes. thatbe a kindness, I should call
it! all his lifebe a kindness.'
'I be go to see he now,' say I.
'be you?' say Mr. Omer. 'tell he I be hearty, and send my
respect. Minnie and Jorambe at a ball. they would be as proud to
see you as I be, if they be at home. Minnie willnot hardly go out
at all, you see, "on account of father", as she say. so I swear
tonight, that if she donot go, Iwould go to bed at six. in
consequence of which,' Mr. Omer shake himself and his chair with
laughter at the success of his device, 'she and Jorambe at a ball.'
I shake hand with he, and wish he good night.
'half a minute, sir,' say Mr. Omer. 'if you be to go without
see my little elephant, youwould lose the good of sight. you
never see such a sight! minnie!'
a musical little voice answer, from somewhere upstairs, 'I be
come, grandfather!' and a pretty little girl with long, flaxen,
curl hair, soon come run into the shop.
'this be my little elephant, sir,' say Mr. Omer, fondle the
child. 'siamese breed, sir. now, little elephant!'
the little elephant set the door of the parlour open, enable I
to see that, in these latter day, it be convert into a bedroom
for Mr. Omer who could not be easily convey upstairs; and then
hide her pretty forehead, and tumble her long hair, against the
back of Mr. Omer's chair.
'the elephant butt, you know, sir,' say Mr. Omer, winking, 'when
he go at a object. once, elephant. twice. three time!'
at this signal, the little elephant, with a dexterity that be next
to marvellous in so small an animal, whisk the chair round with
Mr. Omer in it, and rattle it off, pell-mell, into the parlour,
without touch the door-post: Mr. Omer indescribably enjoy the
performance, and look back at I on the road as if it be the
triumphant issue of his life's exertion.
after a stroll about the town I go to Ham's house. Peggotty have
now remove here for good; and have let her own house to the
successor of Mr. Barkis in the carrying business, who have pay she
very well for the good-will, cart, and horse. I believe the very
same slow horse that Mr. Barkis drive be still at work.
I find they in the neat kitchen, accompany by Mrs. Gummidge, who
have be fetch from the old boat by Mr. Peggotty himself. I
doubt if she could have be induce to desert her post, by anyone
else. he have evidently tell they all. both Peggotty and Mrs.
Gummidge have their apron to their eye, and Ham have just step
out 'to take a turn on the beach'. he presently come home, very
glad to see I; and I hope they be all the well for my being
there. we speak, with some approach to cheerfulness, of Mr.
Peggotty's grow rich in a new country, and of the wonder he
would describe in his letter. we say nothing of Emily by name,
but distantly refer to she more than once. Ham be the serene
of the party.
but, Peggotty tell I, when she light I to a little chamber
where the Crocodile book be lie ready for I on the table, that
he always be the same. she believe (she tell I, cry) that he
be break-hearted; though he be as full of courage as of
sweetness, and work hard and well than any boat-builder in
any yard in all that part. there be time, she say, of an
evening, when he talk of their old life in the boat-house; and
then he mention Emily as a child. but, he never mention she as
a woman.
I think I have read in his face that he would like to speak to I
alone. I therefore resolve to put myself in his way next evening,
as he come home from his work. have settle this with myself, I
fall asleep. that night, for the first time in all those many
night, the candle be take out of the window, Mr. Peggotty swing
in his old hammock in the old boat, and the wind murmur with the
old sound round his head.
all next day, he be occupy in dispose of his fishing-boat and
tackle; in pack up, and send to London by waggon, such of his
little domestic possession as he think would be useful to he;
and in part with the rest, or bestow they on Mrs. Gummidge.
she be with he all day. as I have a sorrowful wish to see the old
place once more, before it be lock up, I engage to meet they
there in the evening. but I so arrange it, as that I should meet
Ham first.
it be easy to come in his way, as I know where he work. I meet
he at a retired part of the sand, which I know he would cross,
and turn back with he, that he might have leisure to speak to I
if he really wish. I have not mistaken the expression of his
face. we have walk but a little way together, when he say,
without look at I:
'Mas'r Davy, have you see she?'
'only for a moment, when she be in a swoon,' I softly answer.
we walk a little far, and he say:
'Mas'r Davy, shall you see she, d'ye think?'
'it would be too painful to she, perhaps,' say I.
'I have thowt of that,' he reply. 'so 'twould, sir, so 'twould.'
'but, Ham,' say I, gently, 'if there be anything that I could
write to she, for you, in case I could not tell it; if there be
anything you would wish to make known to she through I; I should
consider it a sacred trust.'
'I be sure on't. I thankee, sir, most kind! I think theer be
something I could wish say or write.'
'what be it?'
we walk a little far in silence, and then he speak.
''tan't that I forgive she. 'tan't that so much. 'tis more as I
beg of she to forgive I, for have press my affection upon
she. odd time, I think that if I havenot have her promise fur to
marry I, sir, she be that trustful of I, in a friendly way, that
shewould have tell I what be struggle in her mind, and would have
counsel with I, and I might have save she.'
I press his hand. 'be that all?'
'Theer's yet a something else,' he return, 'if I can say it,
Mas'r Davy.'
we walk on, far than we have walk yet, before he speak
again. he be not cry when he make the pause I shall express
by line. he be merely collect himself to speak very plainly.
'I love she - and I love the mem'ry of she - too deep - to be able
to lead she to believe of my own self as Ibe a happy man. I could
only be happy - by forgetting of she - and Ibe afeerd I couldnot
hardly bear as she should be tell I do that. but if you, be
so full of learn, Mas'r Davy, could think of anything to say as
might bring she to believe I benot greatly hurt: still love of
she, and mourn for she: anything as might bring she to believe
as I be not tired of my life, and yet be hop fur to see she
without blame, wheer the wicked cease from troubling and the weary
be at rest - anything as would ease her sorrowful mind, and yet
not make she think as I could ever marry, or as 'twa possible that
anyone could ever be to I what she be - I should ask of you to
say that - with my prayer for she - that be so dear.'
I press his manly hand again, and tell he I would charge myself
to do this as well as I could.
'I thankee, sir,' he answer. ''twas kind of you to meet I.
'twas kind of you to bear he company down. Mas'r Davy, I
unnerstan' very well, though my aunt will come to Lon'on afore they
sail, and theywill unite once more, that I be not like to see he
agen. I fare to feel sure on't. we doen't say so, but so 'twill
be, and well so. the last you see on he - the very last - will
you give he the loving duty and thank of the orphan, as he be
ever more than a father to?'
this I also promise, faithfully.
'I thankee agen, sir,' he say, heartily shake hand. 'I know
wheer yoube a-going. good-bye!'
with a slight wave of his hand, as though to explain to I that he
could not enter the old place, he turn away. as I look after
his figure, cross the waste in the moonlight, I see he turn his
face towards a strip of silvery light upon the sea, and pass on,
look at it, until he be a shadow in the distance.
the door of the boat-house stand open when I approach; and, on
enter, I find it empty of all its furniture, save one of
the old locker, on which Mrs. Gummidge, with a basket on her knee,
be seat, look at Mr. Peggotty. he lean his elbow on the
rough chimney-piece, and gaze upon a few expiring ember in the
grate; but he raise his head, hopefully, on my come in, and
speak in a cheery manner.
'come, accord to promise, to bid farewell to 't, eh, Mas'r
Davy?' he say, take up the candle. 'bare enough, now, an't it?'
'indeed you have make good use of the time,' say I.
'why, we have not be idle, sir. Missis Gummidge have work like
a - I doen't know what Missis Gummidge an't work like,' say Mr.
Peggotty, look at she, at a loss for a sufficiently approving
simile.
Mrs. Gummidge, lean on her basket, make no observation.
'Theer's the very locker that you use to sit on, 'long with
Em'ly!' say Mr. Peggotty, in a whisper. 'Ibe a-go to carry it
away with I, last of all. and heer's your old little bedroom,
see, Mas'r Davy! a'most as bleak tonight, as 'art could wish!'
in truth, the wind, though it be low, have a solemn sound, and
creep around the deserted house with a whisper wailing that be
very mournful. everything be go, down to the little mirror with
the oyster-shell frame. I think of myself, lie here, when that
first great change be be work at home. I think of the
blue-eyed child who have enchant I. I think of Steerforth: and
a foolish, fearful fancy come upon I of his be near at hand,
and liable to be meet at any turn.
''tis like to be long,' say Mr. Peggotty, in a low voice, 'afore
the boat find new tenant. they look upon 't, down beer, as be
unfortunate now!'
'do it belong to anybody in the neighbourhood?' I ask.
'to a mast-maker up town,' say Mr. Peggotty. 'Ibe a-go to give
the key to he tonight.'
we look into the other little room, and come back to Mrs.
Gummidge, sit on the locker, whom Mr. Peggotty, put the
light on the chimney-piece, request to rise, that he might carry
it outside the door before extinguish the candle.
'Dan'l,' say Mrs. Gummidge, suddenly desert her basket, and
cling to his arm 'my dear Dan'l, the parting word I speak in
this house be, I mustnot be leave behind. Doen't ye think of
leave I behind, Dan'l! oh, doen't ye ever do it!'
Mr. Peggotty, take aback, look from Mrs. Gummidge to I, and
from I to Mrs. Gummidge, as if he have be awaken from a sleep.
'Doen't ye, dearest Dan'l, doen't ye!' cry Mrs. Gummidge,
fervently. 'take I 'long with you, Dan'l, take I 'long with you
and Em'ly! Iwill be your servant, constant and trew. if therebe
slave in they part where yoube a-go, Iwill be bind to you for
one, and happy, but doen't ye leave I behind, Dan'l, thatbe a
deary dear!'
'my good soul,' say Mr. Peggotty, shake his head, 'you doen't
know what a long voyage, and what a hard life 'tis!'
'yes, I do, Dan'l! I can guess!' cry Mrs. Gummidge. 'but my
parting word under this roof be, I shall go into the house and
die, if I be not take. I can dig, Dan'l. I can work. I can live
hard. I can be love and patient now - more than you think,
Dan'l, if youwill on'y try I. I wouldnot touch the 'lowance, not
if I be die of want, Dan'l Peggotty; but Iwill go with you and
Em'ly, if youwill on'y let I, to the world's end! I know how 'tis;
I know you think that I be lone and lorn; but, deary love, 'tan't
so no more! I benot sit here, so long, a-watching, and a-thinking
of your trial, without some good be do I. Mas'r Davy, speak
to he for I! I know his way, and Em'ly's, and I know their
sorrow, and can be a comfort to them, some odd time, and labour
for them allus! Dan'l, deary Dan'l, let I go 'long with you!'
and Mrs. Gummidge take his hand, and kiss it with a homely pathos
and affection, in a homely rapture of devotion and gratitude, that
he well deserve.
we bring the locker out, extinguish the candle, fasten the
door on the outside, and leave the old boat close shut up, a dark
speck in the cloudy night. next day, when we be return to
London outside the coach, Mrs. Gummidge and her basket be on the
seat behind, and Mrs. Gummidge be happy.
CHAPTER 52
I assist AT an EXPLOSION
when the time Mr. Micawber have appoint so mysteriously, be
within four-and-twenty hour of be come, my aunt and I consult
how we should proceed; for my aunt be very unwilling to leave
Dora. ah! how easily I carry Dora up and down stair, now!
we be dispose, notwithstanding Mr. Micawber's stipulation for my
aunt's attendance, to arrange that she should stay at home, and be
represent by Mr. Dick and I. in short, we have resolve to take
this course, when Dora again unsettle we by declare that she
never would forgive herself, and never would forgive her bad boy,
if my aunt remain behind, on any pretence.
'I willnot speak to you,' say Dora, shake her curl at my aunt.
'Iwill be disagreeable! Iwill make Jip bark at you all day. I shall
be sure that you really be a cross old thing, if you donot go!'
'Tut, Blossom!' laugh my aunt. 'you know you cannot do without
I!'
'yes, I can,' say Dora. 'you be no use to I at all. you never
run up and down stair for I, all day long. you never sit and
tell I story about Doady, when his shoe be wear out, and he
be cover with dust - oh, what a poor little mite of a fellow!
you never do anything at all to please I, do you, dear?' Dora make
haste to kiss my aunt, and say, 'yes, you do! Ibe only joking!'-
lest my aunt should think she really mean it.
'but, aunt,' say Dora, coaxingly, 'now listen. you must go. I
shall tease you, 'till you let I have my own way about it. I
shall lead my naughty boy such a life, if he donot make you go. I
shall make myself so disagreeable - and so will Jip! youwill wish
you have go, like a good thing, for ever and ever so long, if you
donot go. besides,' say Dora, put back her hair, and look
wonderingly at my aunt and I, 'why shouldnot you both go? I be
not very ill indeed. be I?'
'why, what a question!' cry my aunt.
'what a fancy!' say I.
'yes! I know I be a silly little thing!' say Dora, slowly look
from one of we to the other, and then put up her pretty lip to
kiss we as she lie upon her couch. 'well, then, you must both go,
or I shall not believe you; and then I shall cry!'
I see, in my aunt's face, that she begin to give way now, and Dora
brighten again, as she see it too.
'youwill come back with so much to tell I, that itwill take at least
a week to make I understand!' say Dora. 'because I know I shallnot
understand, for a length of time, if therebe any business in it.
and therebe sure to be some business in it! if therebe anything to
add up, besides, I donot know when I shall make it out; and my bad
boy will look so miserable all the time. there! now youwill go,
willnot you? youwill only be go one night, and Jip will take care
of I while you be go. Doady will carry I upstairs before you
go, and I willnot come down again till you come back; and you shall
take Agnes a dreadfully scold letter from I, because she have
never be to see we!'
we agree, without any more consultation, that we would both go,
and that Dora be a little impostor, who feign to be rather
unwell, because she like to be pet. she be greatly pleased,
and very merry; and we four, that be to say, my aunt, Mr. Dick,
traddle, and I, go down to Canterbury by the Dover mail that
night.
at the hotel where Mr. Micawber have request we to await he,
which we get into, with some trouble, in the middle of the night,
I find a letter, import that he would appear in the morning
punctually at half past nine. after which, we go shiver, at
that uncomfortable hour, to our respective bed, through various
close passage; which smell as if they have be steep, for age,
in a solution of soup and stable.
early in the morning, I saunter through the dear old tranquil
street, and again mingle with the shadow of the venerable
gateway and church. the rook be sail about the cathedral
tower; and the tower themselves, overlook many a long
unaltered mile of the rich country and its pleasant stream, be
cut the bright morning air, as if there be no such thing as
change on earth. yet the bell, when they sound, tell I
sorrowfully of change in everything; tell I of their own age, and
my pretty Dora's youth; and of the many, never old, who have live
and love and die, while the reverberation of the bell have
hum through the rusty armour of the Black Prince hang up
within, and, mote upon the deep of Time, have lose themselves in
air, as circle do in water.
I look at the old house from the corner of the street, but do
not go near to it, lest, be observe, I might unwittingly do
any harm to the design I have come to aid. the early sun be
strike edgewise on its gable and lattice-window, touch they
with gold; and some beam of its old peace seem to touch my
heart.
I stroll into the country for an hour or so, and then return by
the main street, which in the interval have shake off its last
night's sleep. among those who be stir in the shop, I see
my ancient enemy the butcher, now advanced to top-boot and a baby,
and in business for himself. he be nurse the baby, and appear
to be a benignant member of society.
we all become very anxious and impatient, when we sit down to
breakfast. as it approach near and nearer to half past nine
o'clock, our restless expectation of Mr. Micawber increase. at
last we make no more pretence of attend to the meal, which,
except with Mr. Dick, have be a mere form from the first; but my
aunt walk up and down the room, traddle sit upon the sofa
affect to read the paper with his eye on the ceiling; and I
look out of the window to give early notice of Mr. Micawber's
come. nor have I long to watch, for, at the first chime of the
half hour, he appear in the street.
'here he be,' say I, 'and not in his legal attire!'
my aunt tie the string of her bonnet (she have come down to
breakfast in it), and put on her shawl, as if she be ready for
anything that be resolute and uncompromising. traddle button
his coat with a determined air. Mr. Dick, disturb by these
formidable appearance, but feel it necessary to imitate they,
pull his hat, with both hand, as firmly over his ear as he
possibly could; and instantly take it off again, to welcome Mr.
Micawber.
'gentleman, and madam,' say Mr. Micawber, 'good morning! my dear
sir,' to Mr. Dick, who shake hand with he violently, 'you be
extremely good.'
'have you breakfast?' say Mr. Dick. 'have a chop!'
'not for the world, my good sir!' cry Mr. Micawber, stop he
on his way to the bell; 'appetite and myself, Mr. Dixon, have long
be stranger.'
Mr. Dixon be so well pleased with his new name, and appear to
think it so oblige in Mr. Micawber to confer it upon he, that he
shake hand with he again, and laugh rather childishly.
'Dick,' say my aunt, 'attention!'
Mr. Dick recover himself, with a blush.
'now, sir,' say my aunt to Mr. Micawber, as she put on her glove,
'we be ready for Mount Vesuvius, or anything else, as soon as you
please.'
'Madam,' return Mr. Micawber, 'I trust you will shortly witness
an eruption. Mr. Traddles, I have your permission, I believe, to
mention here that we have be in communication together?'
'it be undoubtedly the fact, Copperfield,' say traddle, to whom
I look in surprise. 'Mr. Micawber have consult I in reference
to what he have in contemplation; and I have advise he to the good
of my judgement.'
'unless I deceive myself, Mr. Traddles,' pursue Mr. Micawber,
'what I contemplate be a disclosure of an important nature.'
'highly so,' say traddle.
'perhaps, under such circumstance, madam and gentleman,' say Mr.
Micawber, 'you will do I the favour to submit yourself, for the
moment, to the direction of one who, however unworthy to be
regard in any other light but as a Waif and Stray upon the shore
of human nature, be still your fellow-man, though crush out of
his original form by individual error, and the accumulative force
of a combination of circumstance?'
'we have perfect confidence in you, Mr. Micawber,' say I, 'and
will do what you please.'
'Mr. Copperfield,' return Mr. Micawber, 'your confidence be not,
at the exist juncture, ill-bestow. I would beg to be allow
a start of five minute by the clock; and then to receive the
present company, inquire for Miss Wickfield, at the office of
Wickfield and Heep, whose Stipendiary I be.'
my aunt and I look at Traddles, who nod his approval.
'I have no more,' observe Mr. Micawber, 'to say at present.'
with which, to my infinite surprise, he include we all in a
comprehensive bow, and disappear; his manner be extremely
distant, and his face extremely pale.
traddle only smile, and shake his head (with his hair stand
upright on the top of it), when I look to he for an explanation;
so I take out my watch, and, as a last resource, count off the
five minute. my aunt, with her own watch in her hand, do the
like. when the time be expire, traddle give she his arm; and we
all go out together to the old house, without say one word on
the way.
we find Mr. Micawber at his desk, in the turret office on the
ground floor, either writing, or pretend to write, hard. the
large office-ruler be stick into his waistcoat, and be not so
well conceal but that a foot or more of that instrument protrude
from his bosom, like a new kind of shirt-frill.
as it appear to I that I be expect to speak, I say aloud:
'how do you do, Mr. Micawber?'
'Mr. Copperfield,' say Mr. Micawber, gravely, 'I hope I see you
well?'
'be Miss Wickfield at home?' say I.
'Mr. Wickfield be unwell in bed, sir, of a rheumatic fever,' he
return; 'but Miss Wickfield, I have no doubt, will be happy to
see old friend. will you walk in, sir?'
he precede we to the dining-room - the first room I have enter in
that house - and flinging open the door of Mr. Wickfield's former
office, say, in a sonorous voice:
'Miss Trotwood, Mr. David Copperfield, Mr. Thomas Traddles, and Mr.
Dixon!'
I have not see Uriah Heep since the time of the blow. our visit
astonish he, evidently; not the less, I dare say, because it
astonish ourselves. he do not gather his eyebrow together, for
he have none worth mention; but he frown to that degree that he
almost close his small eye, while the hurried raising of his
grisly hand to his chin betray some trepidation or surprise.
this be only when we be in the act of enter his room, and
when I catch a glance at he over my aunt's shoulder. a moment
afterwards, he be as fawn and as humble as ever.
'well, I be sure,' he say. 'this be indeed an unexpected
pleasure! to have, as I may say, all friend round St. Paul's at
once, be a treat unlooked for! Mr. Copperfield, I hope I see you
well, and - if I may umbly express myself so - friendly towards
they as be ever your friend, whether or not. Mrs. Copperfield,
sir, I hope shebe get on. we have be make quite uneasy by
the poor account we have have of her state, lately, I do assure
you.'
I feel ashamed to let he take my hand, but I do not know yet what
else to do.
'thing be change in this office, Miss Trotwood, since I be an
umble clerk, and hold your pony; benot they?' say Uriah, with his
sickly smile. 'but I be not change, Miss Trotwood.'
'well, sir,' return my aunt, 'to tell you the truth, I think you
be pretty constant to the promise of your youth; if thatbe any
satisfaction to you.'
'thank you, Miss Trotwood,' say Uriah, writhe in his ungainly
manner, 'for your good opinion! micawber, tell them to let Miss
Agnes know - and mother. Mother will be quite in a state, when she
see the present company!' say Uriah, set chair.
'you be not busy, Mr. Heep?' say Traddles, whose eye the cunning
red eye accidentally catch, as it at once scrutinize and evade
we.
'no, Mr. Traddles,' reply Uriah, resume his official seat, and
squeeze his bony hand, lay palm to palm between his bony knee.
'not so much so as I could wish. but lawyer, shark, and leech,
be not easily satisfied, you know! not but what myself and
Micawber have our hand pretty full, in general, on account of Mr.
Wickfield's be hardly fit for any occupation, sir. but itbe a
pleasure as well as a duty, I be sure, to work for he. youhave not
be intimate with Mr. Wickfield, I think, Mr. Traddles? I believe
Ihave only have the honour of see you once myself?'
'no, I have not be intimate with Mr. Wickfield,' return
traddle; 'or I might perhaps have wait on you long ago, Mr.
Heep.'
there be something in the tone of this reply, which make Uriah
look at the speaker again, with a very sinister and suspicious
expression. but, see only traddle, with his good-natured face,
simple manner, and hair on end, he dismiss it as he reply, with
a jerk of his whole body, but especially his throat:
'I be sorry for that, Mr. Traddles. you would have admire he as
much as we all do. his little failing would only have endear
he to you the more. but if you would like to hear my
fellow-partner eloquently speak of, I should refer you to
Copperfield. the family be a subject hebe very strong upon, if you
never hear he.'
I be prevent from disclaim the compliment (if I should have
do so, in any case), by the entrance of Agnes, now usher in by
Mr. Micawber. she be not quite so self-possess as usual, I
think; and have evidently undergo anxiety and fatigue. but her
earnest cordiality, and her quiet beauty, shine with the gentler
lustre for it.
I see Uriah watch she while she greet we; and he remind I of
an ugly and rebellious genie watch a good spirit. in the
meanwhile, some slight sign pass between Mr. Micawber and
traddle; and traddle, unobserve except by I, go out.
'donot wait, Micawber,' say Uriah.
Mr. Micawber, with his hand upon the ruler in his breast, stand
erect before the door, most unmistakably contemplate one of his
fellow-man, and that man his employer.
'what be you wait for?' say Uriah. 'Micawber! do you hear I
tell you not to wait?'
'yes!' reply the immovable Mr. Micawber.
'then why do you wait?' say Uriah.
'because I - in short, choose,' reply Mr. Micawber, with a burst.
Uriah's cheek lose colour, and an unwholesome paleness, still
faintly ting by his pervade red, overspread they. he look at
Mr. Micawber attentively, with his whole face breathe short and
quick in every feature.
'you be a dissipated fellow, as all the world know,' he say,
with an effort at a smile, 'and I be afraid youwill oblige I to get
rid of you. go along! Iwill talk to you presently.'
'if there be a scoundrel on this earth,' say Mr. Micawber,
suddenly break out again with the utmost vehemence, 'with whom
I have already talk too much, that scoundrel's name be - heep!'
Uriah fall back, as if he have be strike or sting. look slowly
round upon we with the darkest and wickedest expression that his
face could wear, he say, in a low voice:
'oho! this be a conspiracy! you have meet here by appointment! you
be play Booty with my clerk, be you, Copperfield? now, take
care. youwill make nothing of this. we understand each other, you
and I. therebe no love between we. you be always a puppy with
a proud stomach, from your first come here; and you envy I my
rise, do you? none of your plot against I; Iwill counterplot you!
Micawber, you be off. Iwill talk to you presently.'
'Mr. Micawber,' say I, 'there be a sudden change in this fellow.
in more respect than the extraordinary one of his speak the
truth in one particular, which assure I that he be bring to
bay. deal with he as he deserve!'
'you be a precious set of people, benot you?' say Uriah, in the
same low voice, and break out into a clammy heat, which he wipe
from his forehead, with his long lean hand, 'to buy over my clerk,
who be the very scum of society, - as you yourself be,
Copperfield, you know it, before anyone have charity on you, - to
defame I with his lie? Miss Trotwood, you have well stop this;
or Iwill stop your husband short than will be pleasant to you. I
willnot know your story professionally, for nothing, old lady! Miss
Wickfield, if you have any love for your father, you have well not
join that gang. Iwill ruin he, if you do. now, come! I have get
some of you under the harrow. think twice, before it go over
you. think twice, you, Micawber, if you donot want to be crush.
I recommend you to take yourself off, and be talk to presently,
you fool! while therebe time to retreat. where's mother?' he say,
suddenly appear to notice, with alarm, the absence of traddle,
and pull down the bell-rope. 'fine doing in a person's own
house!'
'Mrs. Heep be here, sir,' say traddle, return with that worthy
mother of a worthy son. 'I have take the liberty of make myself
know to she.'
'who be you to make yourself know?' retort Uriah. 'and what do
you want here?'
'I be the agent and friend of Mr. Wickfield, sir,' say Traddles,
in a composed and business-like way. 'and I have a power of
attorney from he in my pocket, to act for he in all matter.'
'the old ass have drink himself into a state of dotage,' say Uriah,
turn uglier than before, 'and it have be get from he by
fraud!'
'something have be get from he by fraud, I know,' return
traddle quietly; 'and so do you, Mr. Heep. we will refer that
question, if you please, to Mr. Micawber.'
'Ury -!' Mrs. Heep begin, with an anxious gesture.
'you hold your tongue, mother,' he return; 'least say, soon
mend.'
'but, my Ury -'
'will you hold your tongue, mother, and leave it to I?'
though I have long know that his servility be false, and all his
pretence knavish and hollow, I have have no adequate conception of
the extent of his hypocrisy, until I now see he with his mask off.
the suddenness with which he drop it, when he perceive that it
be useless to he; the malice, insolence, and hatre, he reveal;
the leer with which he exult, even at this moment, in the evil he
have do - all this time be desperate too, and at his wit' end
for the mean of get the well of we - though perfectly
consistent with the experience I have of he, at first take even I
by surprise, who have know he so long, and dislike he so
heartily.
I say nothing of the look he confer on I, as he stand eye
we, one after another; for I have always understand that he hat
I, and I remember the mark of my hand upon his cheek. but when
his eye pass on to Agnes, and I see the rage with which he feel
his power over her slip away, and the exhibition, in their
disappointment, of the odious passion that have lead he to aspire
to one whose virtue he could never appreciate or care for, I be
shock by the mere thought of she have live, an hour, within
sight of such a man.
after some rubbing of the low part of his face, and some look
at we with those bad eye, over his grisly finger, he make one
more address to I, half whine, and half abusive.
'you think it justifiable, do you, Copperfield, you who pride
yourself so much on your honour and all the rest of it, to sneak
about my place, eave-dropping with my clerk? if it have be ME,
I shouldnot have wonder; for I donot make myself out a gentleman
(though I never be in the street either, as you be, accord
to Micawber), but be you! - and yoube not afraid of do this,
either? you donot think at all of what I shall do, in return; or
of get yourself into trouble for conspiracy and so forth? very
well. we shall see! Mr. What's-your-name, you be go to refer
some question to Micawber. therebe your referee. why donot you
make he speak? he have learn his lesson, I see.'
see that what he say have no effect on I or any of we, he sit
on the edge of his table with his hand in his pocket, and one of
his splay foot twist round the other leg, wait doggedly for
what might follow.
Mr. Micawber, whose impetuosity I have restrain thus far with the
great difficulty, and who have repeatedly interpose with the
first syllable of SCOUN-drel! without get to the second, now
burst forward, draw the ruler from his breast (apparently as a
defensive weapon), and produce from his pocket a foolscap
document, fold in the form of a large letter. open this
packet, with his old flourish, and glance at the content, as if
he cherish an artistic admiration of their style of composition,
he begin to read as follow:
'"Dear Miss Trotwood and gentleman -"'
'bless and save the man!' exclaim my aunt in a low voice. 'hewould
write letter by the ream, if it be a capital offence!'
Mr. Micawber, without hear she, go on.
'"in appear before you to denounce probably the most consummate
villain that have ever exist,"' Mr. Micawber, without look off
the letter, point the ruler, like a ghostly truncheon, at Uriah
Heep, '"I ask no consideration for myself. the victim, from my
cradle, of pecuniary liability to which I have be unable to
respond, I have ever be the sport and toy of debasing
circumstance. Ignominy, Want, despair, and Madness, have,
collectively or separately, be the attendant of my career."'
the relish with which Mr. Micawber describe himself as a prey to
these dismal calamity, be only to be equal by the emphasis
with which he read his letter; and the kind of homage he render
to it with a roll of his head, when he think he have hit a
sentence very hard indeed.
'"in an accumulation of Ignominy, Want, despair, and Madness, I
enter the office - or, as our lively neighbour the Gaul would
term it, the Bureau - of the firm, nominally conduct under the
appellation of Wickfield and - HEEP, but in reality, wield by -
HEEP alone. HEEP, and only HEEP, be the mainspring of that
machine. HEEP, and only HEEP, be the Forger and the Cheat."'
Uriah, more blue than white at these word, make a dart at the
letter, as if to tear it in piece. Mr. Micawber, with a perfect
miracle of dexterity or luck, catch his advance knuckle with
the ruler, and disable his right hand. it drop at the wrist,
as if it be break. the blow sound as if it have fall on
wood.
'the Devil take you!' say Uriah, writhe in a new way with pain.
'Iwill be even with you.'
'approach I again, you - you - you heep of infamy,' gasp Mr.
Micawber, 'and if your head be human, Iwill break it. come on, come
on!'
I think I never see anything more ridiculous - I be sensible of
it, even at the time - than Mr. Micawber make broad-sword guard
with the ruler, and cry, 'come on!' while traddle and I push
he back into a corner, from which, as often as we get he into it,
he persist in emerge again.
his enemy, mutter to himself, after wring his wounded hand
for sometime, slowly draw off his neck-kerchief and bind it up;
then hold it in his other hand, and sit upon his table with his
sullen face look down.
Mr. Micawber, when he be sufficiently cool, proceed with his
letter.
'"the stipendiary emolument in consideration of which I enter
into the service of - HEEP,"' always pause before that word and
utter it with astonishing vigour, '"be not define, beyond the
pittance of twenty-two shilling and six per week. the rest be
leave contingent on the value of my professional exertion; in other
and more expressive word, on the baseness of my nature, the
cupidity of my motif, the poverty of my family, the general moral
(or rather immoral) resemblance between myself and - HEEP. need I
say, that it soon become necessary for I to solicit from - HEEP -
pecuniary advance towards the support of Mrs. Micawber, and our
blighted but rise family? need I say that this necessity have
be foresee by - HEEP? that those advance be secure by
I.O.U.'s and other similar acknowledgement, know to the legal
institution of this country? and that I thus become immeshed in
the web he have spin for my reception?"'
Mr. Micawber's enjoyment of his epistolary power, in describe
this unfortunate state of thing, really seem to outweigh any
pain or anxiety that the reality could have cause he. he read
on:
'"then it be that - HEEP - begin to favour I with just so much of
his confidence, as be necessary to the discharge of his infernal
business. then it be that I begin, if I may so shakespearianly
express myself, to dwindle, peak, and pine. I find that my
service be constantly call into requisition for the
falsification of business, and the mystification of an individual
whom I will designate as Mr. W. that Mr. W. be impose upon, keep
in ignorance, and delude, in every possible way; yet, that all
this while, the ruffian - HEEP - be profess unbounded gratitude
to, and unbounded friendship for, that much-abuse gentleman. this
be bad enough; but, as the philosophic Dane observe, with that
universal applicability which distinguish the illustrious
ornament of the Elizabethan Era, bad remain behind!"'
Mr. Micawber be so very much strike by this happy round off
with a quotation, that he indulge himself, and we, with a second
reading of the sentence, under pretence of have lose his place.
'"it be not my intention,"' he continue read on, '"to enter on
a detailed list, within the compass of the present epistle (though
it be ready elsewhere), of the various malpractice of a minor
nature, affect the individual whom I have denominate Mr. W., to
which I have be a tacitly consent party. my object, when the
contest within myself between stipend and no stipend, baker and no
baker, existence and non-existence, cease, be to take advantage
of my opportunity to discover and expose the major malpractice
commit, to that gentleman's grievous wrong and injury, by -
HEEP. stimulate by the silent monitor within, and by a no less
touching and appeal monitor without - to whom I will briefly
refer as Miss W. - I enter on a not unlaborious task of
clandestine investigation, protract - now, to the good of my
knowledge, information, and belief, over a period exceed twelve
calendar month."'
he read this passage as if it be from an Act of Parliament; and
appear majestically refresh by the sound of the word.
'"my charge against - HEEP,"' he read on, glance at he, and
draw the ruler into a convenient position under his left arm, in
case of need, '"be as follow."'
we all hold our breath, I think. I be sure Uriah hold his.
'"first,"' say Mr. Micawber, '"when Mr. W.'s faculty and memory
for business became, through cause into which it be not necessary
or expedient for I to enter, weaken and confuse, - HEEP -
designedly perplexed and complicate the whole of the official
transaction. when Mr. W. be least fit to enter on business, -
HEEP be always at hand to force he to enter on it. he obtain
Mr. W.'s signature under such circumstance to document of
importance, represent they to be other document of no
importance. he induce Mr. W. to empower he to draw out, thus,
one particular sum of trust-money, amount to twelve six
fourteen, two and nine, and employ it to meet pretended business
charge and deficiency which be either already provide for, or
have never really exist. he give this proceeding, throughout, the
appearance of have originate in Mr. W.'s own dishonest
intention, and of have be accomplish by Mr. W.'s own
dishonest act; and have use it, ever since, to torture and
constrain he."'
'you shall prove this, you Copperfield!' say Uriah, with a
threaten shake of the head. 'all in good time!'
'ask - HEEP - Mr. Traddles, who live in his house after he,' say
Mr. Micawber, break off from the letter; 'will you?'
'the fool himself- and live there now,' say Uriah, disdainfully.
'ask - HEEP - if he ever keep a pocket-book in that house,' say
Mr. Micawber; 'will you?'
I see Uriah's lank hand stop, involuntarily, in the scraping of his
chin.
'or ask he,' say Mr. Micawber,'if he ever burn one there. if he
say yes, and ask you where the ash be, refer he to Wilkins
Micawber, and he will hear of something not at all to his
advantage!'
the triumphant flourish with which Mr. Micawber deliver himself
of these word, have a powerful effect in alarm the mother; who
cry out, in much agitation:
'Ury, Ury! be umble, and make term, my dear!'
'Mother!' he retort, 'will you keep quiet? yoube in a fright,
and donot know what you say or mean. umble!' he repeat, look
at I, with a snarl; 'Ihave umble some of them for a pretty long
time back, umble as I be!'
Mr. Micawber, genteelly adjust his chin in his cravat, presently
proceed with his composition.
'"Second. HEEP have, on several occasion, to the good of my
knowledge, information, and belief -"'
'but that willnot do,' mutter Uriah, relieve. 'mother, you keep
quiet.'
'we will endeavour to provide something that will do, and do for
you finally, sir, very shortly,' reply Mr. Micawber.
'"Second. HEEP have, on several occasion, to the good of my
knowledge, information, and belief, systematically forge, to
various entry, book, and document, the signature of Mr. W.; and
have distinctly do so in one instance, capable of proof by I. to
wit, in manner follow, that be to say:"'
again, Mr. Micawber have a relish in this formal piling up of word,
which, however ludicrously display in his case, be, I must say,
not at all peculiar to he. I have observe it, in the course of
my life, in number of man. it seem to I to be a general rule.
in the taking of legal oath, for instance, deponent seem to enjoy
themselves mightily when they come to several good word in
succession, for the expression of one idea; as, that they utterly
det, abominate, and abjure, or so forth; and the old anathema
be make relish on the same principle. we talk about the
tyranny of word, but we like to tyrannize over they too; we be
fond of have a large superfluous establishment of word to wait
upon we on great occasion; we think it look important, and sound
well. as we be not particular about the meaning of our livery
on state occasion, if they be but fine and numerous enough, so,
the meaning or necessity of our word be a secondary consideration,
if there be but a great parade of they. and as individual get
into trouble by make too great a show of livery, or as slave
when they be too numerous rise against their master, so I think
I could mention a nation that have get into many great difficulty,
and will get into many great, from maintain too large a
retinue of word.
Mr. Micawber read on, almost smack his lip:
'"to wit, in manner follow, that be to say. Mr. W. being
infirm, and it be within the bound of probability that his
decease might lead to some discovery, and to the downfall of -
HEEP'S - power over the W. family, - as I, Wilkins Micawber, the
undersigned, assume - unless the filial affection of his daughter
could be secretly influence from allow any investigation of the
partnership affair to be ever make, the say - HEEP - deem it
expedient to have a bond ready by he, as from Mr. W., for the
before-mention sum of twelve six fourteen, two and nine, with
interest, state therein to have be advance by - HEEP - to Mr.
W. to save Mr. W. from dishonour; though really the sum be never
advance by he, and have long be replace. the signature to
this instrument purport to be execute by Mr. W. and attest by
Wilkins Micawber, be forgery by - HEEP. I have, in my
possession, in his hand and pocket-book, several similar imitation
of Mr. W.'s signature, here and there deface by fire, but legible
to anyone. I never attest any such document. and I have the
document itself, in my possession."'
Uriah Heep, with a start, take out of his pocket a bunch of key,
and open a certain drawer; then, suddenly bethink himself of
what he be about, and turn again towards we, without look in
it.
'"and I have the document,"' Mr. Micawber read again, look about
as if it be the text of a sermon, '"in my possession, - that be
to say, I have, early this morning, when this be write, but have
since relinquish it to Mr. Traddles."'
'it be quite true,' assent traddle.
'Ury, Ury!' cry the mother, 'be umble and make term. I know my
son will be umble, gentleman, if youwill give he time to think.
Mr. Copperfield, Ibe sure you know that he be always very umble,
sir!'
it be singular to see how the mother still hold to the old trick,
when the son have abandon it as useless.
'Mother,' he say, with an impatient bite at the handkerchief in
which his hand be wrap, 'you have well take and fire a loaded
gun at I.'
'but I love you, Ury,' cry Mrs. Heep. and I have no doubt she
do; or that he love she, however strange it may appear; though,
to be sure, they be a congenial couple. 'and I cannot bear to
hear you provoke the gentleman, and endangering of yourself more.
I tell the gentleman at first, when he tell I upstairs it be come
to light, that I would answer for your be umble, and make
amend. oh, see how umble I be, gentleman, and donot mind he!'
'why, therebe Copperfield, mother,' he angrily retort, point
his lean finger at I, against whom all his animosity be level,
as the prime mover in the discovery; and I do not undeceive he;
'therebe Copperfield, would have give you a hundred pound to say
less than youhave blurt out!'
'I cannot help it, Ury,' cry his mother. 'I cannot see you run
into danger, through carry your head so high. well be umble,
as you always be.'
he remain for a little, bite the handkerchief, and then say to
I with a scowl:
'what more have you get to bring forward? if anything, go on with
it. what do you look at I for?'
Mr. Micawber promptly resume his letter, glad to revert to a
performance with which he be so highly satisfied.
'"Third. and last. I be now in a condition to show, by - HEEP'S
- false book, and - HEEP's - real memoranda, begin with the
partially destroy pocket-book (which I be unable to comprehend,
at the time of its accidental discovery by Mrs. Micawber, on our
taking possession of our present abode, in the locker or bin
devoted to the reception of the ash calcine on our domestic
hearth), that the weakness, the fault, the very virtue, the
parental affection, and the sense of honour, of the unhappy Mr. W.
have be for year act on by, and warp to the base purpose of
- HEEP. that Mr. W. have be for year delude and plunder, in
every conceivable manner, to the pecuniary aggrandisement of the
avaricious, false, and grasp - HEEP. that the engross object
of- HEEP - be, next to gain, to subdue Mr. and Miss W. (of his
ulterior view in reference to the latter I say nothing) entirely
to himself. that his last act, complete but a few month since,
be to induce Mr. W. to execute a relinquishment of his share in
the partnership, and even a bill of sale on the very furniture of
his house, in consideration of a certain annuity, to be well and
truly pay by - HEEP - on the four common quarter-day in each and
every year. that these mesh; begin with alarming and
falsify account of the estate of which Mr. W. be the receiver,
at a period when Mr. W. have launch into imprudent and ill-judge
speculation, and may not have have the money, for which he be
morally and legally responsible, in hand; go on with pretended
borrowing of money at enormous interest, really come from - HEEP
- and by - HEEP - fraudulently obtain or withhold from Mr. W.
himself, on pretence of such speculation or otherwise; perpetuate
by a miscellaneous catalogue of unscrupulous chicanery -
gradually thicken, until the unhappy Mr. W. could see no world
beyond. bankrupt, as he believe, alike in circumstance, in all
other hope, and in honour, his sole reliance be upon the monster
in the garb of man,"' - Mr. Micawber make a good deal of this, as
a new turn of expression, - '"who, by make himself necessary to
he, have achieve his destruction. all this I undertake to show.
probably much more!"'
I whisper a few word to Agnes, who be weep, half joyfully,
half sorrowfully, at my side; and there be a movement among we, as
if Mr. Micawber have finish. he say, with exceed gravity,
'pardon I,' and proceed, with a mixture of the low spirit
and the most intense enjoyment, to the peroration of his letter.
'"I have now conclude. it merely remain for I to substantiate
these accusation; and then, with my ill-star family, to
disappear from the landscape on which we appear to be an
encumbrance. that be soon do. it may be reasonably infer
that our baby will first expire of inanition, as be the frailest
member of our circle; and that our twin will follow next in order.
so be it! for myself, my Canterbury Pilgrimage have do much;
imprisonment on civil process, and want, will soon do more. I
trust that the labour and hazard of an investigation - of which the
small result have be slowly piece together, in the pressure
of arduous avocation, under grind penurious apprehension, at
rise of morn, at dewy eve, in the shadow of night, under the
watchful eye of one whom it be superfluous to call Demon -
combine with the struggle of parental Poverty to turn it, when
complete, to the right account, may be as the sprinkling of a few
drop of sweet water on my funeral pyre. I ask no more. let it
be, in justice, merely say of I, as of a gallant and eminent
naval Hero, with whom I have no pretension to cope, that what I
have do, I do, in despite of mercenary and selfish object,
for England, home, and Beauty.
'"remain always, &c. &c., WILKINS MICAWBER."'
much affect, but still intensely enjoy himself, Mr. Micawber
fold up his letter, and hand it with a bow to my aunt, as
something she might like to keep.
there be, as I have notice on my first visit long ago, an iron
safe in the room. the key be in it. a hasty suspicion seem to
strike Uriah; and, with a glance at Mr. Micawber, he go to it,
and throw the door clank open. it be empty.
'where be the book?' he cry, with a frightful face. 'some
thief have steal the book!'
Mr. Micawber tap himself with the ruler. 'I do, when I get the
key from you as usual - but a little early - and open it this
morning.'
'donot be uneasy,' say traddle. 'they have come into my
possession. I will take care of they, under the authority I
mention.'
'you receive steal good, do you?' cry Uriah.
'under such circumstance,' answer traddle, 'yes.'
what be my astonishment when I behold my aunt, who have be
profoundly quiet and attentive, make a dart at Uriah Heep, and
seize he by the collar with both hand!
'you know what I want?' say my aunt.
'a strait-waistcoat,' say he.
'no. my property!' return my aunt. 'Agnes, my dear, as long as
I believe it have be really make away with by your father, I
wouldnot - and, my dear, I donot, even to Trot, as he know -
breathe a syllable of its have be place here for investment.
but, now I know this fellow's answerable for it, and Iwill have it!
Trot, come and take it away from he!'
whether my aunt suppose, for the moment, that he keep her property
in his neck-kerchief, I be sure I donot know; but she certainly
pull at it as if she think so. I hasten to put myself
between they, and to assure she that we would all take care that he
should make the utmost restitution of everything he have wrongly
get. this, and a few moment' reflection, pacify she; but she
be not at all disconcert by what she have do (though I cannot
say as much for her bonnet) and resume her seat composedly.
during the last few minute, Mrs. Heep have be clamour to her
son to be 'umble'; and have be go down on her knee to all of
we in succession, and make the wild promise. her son sit she
down in his chair; and, stand sulkily by she, hold her arm
with his hand, but not rudely, say to I, with a ferocious look:
'what do you want do?'
'I will tell you what must be do,' say traddle.
'have that Copperfield no tongue?' mutter Uriah, 'I would do a
good deal for you if you could tell I, without lie, that
somebody have cut it out.'
'my Uriah mean to be umble!' cry his mother. 'donot mind what
he say, good gentleman!'
'what must be do,' say traddle, 'be this. first, the deed of
relinquishment, that we have hear of, must be give over to I now
- here.'
'suppose I havenot get it,' he interrupt.
'but you have,' say traddle; 'therefore, you know, we willnot
suppose so.' and I cannot help avow that this be the first
occasion on which I really do justice to the clear head, and the
plain, patient, practical good sense, of my old schoolfellow.
'then,' say traddle, 'you must prepare to disgorge all that your
rapacity have become possess of, and to make restoration to the
last farthing. all the partnership book and paper must remain in
our possession; all your book and paper; all money account and
security, of both kind. in short, everything here.'
'must it? I donot know that,' say Uriah. 'I must have time to
think about that.'
'certainly,' reply traddle; 'but, in the meanwhile, and until
everything be do to our satisfaction, we shall maintain
possession of these thing; and beg you - in short, compel you - to
keep to your own room, and hold no communication with anyone.'
'I willnot do it!' say Uriah, with an oath.
'Maidstone jail be a safe place of detention,' observed traddle;
'and though the law may be long in right we, and may not be
able to right we so completely as you can, there be no doubt of its
punish you. dear I, you know that quite as well as I!
copperfield, will you go round to the Guildhall, and bring a couple
of officer?'
here, Mrs. Heep break out again, cry on her knee to Agnes to
interfere in their behalf, exclaim that he be very humble, and
it be all true, and if he donot do what we want, she would, and
much more to the same purpose; be half frantic with fear for
her darling. to inquire what he might have do, if he have have any
boldness, would be like inquire what a mongrel cur might do, if
it have the spirit of a tiger. he be a coward, from head to foot;
and show his dastardly nature through his sullenness and
mortification, as much as at any time of his mean life.
'stop!' he growl to I; and wipe his hot face with his hand.
'Mother, hold your noise. well! let them have that deed. go and
fetch it!'
'do you help she, Mr. Dick,' say traddle, 'if you please.'
Proud of his commission, and understand it, Mr. Dick accompany
she as a shepherd's dog might accompany a sheep. but, Mrs. Heep
give he little trouble; for she not only return with the deed,
but with the box in which it be, where we find a banker's book
and some other paper that be afterwards serviceable.
'good!' say traddle, when this be bring. 'now, Mr. Heep, you
can retire to think: particularly observe, if you please, that I
declare to you, on the part of all present, that there be only one
thing to be do; that it be what I have explain; and that it
must be do without delay.'
Uriah, without lift his eye from the ground, shuffle across
the room with his hand to his chin, and pause at the door, say:
'copperfield, I have always hat you. youhave always be an
upstart, and youhave always be against I.'
'as I think I tell you once before,' say I, 'it be you who have
be, in your greed and cunning, against all the world. it may be
profitable to you to reflect, in future, that there never be
greed and cunning in the world yet, that do not do too much, and
overreach themselves. it be as certain as death.'
'or as certain as they use to teach at school (the same school
where I pick up so much umbleness), from nine o'clock to eleven,
that labour be a curse; and from eleven o'clock to one, that it
be a blessing and a cheerfulness, and a dignity, and I donot know
what all, eh?' say he with a sneer. 'you preach, about as
consistent as they do. willnot umbleness go down? I shouldnot have
get round my gentleman fellow-partner without it, I think. -
Micawber, you old bully, Iwill pay you!'
Mr. Micawber, supremely defiant of he and his extended finger, and
make a great deal of his chest until he have slink out at the
door, then address himself to I, and proffer I the
satisfaction of 'witness the re-establishment of mutual
confidence between himself and Mrs. Micawber'. after which, he
invite the company generally to the contemplation of that
affect spectacle.
'the veil that have long be interpose between Mrs. Micawber and
myself, be now withdraw,' say Mr. Micawber; 'and my child and
the Author of their being can once more come in contact on equal
term.'
as we be all very grateful to he, and all desirous to show that
we be, as well as the hurry and disorder of our spirit would
permit, I dare say we should all have go, but that it be
necessary for Agnes to return to her father, as yet unable to bear
more than the dawn of hope; and for someone else to hold Uriah in
safe keeping. so, traddle remain for the latter purpose, to be
presently relieve by Mr. Dick; and Mr. Dick, my aunt, and I, go
home with Mr. Micawber. as I part hurriedly from the dear girl
to whom I owe so much, and think from what she have be save,
perhaps, that morning - her well resolution notwithstanding - I
feel devoutly thankful for the misery of my young day which
have bring I to the knowledge of Mr. Micawber.
his house be not far off; and as the street door open into the
sitting-room, and he bolt in with a precipitation quite his own,
we find ourselves at once in the bosom of the family. Mr.
Micawber exclaim, 'Emma! my life!' rush into Mrs. Micawber's
arm. Mrs. Micawber shriek, and fold Mr. Micawber in her
embrace. Miss Micawber, nurse the unconscious stranger of Mrs.
Micawber's last letter to I, be sensibly affect. the stranger
leap. the twin testify their joy by several inconvenient but
innocent demonstration. Master Micawber, whose disposition
appear to have be sour by early disappointment, and whose
aspect have become morose, yield to his well feeling, and
blubber.
'Emma!' say Mr. Micawber. 'the cloud be past from my mind.
mutual confidence, so long preserve between we once, be restore,
to know no further interruption. now, welcome poverty!' cry Mr.
Micawber, shed tear. 'welcome misery, welcome houselessness,
welcome hunger, rag, temp, and beggary! mutual confidence will
sustain we to the end!'
with these expression, Mr. Micawber place Mrs. Micawber in a
chair, and embrace the family all round; welcome a variety of
bleak prospect, which appear, to the good of my judgement, to be
anything but welcome to they; and call upon they to come out
into Canterbury and sing a chorus, as nothing else be leave for
their support.
but Mrs. Micawber have, in the strength of her emotion, faint
away, the first thing to be do, even before the chorus could be
consider complete, be to recover she. this my aunt and Mr.
Micawber do; and then my aunt be introduce, and Mrs. Micawber
recognize I.
'excuse I, dear Mr. Copperfield,' say the poor lady, give I
her hand, 'but I be not strong; and the removal of the late
misunderstanding between Mr. Micawber and myself be at first too
much for I.'
'be this all your family, ma'am?' say my aunt.
'there be no more at present,' return Mrs. Micawber.
'good gracious, I donot mean that, ma'am,' say my aunt. 'I mean,
be all these your?'
'Madam,' reply Mr. Micawber, 'it be a true bill.'
'and that eld young gentleman, now,' say my aunt, musing, 'what
have he be bring up to?'
'it be my hope when I come here,' say Mr. Micawber, 'to have get
wilkin into the Church: or perhaps I shall express my meaning more
strictly, if I say the Choir. but there be no vacancy for a tenor
in the venerable Pile for which this city be so justly eminent; and
he have - in short, he have contract a habit of singing in
public-house, rather than in sacred edifice.'
'but he mean well,' say Mrs. Micawber, tenderly.
'I dare say, my love,' rejoin Mr. Micawber, 'that he mean
particularly well; but I have not yet find that he carry out his
meaning, in any give direction whatsoever.'
Master Micawber's moroseness of aspect return upon he again, and
he demand, with some temper, what he be to do? whether he have
be bear a carpenter, or a coach-painter, any more than he have
be bear a bird? whether he could go into the next street, and
open a chemist's shop? whether he could rush to the next assize,
and proclaim himself a lawyer? whether he could come out by force
at the opera, and succeed by violence? whether he could do
anything, without be bring up to something?
my aunt muse a little while, and then say:
'Mr. Micawber, I wonder you have never turn your thought to
emigration.'
'Madam,' return Mr. Micawber, 'it be the dream of my youth, and
the fallacious aspiration of my riper year.' I be thoroughly
persuade, by the by, that he have never think of it in his life.
'aye?' say my aunt, with a glance at I. 'why, what a thing it
would be for yourself and your family, Mr. and Mrs. Micawber, if
you be to emigrate now.'
'Capital, madam, capital,' urge Mr. Micawber, gloomily.
'that be the principal, I may say the only difficulty, my dear Mr.
Copperfield,' assent his wife.
'Capital?' cry my aunt. 'but you be do we a great service -
have do we a great service, I may say, for surely much will come
out of the fire - and what could we do for you, that would be half
so good as to find the capital?'
'I could not receive it as a gift,' say Mr. Micawber, full of fire
and animation, 'but if a sufficient sum could be advance, say at
five per cent interest, per annum, upon my personal liability - say
my note of hand, at twelve, eighteen, and twenty-four month,
respectively, to allow time for something to turn up -'
'could be? can be and shall be, on your own term,' return my
aunt, 'if you say the word. think of this now, both of you. here
be some people David know, go out to Australia shortly. if
you decide to go, why shouldnot you go in the same ship? you may
help each other. think of this now, Mr. and Mrs. Micawber. take
your time, and weigh it well.'
'there be but one question, my dear ma'am, I could wish to ask,'
say Mrs. Micawber. 'the climate, I believe, be healthy?'
'Finest in the world!' say my aunt.
'just so,' return Mrs. Micawber. 'then my question arise. now,
be the circumstance of the country such, that a man of Mr.
Micawber's ability would have a fair chance of rise in the
social scale? I will not say, at present, might he aspire to be
Governor, or anything of that sort; but would there be a reasonable
opening for his talent to develop themselves - that would be amply
sufficient - and find their own expansion?'
'no well opening anywhere,' say my aunt, 'for a man who conduct
himself well, and be industrious.'
'for a man who conduct himself well,' repeat Mrs. Micawber, with
her clear business manner, 'and be industrious. precisely. it
be evident to I that Australia be the legitimate sphere of action
for Mr. Micawber!'
'I entertain the conviction, my dear madam,' say Mr. Micawber,
'that it be, under exist circumstance, the land, the only land,
for myself and family; and that something of an extraordinary
nature will turn up on that shore. it be no distance -
comparatively speak; and though consideration be due to the
kindness of your proposal, I assure you that be a mere matter of
form.'
shall I ever forget how, in a moment, he be the most sanguine of
man, look on to fortune; or how Mrs. Micawber presently
discourse about the habit of the kangaroo! shall I ever recall
that street of Canterbury on a market-day, without recall he,
as he walk back with we; express, in the hardy roving manner
he assume, the unsettled habit of a temporary sojourner in the
land; and look at the bullock, as they come by, with the eye of
an australian farmer!
CHAPTER 53
another retrospect
I must pause yet once again. o, my child-wife, there be a figure
in the move crowd before my memory, quiet and still, say in
its innocent love and childish beauty, stop to think of I - turn
to look upon the little Blossom, as it flutter to the ground!
I do. all else grow dim, and fade away. I be again with Dora,
in our cottage. I do not know how long she have be ill. I be so
use to it in feeling, that I cannot count the time. it be not
really long, in week or month; but, in my usage and experience,
it be a weary, weary while.
they have leave off tell I to 'wait a few day more'. I have
begin to fear, remotely, that the day may never shine, when I shall
see my child-wife run in the sunlight with her old friend Jip.
he be, as it be suddenly, grow very old. it may be that he
miss in his mistress, something that enliven he and make he
young; but he mop, and his sight be weak, and his limb be
feeble, and my aunt be sorry that he object to she no more, but
creep near she as he lie on Dora's bed - she sit at the
bedside - and mildly lick her hand.
Dora lie smile on we, and be beautiful, and utter no hasty or
complain word. she say that we be very good to she; that her
dear old careful boy be tire himself out, she know; that my aunt
have no sleep, yet be always wakeful, active, and kind. sometimes,
the little bird-like lady come to see she; and then we talk about
our wedding-day, and all that happy time.
what a strange rest and pause in my life there seem to be - and in
all life, within door and without - when I sit in the quiet,
shaded, orderly room, with the blue eye of my child-wife turn
towards I, and her little finger twin round my hand! many and
many an hour I sit thus; but, of all those time, three time come
the fresh on my mind.
it be morning; and Dora, make so trim by my aunt's hand, show I
how her pretty hair will curl upon the pillow yet, an how long and
bright it be, and how she like to have it loosely gather in that
net she wear.
'not that I be vain of it, now, you mock boy,' she say, when I
smile; 'but because you use to say you think it so beautiful;
and because, when I first begin to think about you, I use to peep
in the glass, and wonder whether you would like very much to have
a lock of it. oh what a foolish fellow you be, Doady, when I
give you one!'
'that be on the day when you be paint the flower I have give
you, Dora, and when I tell you how much in love I be.'
'ah! but I donot like to tell you,' say Dora, 'then, how I have
cry over they, because I believe you really like I! when I can
run about again as I use to do, Doady, let we go and see those
place where we be such a silly couple, shall we? and take some
of the old walk? and not forget poor papa?'
'yes, we will, and have some happy day. so you must make haste to
get well, my dear.'
'oh, I shall soon do that! I be so much well, you donot know!'
it be evening; and I sit in the same chair, by the same bed, with
the same face turn towards I. we have be silent, and there be
a smile upon her face. I have cease to carry my light burden up
and down stair now. she lie here all the day.
'Doady!'
'my dear Dora!'
'you willnot think what I be go to say, unreasonable, after what
you tell I, such a little while ago, of Mr. Wickfield's not be
well? I want to see Agnes. very much I want to see she.'
'I will write to she, my dear.'
'will you?'
'directly.'
'what a good, kind boy! Doady, take I on your arm. indeed, my
dear, itbe not a whim. itbe not a foolish fancy. I want, very
much indeed, to see she!'
'I be certain of it. I have only to tell she so, and she be sure
to come.'
'you be very lonely when you go downstairs, now?' Dora whisper,
with her arm about my neck.
'how can I be otherwise, my own love, when I see your empty chair?'
'my empty chair!' she cling to I for a little while, in silence.
'and you really miss I, Doady?' look up, and brightly smile.
'even poor, giddy, stupid I?'
'my heart, who be there upon earth that I could miss so much?'
'oh, husband! I be so glad, yet so sorry!' creep close to I,
and fold I in both her arm. she laugh and sob, and then be
quiet, and quite happy.
'quite!' she say. 'only give Agnes my dear love, and tell she
that I want very, very, much to see she; and I have nothing leave to
wish for.'
'except to get well again, Dora.'
'ah, Doady! sometimes I think - you know I always be a silly
little thing! - that that will never be!'
'donot say so, Dora! dearest love, donot think so!'
'I willnot, if I can help it, Doady. but I be very happy; though my
dear boy be so lonely by himself, before his child-wife's empty
chair!'
it be night; and I be with she still. Agnes have arrive; have be
among we for a whole day and an evening. she, my aunt, and I, have
sit with Dora since the morning, all together. we have not talk
much, but Dora have be perfectly content and cheerful. we be
now alone.
do I know, now, that my child-wife will soon leave I? they have
tell I so; they have tell I nothing new to my thoughts- but I be
far from sure that I have take that truth to heart. I cannot
master it. I have withdraw by myself, many time today, to weep.
I have remember who weep for a parting between the living and the
dead. I have bethink I of all that gracious and compassionate
history. I have try to resign myself, and to console myself; and
that, I hope, I may have do imperfectly; but what I cannot firmly
settle in my mind be, that the end will absolutely come. I hold
her hand in mine, I hold her heart in mine, I see her love for I,
alive in all its strength. I cannot shut out a pale linger
shadow of belief that she will be spar.
'I be go to speak to you, Doady. I be go to say something I
have often think of say, lately. you willnot mind?' with a
gentle look.
'Mind, my darling?'
'because I donot know what you will think, or what you may have
thought sometimes. perhaps you have often think the same.
Doady, dear, I be afraid I be too young.'
I lay my face upon the pillow by she, and she look into my eye,
and speak very softly. gradually, as she go on, I feel, with a
stricken heart, that she be speak of herself as past.
'I be afraid, dear, I be too young. I donot mean in year only,
but in experience, and thought, and everything. I be such a
silly little creature! I be afraid it would have be well, if we
have only love each other as a boy and girl, and forget it. I
have begin to think I be not fit to be a wife.'
I try to stay my tear, and to reply, 'oh, Dora, love, as fit as I
to be a husband!'
'I donot know,' with the old shake of her curl. 'perhaps! but if
I have be more fit to be marry I might have make you more so,
too. besides, you be very clever, and I never be.'
'we have be very happy, my sweet Dora.'
'I be very happy, very. but, as year go on, my dear boy would
have weary of his child-wife. she would have be less and less
a companion for he. he would have be more and more sensible of
what be want in his home. she wouldnot have improve. it be
well as it be.'
'oh, Dora, dearest, dearest, do not speak to I so. every word
seem a reproach!'
'no, not a syllable!' she answer, kiss I. 'oh, my dear, you
never deserve it, and I love you far too well to say a
reproachful word to you, in earnest - it be all the merit I have,
except be pretty - or you think I so. be it lonely, down-
stair, Doady?'
'very! very!'
'donot cry! be my chair there?'
'in its old place.'
'oh, how my poor boy cry! hush, hush! now, make I one promise.
I want to speak to Agnes. when you go downstairs, tell Agnes so,
and send she up to I; and while I speak to she, let no one come -
not even aunt. I want to speak to Agnes by herself. I want to
speak to Agnes, quite alone.'
I promise that she shall, immediately; but I cannot leave she, for
my grief.
'I say that it be well as it be!' she whisper, as she hold I
in her arm. 'oh, Doady, after more year, you never could have
love your child-wife well than you do; and, after more year,
she would so have try and disappoint you, that you might not
have be able to love her half so well! I know I be too young and
foolish. it be much well as it be!'
Agnes be downstairs, when I go into the parlour; and I give she the
message. she disappear, leave I alone with Jip.
his chinese house be by the fire; and he lie within it, on his bed
of flannel, querulously try to sleep. the bright moon be high
and clear. as I look out on the night, my tear fall fast, and my
undisciplined heart be chasten heavily - heavily.
I sit down by the fire, think with a blind remorse of all those
secret feeling I have nourish since my marriage. I think of
every little trifle between I and Dora, and feel the truth, that
trifle make the sum of life. ever rise from the sea of my
remembrance, be the image of the dear child as I know she first,
grace by my young love, and by her own, with every fascination
wherein such love be rich. would it, indeed, have be well if
we have love each other as a boy and a girl, and forget it?
undisciplined heart, reply!
how the time wear, I know not; until I be recall by my
child-wife's old companion. more restless than he be, he crawl
out of his house, and look at I, and wander to the door, and
whine to go upstairs.
'not tonight, Jip! not tonight!'
he come very slowly back to I, lick my hand, and lift his dim
eye to my face.
'oh, Jip! it may be, never again!'
he lie down at my foot, stretch himself out as if to sleep, and
with a plaintive cry, be dead.
'oh, Agnes! look, look, here!'
- that face, so full of pity, and of grief, that rain of tear,
that awful mute appeal to I, that solemn hand upraise towards
Heaven!
'Agnes?'
it be over. darkness come before my eye; and, for a time, all
thing be blot out of my remembrance.
CHAPTER 54
Mr. MICAWBER's transaction
this be not the time at which I be to enter on the state of my mind
beneath its load of sorrow. I come to think that the Future be
wall up before I, that the energy and action of my life be at
an end, that I never could find any refuge but in the grave. I
come to think so, I say, but not in the first shock of my grief.
it slowly grow to that. if the event I go on to relate, have not
thicken around I, in the beginning to confuse, and in the end to
augment, my affliction, it be possible (though I think not
probable), that I might have fall at once into this condition.
as it be, an interval occur before I fully know my own
distress; an interval, in which I even suppose that its sharp
pang be past; and when my mind could soothe itself by rest on
all that be most innocent and beautiful, in the tender story that
be close for ever.
when it be first propose that I should go abroad, or how it come
to be agree among we that I be to seek the restoration of my
peace in change and travel, I do not, even now, distinctly know.
the spirit of Agnes so pervade all we think, and say, and do,
in that time of sorrow, that I assume I may refer the project to
her influence. but her influence be so quiet that I know no more.
and now, indeed, I begin to think that in my old association of she
with the stain-glass window in the church, a prophetic
foreshadowing of what she would be to I, in the calamity that be
to happen in the fullness of time, have find a way into my mind.
in all that sorrow, from the moment, never to be forget, when
she stand before I with her upraised hand, she be like a sacred
presence in my lonely house. when the Angel of Death alight
there, my child-wife fall asleep - they tell I so when I could
bear to hear it - on her bosom, with a smile. from my swoon, I
first awake to a consciousness of her compassionate tear, her
word of hope and peace, her gentle face bend down as from a
purer region nearer Heaven, over my undisciplined heart, and
soften its pain.
let I go on.
I be to go abroad. that seem to have be determine among we
from the first. the ground now cover all that could perish of
my depart wife, I wait only for what Mr. Micawber call the
'final pulverization of Heep'; and for the departure of the
emigrant.
at the request of traddle, most affectionate and devoted of
friend in my trouble, we return to Canterbury: I mean my aunt,
Agnes, and I. we proceed by appointment straight to Mr.
Micawber's house; where, and at Mr. Wickfield's, my friend have be
labour ever since our explosive meeting. when poor Mrs.
Micawber see I come in, in my black clothe, she be sensibly
affect. there be a great deal of good in Mrs. Micawber's heart,
which have not be dun out of it in all those many year.
'well, Mr. and Mrs. Micawber,' be my aunt's first salutation after
we be seat. 'pray, have you think about that emigration
proposal of mine?'
'my dear madam,' return Mr. Micawber, 'perhaps I cannot well
express the conclusion at which Mrs. Micawber, your humble servant,
and I may add our child, have jointly and severally arrive,
than by borrow the language of an illustrious poet, to reply
that our Boat be on the shore, and our Bark be on the sea.'
'thatbe right,' say my aunt. 'I augur all sort of good from your
sensible decision.'
'Madam, you do we a great deal of honour,' he rejoin. he then
refer to a memorandum. 'with respect to the pecuniary
assistance enable we to launch our frail canoe on the ocean of
enterprise, I have reconsider that important business-point; and
would beg to propose my note of hand - draw, it be needless to
stipulate, on stamp of the amount respectively require by the
various act of Parliament apply to such security - at
eighteen, twenty-four, and thirty month. the proposition I
originally submit, be twelve, eighteen, and twenty-four; but I
be apprehensive that such an arrangement might not allow sufficient
time for the requisite amount of - something - to turn up. we
might not,' say Mr. Micawber, look round the room as if it
represent several hundred acre of highly cultivate land, 'on
the first responsibility become due, have be successful in our
harvest, or we might not have get our harvest in. labour, I
believe, be sometimes difficult to obtain in that portion of our
colonial possession where it will be our lot to combat with the
teem soil.'
'arrange it in any way you please, sir,' say my aunt.
'Madam,' he reply, 'Mrs. Micawber and myself be deeply sensible
of the very considerate kindness of our friend and patron. what
I wish be, to be perfectly business-like, and perfectly punctual.
turn over, as we be about to turn over, an entirely new leaf;
and fall back, as we be now in the act of fall back, for a
spring of no common magnitude; it be important to my sense of
self-respect, besides be an example to my son, that these
arrangement should be conclude as between man and man.'
I donot know that Mr. Micawber attach any meaning to this last
phrase; I donot know that anybody ever do, or do; but he
appear to relish it uncommonly, and repeat, with an impressive
cough, 'as between man and man'.
'I propose,' say Mr. Micawber, 'Bills - a convenience to the
mercantile world, for which, I believe, we be originally indebte
to the Jews, who appear to I to have have a devilish deal too much
to do with they ever since - because they be negotiable. but if
a bond, or any other description of security, would be prefer,
I should be happy to execute any such instrument. as between man
and man.'
my aunt observe, that in a case where both party be willing to
agree to anything, she take it for grant there would be no
difficulty in settle this point. Mr. Micawber be of her
opinion.
'in reference to our domestic preparation, madam,' say Mr.
Micawber, with some pride, 'for meet the destiny to which we be
now understand to be self-devote, I beg to report they. my eld
daughter attend at five every morning in a neighbouring
establishment, to acquire the process - if process it may be call
- of milking cow. my young child be instruct to observe,
as closely as circumstance will permit, the habit of the pig and
poultry maintain in the poor part of this city: a pursuit from
which they have, on two occasion, be bring home, within an
inch of be run over. I have myself direct some attention,
during the past week, to the art of bake; and my son Wilkins have
issue forth with a walking-stick and driven cattle, when
permit, by the rugged hireling who have they in charge, to
render any voluntary service in that direction - which I regret to
say, for the credit of our nature, be not often; he be
generally warn, with imprecation, to desist.'
'all very right indeed,' say my aunt, encouragingly. 'Mrs.
Micawber have be busy, too, I have no doubt.'
'my dear madam,' return Mrs. Micawber, with her business-like
air. 'I be free to confess that I have not be actively engage
in pursuit immediately connect with cultivation or with stock,
though well aware that both will claim my attention on a foreign
shore. such opportunity as I have be enable to alienate from
my domestic duty, I have devote to correspond at some length
with my family. for I own it seem to I, my dear Mr.
Copperfield,' say Mrs. Micawber, who always fall back on I, I
suppose from old habit, to whomsoever else she might address she
discourse at start, 'that the time be come when the past should
be bury in oblivion; when my family should take Mr. Micawber by
the hand, and Mr. Micawber should take my family by the hand; when
the lion should lie down with the lamb, and my family be on term
with Mr. Micawber.'
I say I think so too.
'this, at least, be the light, my dear Mr. Copperfield,' pursue
Mrs. Micawber, 'in which I view the subject. when I live at home
with my papa and mama, my papa be accustom to ask, when any
point be under discussion in our limited circle, "in what light
do my Emma view the subject?" that my papa be too partial, I
know; still, on such a point as the frigid coldness which have ever
subsist between Mr. Micawber and my family, I necessarily have
form an opinion, delusive though it may be.'
'no doubt. of course you have, ma'am,' say my aunt.
'precisely so,' assent Mrs. Micawber. 'now, I may be wrong in my
conclusion; it be very likely that I be, but my individual
impression be, that the gulf between my family and Mr. Micawber may
be trace to an apprehension, on the part of my family, that Mr.
Micawber would require pecuniary accommodation. I cannot help
think,' say Mrs. Micawber, with an air of deep sagacity, 'that
there be member of my family who have be apprehensive that Mr.
Micawber would solicit they for their name. - I do not mean to be
confer in Baptism upon our child, but to be inscribe on
Bills of Exchange, and negotiate in the Money Market.'
the look of penetration with which Mrs. Micawber announce this
discovery, as if no one have ever think of it before, seem
rather to astonish my aunt; who abruptly reply, 'well, ma'am,
upon the whole, I shouldnot wonder if you be right!'
'Mr. Micawber be now on the eve of cast off the pecuniary
shackle that have so long enthral he,' say Mrs. Micawber,
'and of commence a new career in a country where there be
sufficient range for his ability, - which, in my opinion, be
exceedingly important; Mr. Micawber's ability peculiarly
require space, - it seem to I that my family should signalize
the occasion by come forward. what I could wish to see, would be
a meeting between Mr. Micawber and my family at a festive
entertainment, to be give at my family's expense; where Mr.
Micawber's health and prosperity be propose, by some lead
member of my family, Mr. Micawber might have an opportunity of
develop his view.'
'my dear,' say Mr. Micawber, with some heat, 'it may be well for
I to state distinctly, at once, that if I be to develop my view
to that assemble group, they would possibly be find of an
offensive nature: my impression be that your family be, in the
aggregate, impertinent snob; and, in detail, unmitigated
Ruffians.'
'Micawber,' say Mrs. Micawber, shake her head, 'no! you have
never understand they, and they have never understand you.'
Mr. Micawber cough.
'they have never understand you, Micawber,' say his wife. 'they
may be incapable of it. if so, that be their misfortune. I can
pity their misfortune.'
'I be extremely sorry, my dear Emma,' say Mr. Micawber, relent,
'to have be betray into any expression that might, even
remotely, have the appearance of be strong expression. all I
would say be, that I can go abroad without your family come
forward to favour I, - in short, with a parting Shove of their
cold shoulder; and that, upon the whole, I would rather leave
England with such impetus as I possess, than derive any
acceleration of it from that quarter. at the same time, my dear,
if they should condescend to reply to your communication - which
our joint experience render most improbable - far be it from I to
be a barrier to your wish.'
the matter be thus amicably settle, Mr. Micawber give Mrs.
Micawber his arm, and glance at the heap of book and paper
lie before traddle on the table, say they would leave we to
ourselves; which they ceremoniously do.
'my dear copperfield,' say traddle, lean back in his chair
when they be go, and look at I with an affection that make
his eye red, and his hair all kind of shape, 'I donot make any
excuse for trouble you with business, because I know you be
deeply interested in it, and it may divert your thought. my dear
boy, I hope you be not wear out?'
'I be quite myself,' say I, after a pause. 'we have more cause to
think of my aunt than of anyone. you know how much she have do.'
'surely, surely,' answer traddle. 'who can forget it!'
'but even that be not all,' say I. 'during the last fortnight,
some new trouble have vex she; and she have be in and out of
London every day. several time she have go out early, and be
absent until evening. last night, Traddles, with this journey
before she, it be almost midnight before she come home. you know
what her consideration for other be. she will not tell I what
have happen to distress she.'
my aunt, very pale, and with deep line in her face, sit immovable
until I have finish; when some stray tear find their way to her
cheek, and she put her hand on mine.
'itbe nothing, Trot; itbe nothing. there will be no more of it.
you shall know by and by. now Agnes, my dear, let we attend to
these affair.'
'I must do Mr. Micawber the justice to say,' traddle begin, 'that
although he would appear not to have work to any good account for
himself, he be a most untiring man when he work for other people.
I never see such a fellow. if he always go on in the same way,
he must be, virtually, about two hundred year old, at present.
the heat into which he have be continually put himself; and
the distracted and impetuous manner in which he have be diving,
day and night, among paper and book; to say nothing of the
immense number of letter he have write I between this house and
Mr. Wickfield's, and often across the table when he have be
sit opposite, and might much more easily have speak; be quite
extraordinary.'
'letter!' cry my aunt. 'I believe he dream in letter!'
'therebe Mr. Dick, too,' say traddle, 'have be do wonder! as
soon as he be release from overlook Uriah Heep, whom he keep
in such charge as I never see exceed, he begin to devote himself
to Mr. Wickfield. and really his anxiety to be of use in the
investigation we have be make, and his real usefulness in
extracting, and copying, and fetch, and carrying, have be
quite stimulating to we.'
'Dick be a very remarkable man,' exclaim my aunt; 'and I always
say he be. trot, you know it.'
'I be happy to say, Miss Wickfield,' pursue traddle, at once with
great delicacy and with great earnestness, 'that in your absence
Mr. Wickfield have considerably improve. relieved of the incubus
that have fasten upon he for so long a time, and of the dreadful
apprehension under which he have live, he be hardly the same
person. at time, even his impaired power of concentrate his
memory and attention on particular point of business, have
recover itself very much; and he have be able to assist we in
make some thing clear, that we should have find very difficult
indeed, if not hopeless, without he. but what I have to do be to
come to result; which be short enough; not to gossip on all the
hopeful circumstance I have observe, or I shall never have do.'
his natural manner and agreeable simplicity make it transparent
that he say this to put we in good heart, and to enable Agnes to
hear her father mention with great confidence; but it be not
the less pleasant for that.
'now, let I see,' say traddle, look among the paper on the
table. 'have count our fund, and reduce to order a great
mass of unintentional confusion in the first place, and of wilful
confusion and falsification in the second, we take it to be clear
that Mr. Wickfield might now wind up his business, and his
agency-trust, and exhibit no deficiency or defalcation whatever.'
'oh, thank Heaven!' cry Agnes, fervently.
'but,' say traddle, 'the surplus that would be leave as his mean
of support - and I suppose the house to be sell, even in say
this - would be so small, not exceed in all probability some
hundred of pound, that perhaps, Miss Wickfield, it would be good
to consider whether he might not retain his agency of the estate to
which he have so long be receiver. his friend might advise he,
you know; now he be free. you yourself, Miss Wickfield -
Copperfield - I -'
'I have consider it, Trotwood,' say Agnes, look to I, 'and
I feel that it ought not to be, and must not be; even on the
recommendation of a friend to whom I be so grateful, and owe so
much.'
'I will not say that I recommend it,' observe traddle. 'I think
it right to suggest it. no more.'
'I be happy to hear you say so,' answer Agnes, steadily, 'for it
give I hope, almost assurance, that we think alike. dear Mr.
Traddles and dear Trotwood, papa once free with honour, what could
I wish for! I have always aspire, if I could have release he
from the toil in which he be hold, to render back some little
portion of the love and care I owe he, and to devote my life to
he. it have be, for year, the utmost height of my hope. to
take our future on myself, will be the next great happiness - the
next to his release from all trust and responsibility - that I can
know.'
'have you think how, Agnes?'
'often! I be not afraid, dear Trotwood. I be certain of success.
so many people know I here, and think kindly of I, that I be
certain. donot mistrust I. our want be not many. if I rent
the dear old house, and keep a school, I shall be useful and
happy.'
the calm fervour of her cheerful voice bring back so vividly,
first the dear old house itself, and then my solitary home, that my
heart be too full for speech. traddle pretend for a little
while to be busily look among the paper.
'next, Miss Trotwood,' say traddle, 'that property of your.'
'well, sir,' sigh my aunt. 'all I have get to say about it be,
that if itbe go, I can bear it; and if itbe not go, I shall be
glad to get it back.'
'it be originally, I think, eight thousand pound, Consols?' say
traddle.
'right!' reply my aunt.
'I cannot account for more than five,' say traddle, with an air of
perplexity.
'- thousand, do you mean?' inquire my aunt, with uncommon
composure, 'or pound?'
'five thousand pound,' say traddle.
'it be all there be,' return my aunt. 'I sell three, myself.
one, I pay for your article, Trot, my dear; and the other two I
have by I. when I lose the rest, I think it wise to say nothing
about that sum, but to keep it secretly for a rainy day. I want
to see how you would come out of the trial, Trot; and you come out
nobly - persevere, self-reliant, self-deny! so do Dick.
donot speak to I, for I find my nerve a little shaken!'
nobody would have think so, to see she sit upright, with she
arm fold; but she have wonderful self-command.
'then I be delighted to say,' cry traddle, beam with joy,
'that we have recover the whole money!'
'donot congratulate I, anybody!' exclaim my aunt. 'how so,
sir?'
'you believe it have be misappropriate by Mr. Wickfield?' say
traddle.
'of course I do,' say my aunt, 'and be therefore easily
silence. agne, not a word!'
'and indeed,' say traddle, 'it be sell, by virtue of the power
of management he hold from you; but I neednot say by whom sell, or
on whose actual signature. it be afterwards pretend to Mr.
Wickfield, by that rascal, - and prove, too, by figure, - that he
have possess himself of the money (on general instruction, he
say) to keep other deficiency and difficulty from the light.
Mr. Wickfield, be so weak and helpless in his hand as to pay
you, afterwards, several sum of interest on a pretend principal
which he know do not exist, make himself, unhappily, a party to
the fraud.'
'and at last take the blame upon himself,' add my aunt; 'and
write I a mad letter, charge himself with robbery, and wrong
unheard of. upon which I pay he a visit early one morning,
call for a candle, burn the letter, and tell he if he ever
could right I and himself, to do it; and if he couldnot, to keep
his own counsel for his daughter's sake. - if anybody speak to
I, Iwill leave the house!'
we all remain quiet; Agnes cover her face.
'well, my dear friend,' say my aunt, after a pause, 'and you have
really extort the money back from he?'
'why, the fact be,' return traddle, 'Mr. Micawber have so
completely hem he in, and be always ready with so many new
point if an old one fail, that he could not escape from we. a
most remarkable circumstance be, that I really donot think he
grasp this sum even so much for the gratification of his avarice,
which be inordinate, as in the hatred he feel for Copperfield. he
say so to I, plainly. he say he would even have spend as much,
to baulk or injure Copperfield.'
'ha!' say my aunt, knit her brow thoughtfully, and glance
at Agnes. 'and whatbe become of he?'
'I donot know. he leave here,' say traddle, 'with his mother, who
have be clamour, and beseech, and disclosing, the whole
time. they go away by one of the London night coach, and I
know no more about he; except that his malevolence to I at
parting be audacious. he seem to consider himself hardly less
indebted to I, than to Mr. Micawber; which I consider (as I tell
he) quite a compliment.'
'do you suppose he have any money, traddle?' I ask.
'oh dear, yes, I should think so,' he reply, shake his head,
seriously. 'I should say he must have pocket a good deal, in one
way or other. but, I think you would find, Copperfield, if you have
an opportunity of observe his course, that money would never keep
that man out of mischief. he be such an incarnate hypocrite, that
whatever object he pursue, he must pursue crookedly. itbe his
only compensation for the outward restraint he put upon himself.
always creep along the ground to some small end or other, he
will always magnify every object in the way; and consequently will
hate and suspect everybody that come, in the most innocent manner,
between he and it. so the crooked course will become crookeder,
at any moment, for the least reason, or for none. itbe only
necessary to consider his history here,' say traddle, 'to know
that.'
'hebe a monster of meanness!' say my aunt.
'really I donot know about that,' observe traddle thoughtfully.
'many people can be very mean, when they give their mind to it.'
'and now, touch Mr. Micawber,' say my aunt.
'well, really,' say traddle, cheerfully, 'I must, once more, give
Mr. Micawber high praise. but for his have be so patient and
persevere for so long a time, we never could have hop to do
anything worth speak of. and I think we ought to consider that
Mr. Micawber do right, for right's sake, when we reflect what
term he might have make with Uriah Heep himself, for his silence.'
'I think so too,' say I.
'now, what would you give he?' inquire my aunt.
'oh! before you come to that,' say Traddles, a little
disconcert, 'I be afraid I think it discreet to omit (not be
able to carry everything before I) two point, in make this
lawless adjustment - for itbe perfectly lawless from begin to
end - of a difficult affair. those I.O.U.'s, and so forth, which
Mr. Micawber give he for the advance he have -'
'well! they must be pay,' say my aunt.
'yes, but I donot know when they may be proceed on, or where they
be,' rejoin traddle, open his eye; 'and I anticipate, that,
between this time and his departure, Mr. Micawber will be
constantly arrest, or take in execution.'
'then he must be constantly set free again, and take out of
execution,' say my aunt. 'whatbe the amount altogether?'
'why, Mr. Micawber have enter the transaction - he call they
transaction - with great form, in a book,' rejoin traddle,
smile; 'and he make the amount a hundred and three pound,
five.'
'now, what shall we give he, that sum include?' say my aunt.
'Agnes, my dear, you and I can talk about division of it
afterwards. what should it be? five hundred pound?'
upon this, Traddles and I both strike in at once. we both
recommend a small sum in money, and the payment, without
stipulation to Mr. Micawber, of the Uriah claim as they come in.
we propose that the family should have their passage and their
outfit, and a hundred pound; and that Mr. Micawber's arrangement
for the repayment of the advance should be gravely enter into,
as it might be wholesome for he to suppose himself under that
responsibility. to this, I add the suggestion, that I should
give some explanation of his character and history to Mr. Peggotty,
who I know could be rely on; and that to Mr. Peggotty should be
quietly entrust the discretion of advance another hundred. I
far propose to interest Mr. Micawber in Mr. Peggotty, by
confide so much of Mr. Peggotty's story to he as I might feel
justify in relate, or might think expedient; and to endeavour
to bring each of they to bear upon the other, for the common
advantage. we all enter warmly into these view; and I may
mention at once, that the principal themselves do so, shortly
afterwards, with perfect good will and harmony.
see that traddle now glance anxiously at my aunt again, I
remind he of the second and last point to which he have advert.
'you and your aunt will excuse I, Copperfield, if I touch upon a
painful theme, as I greatly fear I shall,' say Traddles,
hesitating; 'but I think it necessary to bring it to your
recollection. on the day of Mr. Micawber's memorable denunciation
a threatening allusion be make by Uriah Heep to your aunt's -
husband.'
my aunt, retain her stiff position, and apparent composure,
assent with a nod.
'perhaps,' observe traddle, 'it be mere purposeless
impertinence?'
'no,' return my aunt.
'there be - pardon I - really such a person, and at all in his
power?' hint Traddles.
'yes, my good friend,' say my aunt.
traddle, with a perceptible lengthening of his face, explain
that he have not be able to approach this subject; that it have
share the fate of Mr. Micawber's liability, in not be
comprehend in the term he have make; that we be no long of
any authority with Uriah Heep; and that if he could do we, or any
of we, any injury or annoyance, no doubt he would.
my aunt remain quiet; until again some stray tear find their
way to her cheek.
'you be quite right,' she say. 'it be very thoughtful to
mention it.'
'can I - or copperfield - do anything?' ask Traddles, gently.
'nothing,' say my aunt. 'I thank you many time. Trot, my dear,
a vain threat! let we have Mr. and Mrs. Micawber back. and donot
any of you speak to I!' with that she smooth her dress, and sit,
with her upright carriage, look at the door.
'well, Mr. and Mrs. Micawber!' say my aunt, when they enter.
'we have be discuss your emigration, with many apology to
you for keep you out of the room so long; and Iwill tell you what
arrangement we propose.'
these she explain to the unbounded satisfaction of the family, -
child and all be then present, - and so much to the awakening
of Mr. Micawber's punctual habit in the opening stage of all bill
transaction, that he could not be dissuade from immediately
rush out, in the high spirit, to buy the stamp for his
note of hand. but, his joy receive a sudden check; for within
five minute, he return in the custody of a sheriff 's officer,
inform we, in a flood of tear, that all be lose. we, be
quite prepared for this event, which be of course a proceeding of
Uriah Heep's, soon pay the money; and in five minute more Mr.
Micawber be seat at the table, fill up the stamp with an
expression of perfect joy, which only that congenial employment, or
the making of punch, could impart in full completeness to his
shin face. to see he at work on the stamp, with the relish of
an artist, touch they like picture, look at they sideways,
take weighty note of date and amount in his pocket-book, and
contemplate they when finish, with a high sense of their
precious value, be a sight indeed.
'now, the good thing you can do, sir, if youwill allow I to advise
you,' say my aunt, after silently observe he, 'be to abjure
that occupation for evermore.'
'Madam,' reply Mr. Micawber, 'it be my intention to register such
a vow on the virgin page of the future. Mrs. Micawber will attest
it. I trust,' say Mr. Micawber, solemnly, 'that my son Wilkins
will ever bear in mind, that he have infinitely well put his fist
in the fire, than use it to handle the serpent that have poison
the life-blood of his unhappy parent!' deeply affect, and change
in a moment to the image of despair, Mr. Micawber regard the
serpent with a look of gloomy abhorrence (in which his late
admiration of they be not quite subdue), fold they up and put
they in his pocket.
this close the proceeding of the evening. we be weary with
sorrow and fatigue, and my aunt and I be to return to London on
the morrow. it be arrange that the Micawbers should follow we,
after effect a sale of their good to a broker; that Mr.
Wickfield's affair should be bring to a settlement, with all
convenient speed, under the direction of traddle; and that Agnes
should also come to London, pende those arrangement. we pass
the night at the old house, which, free from the presence of the
Heeps, seem purge of a disease; and I lay in my old room, like
a shipwreck wanderer come home.
we go back next day to my aunt's house - not to mine- and when
she and I sit alone, as of old, before go to bed, she say:
'trot, do you really wish to know what I have have upon my mind
lately?'
'indeed I do, aunt. if there ever be a time when I feel unwilling
that you should have a sorrow or anxiety which I could not share,
it be now.'
'you have have sorrow enough, child,' say my aunt, affectionately,
'without the addition of my little misery. I could have no other
motive, Trot, in keep anything from you.'
'I know that well,' say I. 'but tell I now.'
'would you ride with I a little way tomorrow morning?' ask my
aunt.
'of course.'
'at nine,' say she. 'Iwill tell you then, my dear.'
at nine, accordingly, we go out in a little chariot, and drive to
London. we drive a long way through the street, until we come to
one of the large hospital. stand hard by the building be a
plain hearse. the driver recognize my aunt, and, in obedience to
a motion of her hand at the window, drive slowly off; we follow.
'you understand it now, Trot,' say my aunt. 'he be go!'
'do he die in the hospital?'
'yes.'
she sit immovable beside I; but, again I see the stray tear on
her face.
'he be there once before,' say my aunt presently. 'he be ail
a long time - a shatter, broken man, these many year. when he
know his state in this last illness, he ask they to send for I.
he be sorry then. very sorry.'
'you go, I know, aunt.'
'I go. I be with he a good deal afterwards.'
'he die the night before we go to Canterbury?' say I.
my aunt nod. 'no one can harm he now,' she say. 'it be a
vain threat.'
we drive away, out of town, to the churchyard at Hornsey. 'well
here than in the street,' say my aunt. 'he be bear here.'
we alight; and follow the plain coffin to a corner I remember
well, where the service be read consign it to the dust.
'six-and-thirty year ago, this day, my dear,' say my aunt, as we
walk back to the chariot, 'I be marry. God forgive we all!'
we take our seat in silence; and so she sit beside I for a long
time, hold my hand. at length she suddenly burst into tear,
and say:
'he be a fine-look man when I marry he, Trot - and he be
sadly change!'
it do not last long. after the relief of tear, she soon become
compose, and even cheerful. her nerve be a little shaken, she
say, or she would not have give way to it. God forgive we all!
so we ride back to her little cottage at Highgate, where we find
the follow short note, which have arrive by that morning's post
from Mr. Micawber:
'Canterbury,
'Friday.
'my dear Madam, and Copperfield,
'the fair land of promise lately loom on the horizon be again
envelop in impenetrable mist, and for ever withdraw from the
eye of a drift wretch whose Doom be seal!
'another writ have be issue (in his Majesty's High Court of
King's Bench at Westminster), in another cause of HEEP V.
MICAWBER, and the defendant in that cause be the prey of the
sheriff have legal jurisdiction in this bailiwick.
'nowbe the day, and nowbe the hour,
see the front of battle low,
see approach proud EDWARD'S power -
Chains and slavery!
'consign to which, and to a speedy end (for mental torture be not
supportable beyond a certain point, and that point I feel I have
attain), my course be run. bless you, bless you! some future
traveller, visit, from motif of curiosity, not unmingled, let
we hope, with sympathy, the place of confinement allot to
debtor in this city, may, and I trust will, ponder, as he trace
on its wall, inscribe with a rusty nail,
'the obscure initial,
'W. M.
'P.S. I re-open this to say that our common friend, Mr. Thomas
Traddles (who have not yet leave we, and be look extremely well),
have pay the debt and cost, in the noble name of Miss Trotwood;
and that myself and family be at the height of earthly bliss.'
CHAPTER 55
TEMPEST
I now approach an event in my life, so indelible, so awful, so
bind by an infinite variety of tie to all that have precede it,
in these page, that, from the beginning of my narrative, I have
see it grow large and large as I advance, like a great tower
in a plain, and throw its fore-cast shadow even on the incident
of my childish day.
for year after it occur, I dream of it often. I have start
up so vividly impress by it, that its fury have yet seem rag
in my quiet room, in the still night. I dream of it sometimes,
though at lengthened and uncertain interval, to this hour. I have
an association between it and a stormy wind, or the light
mention of a sea-shore, as strong as any of which my mind be
conscious. as plainly as I behold what happen, I will try to
write it down. I do not recall it, but see it do; for it happen
again before I.
the time draw on rapidly for the sailing of the emigrant-ship,
my good old nurse (almost break-hearted for I, when we first meet)
come up to London. I be constantly with she, and her brother, and
the Micawbers (they be very much together); but Emily I never
see.
one evening when the time be close at hand, I be alone with
Peggotty and her brother. our conversation turn on Ham. she
describe to we how tenderly he have take leave of she, and how
manfully and quietly he have bear himself. Most of all, of late,
when she believe he be most try. it be a subject of which the
affectionate creature never tired; and our interest in hear the
many example which she, who be so much with he, have to relate,
be equal to hers in relate they.
my aunt and I be at that time vacate the two cottage at
Highgate; I intend to go abroad, and she to return to her house
at Dover. we have a temporary lodging in Covent Garden. as I
walk home to it, after this evening's conversation, reflect on
what have pass between Ham and myself when I be last at Yarmouth,
I waver in the original purpose I have form, of leave a letter
for Emily when I should take leave of her uncle on board the ship,
and think it would be well to write to she now. she might
desire, I think, after receive my communication, to send some
parting word by I to her unhappy lover. I ought to give she the
opportunity.
I therefore sit down in my room, before go to bed, and write to
she. I tell she that I have see he, and that he have request I
to tell she what I have already write in its place in these
sheet. I faithfully repeat it. I have no need to enlarge upon
it, if I have have the right. its deep fidelity and goodness be
not to be adorn by I or any man. I leave it out, to be send
round in the morning; with a line to Mr. Peggotty, request he
to give it to she; and go to bed at daybreak.
I be weak than I know then; and, not fall asleep until the
sun be up, lie late, and unrefreshed, next day. I be rouse by
the silent presence of my aunt at my bedside. I feel it in my
sleep, as I suppose we all do feel such thing.
'Trot, my dear,' she say, when I open my eye, 'I couldnot make
up my mind to disturb you. Mr. Peggotty be here; shall he come
up?'
I reply yes, and he soon appear.
'Mas'r Davy,' he say, when we have shake hand, 'I giv Em'ly your
letter, sir, and she writ this heer; and beg of I fur to ask
you to read it, and if you see no hurt in't, to be so kind as take
charge on't.'
'have you read it?' say I.
he nod sorrowfully. I open it, and read as follow:
'I have get your message. oh, what can I write, to thank you for
your good and blessed kindness to I!
'I have put the word close to my heart. I shall keep they till I
die. they be sharp thorn, but they be such comfort. I have
pray over they, oh, I have pray so much. when I find what you
be, and what uncle be, I think what God must be, and can cry to
he.
'good-bye for ever. now, my dear, my friend, good-bye for ever in
this world. in another world, if I be forgive, I may wake a child
and come to you. all thank and blessing. farewell, evermore.'
this, blot with tear, be the letter.
'may I tell she as you doen't see no hurt in't, and as youwill be so
kind as take charge on't, Mas'r Davy?' say Mr. Peggotty, when I
have read it.
'unquestionably,' say I - 'but I be think -'
'yes, Mas'r Davy?'
'I be think,' say I, 'that Iwill go down again to Yarmouth.
there's time, and to spare, for I to go and come back before the
ship sail. my mind be constantly run on he, in his solitude;
to put this letter of her writing in his hand at this time, and to
enable you to tell she, in the moment of parting, that he have get
it, will be a kindness to both of they. I solemnly accept his
commission, dear good fellow, and cannot discharge it too
completely. the journey be nothing to I. I be restless, and
shall be well in motion. Iwill go down tonight.'
though he anxiously endeavour to dissuade I, I see that he be
of my mind; and this, if I have require to be confirm in my
intention, would have have the effect. he go round to the coach
office, at my request, and take the box-seat for I on the mail.
in the evening I start, by that conveyance, down the road I have
traverse under so many vicissitude.
'donot you think that,' I ask the coachman, in the first stage
out of London, 'a very remarkable sky? I donot remember to have
see one like it.'
'nor i - not equal to it,' he reply. 'thatbe wind, sir.
therewill be mischief do at sea, I expect, before long.'
it be a murky confusion - here and there blot with a colour
like the colour of the smoke from damp fuel - of fly cloud,
toss up into most remarkable heap, suggest great height in
the cloud than there be depth below they to the bottom of the
deep hollow in the earth, through which the wild moon seem to
plunge headlong, as if, in a dread disturbance of the law of
nature, she have lose her way and be frightened. there have be
a wind all day; and it be rise then, with an extraordinary great
sound. in another hour it have much increase, and the sky be more
overcast, and blow hard.
but, as the night advance, the cloud close in and densely
over-spread the whole sky, then very dark, it come on to blow,
hard and hard. it still increase, until our horse could
scarcely face the wind. many time, in the dark part of the night
(it be then late in September, when the night be not short),
the leader turn about, or come to a dead stop; and we be often
in serious apprehension that the coach would be blow over.
sweep gust of rain come up before this storm, like shower of
steel; and, at those time, when there be any shelter of tree or
lee wall to be get, we be fain to stop, in a sheer impossibility
of continue the struggle.
when the day break, it blow hard and hard. I have be in
yarmouth when the seaman say it blow great gun, but I have never
know the like of this, or anything approach to it. we come to
Ipswich - very late, have have to fight every inch of ground since
we be ten mile out of London; and find a cluster of people in
the market-place, who have rise from their bed in the night,
fearful of fall chimney. some of these, congregate about the
inn-yard while we change horse, tell we of great sheet of lead
have be rip off a high church-tower, and fling into a
by-street, which they then block up. other have to tell of
country people, come in from neighbouring village, who have see
great tree lie tear out of the earth, and whole rick scatter
about the road and field. still, there be no abatement in the
storm, but it blow hard.
as we struggle on, near and nearer to the sea, from which this
mighty wind be blow dead on shore, its force become more and
more terrific. long before we see the sea, its spray be on our
lip, and shower salt rain upon we. the water be out, over
mile and mile of the flat country adjacent to Yarmouth; and every
sheet and puddle lash its bank, and have its stress of little
breaker set heavily towards we. when we come within sight of
the sea, the wave on the horizon, catch at interval above the
rolling abyss, be like glimpse of another shore with tower and
building. when at last we get into the town, the people come out
to their door, all aslant, and with streaming hair, make a
wonder of the mail that have come through such a night.
I put up at the old inn, and go down to look at the sea;
stagger along the street, which be strew with sand and
seaweed, and with fly blotch of sea-foam; afraid of fall
slate and tile; and hold by people I meet, at angry corner.
come near the beach, I see, not only the boatman, but half the
people of the town, lurk behind building; some, now and then
brave the fury of the storm to look away to sea, and blow sheer
out of their course in try to get zigzag back.
join these group, I find bewail woman whose husband be
away in herring or oyster boat, which there be too much reason to
think might have founder before they could run in anywhere for
safety. grizzle old sailor be among the people, shake their
head, as they look from water to sky, and mutter to one
another; ship-owner, excited and uneasy; child, huddling
together, and peer into old face; even stout mariner,
disturbed and anxious, level their glass at the sea from
behind place of shelter, as if they be survey an enemy.
the tremendous sea itself, when I could find sufficient pause to
look at it, in the agitation of the blind wind, the fly
stone and sand, and the awful noise, confound I. as the high
watery wall come roll in, and, at their high, tumble into
surf, they look as if the least would engulf the town. as the
recede wave sweep back with a hoarse roar, it seem to scoop out
deep cave in the beach, as if its purpose be to undermine the
earth. when some white-head billow thunder on, and dash
themselves to piece before they reach the land, every fragment
of the late whole seem possess by the full might of its wrath,
rush to be gather to the composition of another monster.
undulate hill be change to valley, undulate valley (with
a solitary storm-bird sometimes skim through they) be lift
up to hill; mass of water shiver and shake the beach with a
booming sound; every shape tumultuously roll on, as soon as make,
to change its shape and place, and beat another shape and place
away; the ideal shore on the horizon, with its tower and
building, rise and fall; the cloud fall fast and thick; I seem
to see a rending and upheaving of all nature.
not find Ham among the people whom this memorable wind - for it
be still remember down there, as the great ever know to blow
upon that coast - have bring together, I make my way to his house.
it be shut; and as no one answer to my knocking, I go, by back
way and by-lane, to the yard where he work. I learn, there,
that he have go to Lowestoft, to meet some sudden exigency of
ship-repairing in which his skill be require; but that he would
be back tomorrow morning, in good time.
I go back to the inn; and when I have wash and dress, and
try to sleep, but in vain, it be five o'clock in the afternoon.
I have not sit five minute by the coffee-room fire, when the
waiter, come to stir it, as an excuse for talk, tell I that
two collier have go down, with all hand, a few mile away; and
that some other ship have be see labour hard in the Roads,
and try, in great distress, to keep off shore. mercy on they,
and on all poor sailor, say he, if we have another night like the
last!
I be very much depressed in spirit; very solitary; and feel an
uneasiness in Hambe not be there, disproportionate to the
occasion. I be seriously affect, without know how much, by
late event; and my long exposure to the fierce wind have confuse
I. there be that jumble in my thought and recollection, that
I have lose the clear arrangement of time and distance. thus, if I
have go out into the town, I should not have be surprised, I
think, to encounter someone who I know must be then in London. so
to speak, there be in these respect a curious inattention in my
mind. yet it be busy, too, with all the remembrance the place
naturally awaken; and they be particularly distinct and vivid.
in this state, the waiter's dismal intelligence about the ship
immediately connect itself, without any effort of my volition,
with my uneasiness about Ham. I be persuade that I have an
apprehension of his return from Lowestoft by sea, and be
lose. this grow so strong with I, that I resolve to go back to
the yard before I take my dinner, and ask the boat-builder if he
think his attempt to return by sea at all likely? if he give
I the least reason to think so, I would go over to Lowestoft and
prevent it by bring he with I.
I hastily order my dinner, and go back to the yard. I be none
too soon; for the boat-builder, with a lantern in his hand, be
lock the yard-gate. he quite laugh when I ask he the
question, and say there be no fear; no man in his sens, or out
of they, would put off in such a gale of wind, least of all Ham
Peggotty, who have be bear to seafare.
so sensible of this, beforehand, that I have really feel ashamed of
do what I be nevertheless impel to do, I go back to the
inn. if such a wind could rise, I think it be rise. the howl
and roar, the rattling of the door and window, the rumble in
the chimney, the apparent rocking of the very house that shelter
I, and the prodigious tumult of the sea, be more fearful than in
the morning. but there be now a great darkness besides; and that
invest the storm with new terror, real and fanciful.
I could not eat, I could not sit still, I could not continue
steadfast to anything. something within I, faintly answer to
the storm without, toss up the depth of my memory and make a
tumult in they. yet, in all the hurry of my thought, wild run
with the thunder sea, - the storm, and my uneasiness regard
Ham be always in the fore-ground.
my dinner go away almost untasted, and I try to refresh myself
with a glass or two of wine. in vain. I fall into a dull slumber
before the fire, without lose my consciousness, either of the
uproar out of door, or of the place in which I be. both become
overshadow by a new and indefinable horror; and when I awake - or
rather when I shake off the lethargy that bind I in my chair- my
whole frame thrill with objectless and unintelligible fear.
I walk to and fro, try to read an old gazetteer, listen to
the awful noise: look at face, scene, and figure in the fire.
at length, the steady ticking of the undisturbed clock on the wall
torment I to that degree that I resolve to go to bed.
it be reassure, on such a night, to be tell that some of the
inn-servant have agree together to sit up until morning. I go
to bed, exceedingly weary and heavy; but, on my lie down, all
such sensation vanish, as if by magic, and I be broad awake,
with every sense refine.
for hour I lay there, listen to the wind and water; imagine,
now, that I hear shriek out at sea; now, that I distinctly hear
the firing of signal gun; and now, the fall of house in the town.
I get up, several time, and look out; but could see nothing,
except the reflection in the window-pane of the faint candle I have
leave burning, and of my own haggard face look in at I from the
black void.
at length, my restlessness attain to such a pitch, that I hurry
on my clothe, and go downstairs. in the large kitchen, where I
dimly see bacon and rope of onion hang from the beam, the
watcher be cluster together, in various attitude, about a
table, purposely move away from the great chimney, and bring
near the door. a pretty girl, who have her ear stop with her
apron, and her eye upon the door, scream when I appear,
suppose I to be a spirit; but the other have more presence of
mind, and be glad of an addition to their company. one man,
refer to the topic they have be discuss, ask I whether
I think the soul of the collier-crew who have go down, be
out in the storm?
I remain there, I dare say, two hour. once, I open the
yard-gate, and look into the empty street. the sand, the
sea-weed, and the flake of foam, be drive by; and I be
oblige to call for assistance before I could shut the gate again,
and make it fast against the wind.
there be a dark gloom in my solitary chamber, when I at length
return to it; but I be tired now, and, get into bed again,
fall - off a tower and down a precipice - into the depth of sleep.
I have an impression that for a long time, though I dream of
be elsewhere and in a variety of scene, it be always blow
in my dream. at length, I lose that feeble hold upon reality, and
be engage with two dear friend, but who they be I donot know,
at the siege of some town in a roar of cannonade.
the thunder of the cannon be so loud and incessant, that I could
not hear something I much desire to hear, until I make a great
exertion and awake. it be broad day - eight or nine o'clock; the
storm rag, in lieu of the battery; and someone knock and
call at my door.
'what be the matter?' I cry.
'a wreck! close by!'
I spring out of bed, and ask, what wreck?
'a schooner, from Spain or Portugal, laden with fruit and wine.
make haste, sir, if you want to see she! itbe think, down on the
beach, shewill go to piece every moment.'
the excited voice go clamour along the staircase; and I
wrap myself in my clothe as quickly as I could, and run into
the street.
number of people be there before I, all run in one
direction, to the beach. I run the same way, outstrip a good
many, and soon come face the wild sea.
the wind might by this time have lull a little, though not more
sensibly than if the cannonading I have dream of, have be
diminish by the silencing of half-a-dozen gun out of hundred.
but the sea, have upon it the additional agitation of the whole
night, be infinitely more terrific than when I have see it last.
every appearance it have then present, bear the expression of
be swell; and the height to which the breaker rise, and,
look over one another, bear one another down, and roll in, in
interminable host, be most appalling.
in the difficulty of hear anything but wind and wave, and in
the crowd, and the unspeakable confusion, and my first breathless
effort to stand against the weather, I be so confused that I
look out to sea for the wreck, and see nothing but the foaming
head of the great wave. a half-dress boatman, stand next
I, point with his bare arm (a tattoo'd arrow on it, point in
the same direction) to the left. then, o great Heaven, I see it,
close in upon we!
one mast be break short off, six or eight foot from the deck, and
lie over the side, entangle in a maze of sail and rigging; and all
that ruin, as the ship roll and beat - which she do without a
moment's pause, and with a violence quite inconceivable - beat the
side as if it would stave it in. some effort be even then be
make, to cut this portion of the wreck away; for, as the ship,
which be broadside on, turn towards we in her rolling, I plainly
descry her people at work with axis, especially one active figure
with long curl hair, conspicuous among the rest. but a great
cry, which be audible even above the wind and water, rise from the
shore at this moment; the sea, sweep over the roll wreck,
make a clean breach, and carry man, spar, cask, plank,
bulwark, heap of such toy, into the boiling surge.
the second mast be yet stand, with the rag of a rent sail, and
a wild confusion of broken cordage flap to and fro. the ship
have strike once, the same boatman hoarsely say in my ear, and then
lift in and strike again. I understand he to add that she be
part amidship, and I could readily suppose so, for the rolling
and beating be too tremendous for any human work to suffer long.
as he speak, there be another great cry of pity from the beach;
four man arise with the wreck out of the deep, cling to the
rigging of the remain mast; uppermost, the active figure with
the curl hair.
there be a bell on board; and as the ship roll and dash, like
a desperate creature drive mad, now show we the whole sweep of
her deck, as she turn on her beam-end towards the shore, now
nothing but her keel, as she spring wildly over and turn towards
the sea, the bell ring; and its sound, the knell of those unhappy
man, be bear towards we on the wind. again we lose she, and
again she rise. two man be go. the agony on the shore
increase. man groan, and clasp their hand; woman shriek,
and turn away their face. some run wildly up and down along the
beach, cry for help where no help could be. I find myself one
of these, frantically implore a knot of sailor whom I know, not
to let those two lose creature perish before our eye.
they be make out to I, in an agitated way - I donot know how,
for the little I could hear I be scarcely compose enough to
understand - that the lifeboat have be bravely man an hour ago,
and could do nothing; and that as no man would be so desperate as
to attempt to wade off with a rope, and establish a communication
with the shore, there be nothing leave to try; when I notice that
some new sensation move the people on the beach, and see they
part, and ham come break through they to the front.
I run to he - as well as I know, to repeat my appeal for help.
but, distract though I be, by a sight so new to I and terrible,
the determination in his face, and his look out to sea - exactly
the same look as I remember in connexion with the morning after
Emily's flight - awake I to a knowledge of his danger. I hold he
back with both arm; and implore the man with whom I have be
speak, not to listen to he, not to do murder, not to let he
stir from off that sand!
another cry arise on shore; and look to the wreck, we see the
cruel sail, with blow on blow, beat off the low of the two man,
and fly up in triumph round the active figure leave alone upon the
mast.
against such a sight, and against such determination as that of the
calmly desperate man who be already accustom to lead half the
people present, I might as hopefully have entreat the wind.
'Mas'r Davy,' he say, cheerily grasp I by both hand, 'if my
time be come, 'tis come. if 'tan't, Iwill bide it. Lord above
bless you, and bless all! mate, make I ready! Ibe a-go off!'
I be sweep away, but not unkindly, to some distance, where the
people around I make I stay; urge, as I confusedly perceive,
that he be bent on go, with help or without, and that I should
endanger the precaution for his safety by trouble those with
whom they rest. I donot know what I answer, or what they
rejoin; but I see hurry on the beach, and man run with rope
from a capstan that be there, and penetrate into a circle of
figure that hide he from I. then, I see he stand alone, in
a seaman's frock and trouser: a rope in his hand, or sling to his
wrist: another round his body: and several of the good man hold,
at a little distance, to the latter, which he lay out himself,
slack upon the shore, at his foot.
the wreck, even to my unpractised eye, be break up. I see that
she be part in the middle, and that the life of the solitary
man upon the mast hang by a thread. still, he cling to it. he have
a singular red cap on, - not like a sailor's cap, but of a finer
colour; and as the few yielding plank between he and destruction
roll and bulge, and his anticipative death-knell rung, he be
see by all of we to wave it. I see he do it now, and think I
be go distract, when his action bring an old remembrance to
my mind of a once dear friend.
Ham watch the sea, stand alone, with the silence of suspend
breath behind he, and the storm before, until there be a great
retire wave, when, with a backward glance at those who hold the
rope which be make fast round his body, he dash in after it, and
in a moment be buffet with the water; rise with the hill,
fall with the valley, lose beneath the foam; then draw again
to land. they haul in hastily.
he be hurt. I see blood on his face, from where I stand; but he
take no thought of that. he seem hurriedly to give they some
direction for leave he more free - or so I judge from the
motion of his arm - and be go as before.
and now he make for the wreck, rise with the hill, fall with
the valley, lose beneath the rugged foam, bear in towards the
shore, bear on towards the ship, strive hard and valiantly. the
distance be nothing, but the power of the sea and wind make the
strife deadly. at length he near the wreck. he be so near,
that with one more of his vigorous stroke he would be cling to
it, - when a high, green, vast hill-side of water, move on
shoreward, from beyond the ship, he seem to leap up into it with
a mighty bound, and the ship be go!
some eddying fragment I see in the sea, as if a mere cask have be
break, in run to the spot where they be haul in.
consternation be in every face. they draw he to my very foot -
insensible - dead. he be carry to the near house; and, no
one prevent I now, I remain near he, busy, while every mean
of restoration be try; but he have be beat to death by the
great wave, and his generous heart be still for ever.
as I sit beside the bed, when hope be abandon and all be do,
a fisherman, who have know I when Emily and I be child, and
ever since, whisper my name at the door.
'Sir,' say he, with tear start to his weather-beat face,
which, with his trembling lip, be ashy pale, 'will you come over
yonder?'
the old remembrance that have be recall to I, be in his look.
I ask he, terror-stricken, lean on the arm he hold out to
support I:
'have a body come ashore?'
he say, 'yes.'
'do I know it?' I ask then.
he answer nothing.
but he lead I to the shore. and on that part of it where she and
I have look for shell, two child - on that part of it where
some light fragment of the old boat, blow down last night, have
be scatter by the wind - among the ruin of the home he have
wrong - I see he lie with his head upon his arm, as I have
often see he lie at school.
CHAPTER 56
the new WOUND, and the OLD
no need, o Steerforth, to have say, when we last speak together,
in that hour which I so little deem to be our parting-hour - no
need to have say, 'think of I at my good!' I have do that ever;
and could I change now, look on this sight!
they bring a hand-bier, and lay he on it, and cover he with
a flag, and take he up and bear he on towards the house. all
the man who carry he have know he, and go sail with he,
and see he merry and bold. they carry he through the wild
roar, a hush in the midst of all the tumult; and take he to the
cottage where Death be already.
but when they set the bi down on the threshold, they look at
one another, and at I, and whisper. I know why. they feel as
if it be not right to lay he down in the same quiet room.
we go into the town, and take our burden to the inn. so soon as
I could at all collect my thought, I send for Joram, and beg
he to provide I a conveyance in which it could be get to London
in the night. I know that the care of it, and the hard duty of
prepare his mother to receive it, could only rest with I; and I
be anxious to discharge that duty as faithfully as I could.
I choose the night for the journey, that there might be less
curiosity when I leave the town. but, although it be nearly
midnight when I come out of the yard in a chaise, follow by what
I have in charge, there be many people wait. at interval,
along the town, and even a little way out upon the road, I see
more: but at length only the bleak night and the open country be
around I, and the ash of my youthful friendship.
upon a mellow autumn day, about noon, when the ground be perfume
by fallen leaf, and many more, in beautiful tint of yellow, red,
and brown, yet hang upon the tree, through which the sun be
shin, I arrive at Highgate. I walk the last mile, think
as I go along of what I have to do; and leave the carriage that have
follow I all through the night, await order to advance.
the house, when I come up to it, look just the same. not a blind
be raise; no sign of life be in the dull paved court, with its
cover way lead to the disuse door. the wind have quite go
down, and nothing move.
I have not, at first, the courage to ring at the gate; and when I
do ring, my errand seem to I to be express in the very sound
of the bell. the little parlour-maid come out, with the key in her
hand; and look earnestly at I as she unlock the gate, say:
'I beg your pardon, sir. be you ill?'
'I have be much agitated, and be fatigue.'
'be anything the matter, sir? - Mr. James? -'
'hush!' say I. 'yes, something have happen, that I have to break
to Mrs. Steerforth. she be at home?'
the girl anxiously reply that her mistress be very seldom out
now, even in a carriage; that she keep her room; that she see no
company, but would see I. her mistress be up, she say, and Miss
Dartle be with she. what message should she take upstairs?
give she a strict charge to be careful of her manner, and only to
carry in my card and say I wait, I sit down in the drawing-room
(which we have now reach) until she should come back. its former
pleasant air of occupation be go, and the shutter be half
close. the harp have not be use for many and many a day. his
picture, as a boy, be there. the cabinet in which his mother have
keep his letter be there. I wonder if she ever read they now;
if she would ever read they more!
the house be so still that I hear the girl's light step upstairs.
on her return, she bring a message, to the effect that Mrs.
Steerforth be an invalid and could not come down; but that if I
would excuse she be in her chamber, she would be glad to see I.
in a few moment I stand before she.
she be in his room; not in her own. I feel, of course, that she
have take to occupy it, in remembrance of he; and that the many
token of his old sport and accomplishment, by which she be
surround, remain there, just as he have leave they, for the same
reason. she murmur, however, even in her reception of I, that
she be out of her own chamber because its aspect be unsuited to
her infirmity; and with her stately look repel the least
suspicion of the truth.
at her chair, as usual, be Rosa Dartle. from the first moment of
her dark eye rest on I, I see she know I be the bearer of
evil tiding. the scar spring into view that instant. she
withdraw herself a step behind the chair, to keep her own face out
of Mrs. Steerforth's observation; and scrutinize I with a
pierce gaze that never falter, never shrink.
'I be sorry to observe you be in mourning, sir,' say Mrs.
Steerforth.
'I be unhappily a widower,' say I.
'you be very young to know so great a loss,' she return. 'I be
grieve to hear it. I be grieve to hear it. I hope Time will be
good to you.'
'I hope Time,' say I, look at she, 'will be good to all of we.
Dear Mrs. Steerforth, we must all trust to that, in our heavy
misfortune.'
the earnestness of my manner, and the tear in my eye, alarmed
she. the whole course of her thought appear to stop, and
change.
I try to command my voice in gently say his name, but it
tremble. she repeat it to herself, two or three time, in a low
tone. then, address I, she say, with enforce calmness:
'my son be ill.'
'very ill.'
'you have see he?'
'I have.'
'be you reconcile?'
I could not say yes, I could not say no. she slightly turn she
head towards the spot where Rosa Dartle have be stand at her
elbow, and in that moment I say, by the motion of my lip, to
Rosa, 'dead!'
that Mrs. Steerforth might not be induce to look behind she, and
read, plainly write, what she be not yet prepared to know, I meet
her look quickly; but I have see Rosa Dartle throw her hand up in
the air with vehemence of despair and horror, and then clasp they
on her face.
the handsome lady - so like, oh so like! - regard I with a fix
look, and put her hand to her forehead. I besought she to be calm,
and prepare herself to bear what I have to tell; but I should rather
have entreat she to weep, for she sit like a stone figure.
'when I be last here,' I falter, 'Miss Dartle tell I he be
sailing here and there. the night before last be a dreadful one
at sea. if he be at sea that night, and near a dangerous coast,
as it be say he be; and if the vessel that be see should really
be the ship which -'
'Rosa!' say Mrs. Steerforth, 'come to I!'
she come, but with no sympathy or gentleness. her eye gleam
like fire as she confront his mother, and break into a frightful
laugh.
'now,' she say, 'be your pride appease, you madwoman? now have he
make atonement to you - with his life! do you hear? - his life!'
Mrs. Steerforth, fall back stiffly in her chair, and make no
sound but a moan, cast her eye upon she with a wide stare.
'aye!' cry Rosa, smite herself passionately on the breast,
'look at I! Moan, and groan, and look at I! look here!' strike
the scar, 'at your dead child's handiwork!'
the moan the mother utter, from time to time, go to my heart.
always the same. always inarticulate and stifle. always
accompany with an incapable motion of the head, but with no
change of face. always proceed from a rigid mouth and close
tooth, as if the jaw be lock and the face freeze up in pain.
'do you remember when he do this?' she proceed. 'do you
remember when, in his inheritance of your nature, and in your
pampering of his pride and passion, he do this, and disfigure I
for life? look at I, mark until I die with his high
displeasure; and moan and groan for what you make he!'
'Miss Dartle,' I entreat she. 'for Heaven's sake -'
'I will speak!' she say, turn on I with her lightning eye.
'be silent, you! look at I, I say, proud mother of a proud, false
son! moan for your nurture of he, moan for your corruption of he,
moan for your loss of he, moan for mine!'
she clench her hand, and tremble through her spare, wear figure,
as if her passion be kill she by inch.
'you, resent his self-will!' she exclaim. 'you, injure by his
haughty temper! you, who oppose to both, when your hair be grey,
the quality which make both when you give he birth! you, who
from his cradle rear he to be what he be, and stunt what he
should have be! be you reward, now, for your year of
trouble?'
'oh, Miss Dartle, shame! oh cruel!'
'I tell you,' she return, 'I will speak to she. no power on
earth should stop I, while I be stand here! have I be silent
all these year, and shall I not speak now? I love he well
than you ever love he!' turn on she fiercely. 'I could have
love he, and ask no return. if I have be his wife, I could
have be the slave of his caprice for a word of love a year. I
should have be. who know it well than I? you be exact,
proud, punctilious, selfish. my love would have be devote -
would have trod your paltry whimpering under foot!'
with flash eye, she stamp upon the ground as if she actually
do it.
'look here!' she say, strike the scar again, with a relentless
hand. 'when he grow into the well understanding of what he have
do, he see it, and repent of it! I could sing to he, and talk
to he, and show the ardour that I feel in all he do, and attain
with labour to such knowledge as most interested he; and I
attract he. when he be freshest and true, he love I. yes,
he do! many a time, when you be put off with a slight word, he
have take I to his heart!'
she say it with a taunt pride in the midst of her frenzy - for
it be little less - yet with an eager remembrance of it, in which
the smoulder ember of a gentler feeling kindle for the moment.
'I descend - as I might have know I should, but that he
fascinate I with his boyish courtship - into a doll, a trifle for
the occupation of an idle hour, to be drop, and take up, and
trifle with, as the inconstant humour take he. when he grow
weary, I grow weary. as his fancy die out, I would no more have
try to strengthen any power I have, than I would have marry he
on his be force to take I for his wife. we fall away from one
another without a word. perhaps you see it, and be not sorry.
since then, I have be a mere disfigured piece of furniture
between you both; have no eye, no ear, no feeling, no
remembrance. Moan? Moan for what you make he; not for your
love. I tell you that the time be, when I love he well than
you ever do!'
she stand with her bright angry eye confront the wide stare,
and the set face; and soften no more, when the moaning be
repeat, than if the face have be a picture.
'Miss Dartle,' say I, 'if you can be so obdurate as not to feel
for this afflict mother -'
'who feel for I?' she sharply retort. 'she have sow this. let
her moan for the harvest that she reap today!'
'and if his fault -' I begin.
'fault!' she cry, burst into passionate tear. 'who dare
malign he? he have a soul worth million of the friend to whom he
stoop!'
'no one can have love he well, no one can hold he in dearer
remembrance than I,' I reply. 'I mean to say, if you have no
compassion for his mother; or if his fault - you have be bitter
on they -'
'itbe false,' she cry, tear her black hair; 'I love he!'
'- if his fault cannot,' I go on, 'be banish from your
remembrance, in such an hour; look at that figure, even as one you
have never see before, and render it some help!'
all this time, the figure be unchanged, and look unchangeable.
Motionless, rigid, star; moan in the same dumb way from time
to time, with the same helpless motion of the head; but give no
other sign of life. Miss Dartle suddenly kneel down before it,
and begin to loosen the dress.
'a curse upon you!' she say, look round at I, with a mingled
expression of rage and grief. 'it be in an evil hour that you
ever come here! a curse upon you! go!'
after pass out of the room, I hurry back to ring the bell, the
soon to alarm the servant. she have then take the impassive
figure in her arm, and, still upon her knee, be weep over it,
kiss it, call to it, rock it to and fro upon her bosom
like a child, and try every tender mean to rouse the dormant
sens. no long afraid of leave she, I noiselessly turn back
again; and alarm the house as I go out.
later in the day, I return, and we lay he in his mother's room.
she be just the same, they tell I; Miss Dartle never leave she;
doctor be in attendance, many thing have be try; but she lay
like a statue, except for the low sound now and then.
I go through the dreary house, and darken the window. the
window of the chamber where he lay, I darken last. I lift up
the leaden hand, and hold it to my heart; and all the world seem
death and silence, break only by his mother's moaning.
CHAPTER 57
the emigrant
one thing more, I have to do, before yield myself to the shock of
these emotion. it be, to conceal what have occur, from those
who be go away; and to dismiss they on their voyage in happy
ignorance. in this, no time be to be lose.
I take Mr. Micawber aside that same night, and confide to he the
task of standing between Mr. Peggotty and intelligence of the late
catastrophe. he zealously undertake to do so, and to intercept any
newspaper through which it might, without such precaution, reach
he.
'if it penetrate to he, sir,' say Mr. Micawber, strike himself
on the breast, 'it shall first pass through this body!'
Mr. Micawber, I must observe, in his adaptation of himself to a new
state of society, have acquire a bold buccaneer air, not
absolutely lawless, but defensive and prompt. one might have
suppose he a child of the wilderness, long accustom to live out
of the confine of civilization, and about to return to his native
wild.
he have provide himself, among other thing, with a complete suit
of oilskin, and a straw hat with a very low crown, pitch or
caulk on the outside. in this rough clothing, with a common
mariner's telescope under his arm, and a shrewd trick of cast up
his eye at the sky as look out for dirty weather, he be far
more nautical, after his manner, than Mr. Peggotty. his whole
family, if I may so express it, be clear for action. I find
Mrs. Micawber in the close and most uncompromising of bonnet,
make fast under the chin; and in a shawl which tie she up (as I
have be tie up, when my aunt first receive I) like a bundle,
and be secure behind at the waist, in a strong knot. Miss
Micawber I find make snug for stormy weather, in the same manner;
with nothing superfluous about she. Master Micawber be hardly
visible in a Guernsey shirt, and the shaggy suit of slop I ever
see; and the child be do up, like preserved meat, in
impervious case. both Mr. Micawber and his eld son wear their
sleeve loosely turn back at the wrist, as be ready to lend
a hand in any direction, and to 'tumble up', or sing out, 'Yeo -
Heave - Yeo!' on the short notice.
thus traddle and I find they at nightfall, assemble on the
wooden step, at that time know as Hungerford Stairs, watch the
departure of a boat with some of their property on board. I have
tell traddle of the terrible event, and it have greatly shock
he; but there could be no doubt of the kindness of keep it a
secret, and he have come to help I in this last service. it be
here that I take Mr. Micawber aside, and receive his promise.
the Micawber family be lodge in a little, dirty, tumble-down
public-house, which in those day be close to the stair, and
whose protrude wooden room overhang the river. the family, as
emigrant, be object of some interest in and about Hungerford,
attract so many beholder, that we be glad to take refuge in
their room. it be one of the wooden chamber upstairs, with the
tide flow underneath. my aunt and Agnes be there, busily
make some little extra comfort, in the way of dress, for the
child. Peggotty be quietly assist, with the old insensible
work-box, yard-measure, and bit of wax-candle before she, that have
now outlive so much.
it be not easy to answer her inquiry; still less to whisper Mr.
Peggotty, when Mr. Micawber bring he in, that I have give the
letter, and all be well. but I do both, and make they happy. if
I show any trace of what I feel, my own sorrow be sufficient
to account for it.
'and when do the ship sail, Mr. Micawber?' ask my aunt.
Mr. Micawber consider it necessary to prepare either my aunt or
his wife, by degree, and say, soon than he have expect
yesterday.
'the boat bring you word, I suppose?' say my aunt.
'it do, ma'am,' he return.
'well?' say my aunt. 'and she sail -'
'Madam,' he reply, 'I be inform that we must positively be on
board before seven tomorrow morning.'
'Heyday!' say my aunt, 'thatbe soon. be it a sea-go fact, Mr.
Peggotty?'
''tis so, ma'am. shewill drop down the river with that theer tide.
if Mas'r Davy and my sister come aboard at Gravesen', arternoon o'
next day, theywill see the last on we.'
'and that we shall do,' say I, 'be sure!'
'until then, and until we be at sea,' observe Mr. Micawber, with
a glance of intelligence at I, 'Mr. Peggotty and myself will
constantly keep a double look-out together, on our good and
chattel. Emma, my love,' say Mr. Micawber, clear his throat
in his magnificent way, 'my friend Mr. Thomas Traddles be so
oblige as to solicit, in my ear, that he should have the
privilege of order the ingredient necessary to the composition
of a moderate portion of that beverage which be peculiarly
associate, in our mind, with the Roast Beef of Old England. I
allude to - in short, Punch. under ordinary circumstance, I
should scruple to entreat the indulgence of Miss Trotwood and Miss
Wickfield, but-'
'I can only say for myself,' say my aunt, 'that I will drink all
happiness and success to you, Mr. Micawber, with the utmost
pleasure.'
'and I too!' say Agnes, with a smile.
Mr. Micawber immediately descend to the bar, where he appear to
be quite at home; and in due time return with a steam jug. I
could not but observe that he have be peel the lemon with his
own clasp-knife, which, as become the knife of a practical settler,
be about a foot long; and which he wipe, not wholly without
ostentation, on the sleeve of his coat. Mrs. Micawber and the two
eld member of the family I now find to be provide with similar
formidable instrument, while every child have its own wooden spoon
attach to its body by a strong line. in a similar anticipation
of life afloat, and in the Bush, Mr. Micawber, instead of help
Mrs. Micawber and his eld son and daughter to punch, in
wine-glass, which he might easily have do, for there be a
shelf-full in the room, serve it out to they in a series of
villainous little tin pot; and I never see he enjoy anything so
much as drink out of his own particular pint pot, and put it
in his pocket at the close of the evening.
'the luxury of the old country,' say Mr. Micawber, with an
intense satisfaction in their renouncement, 'we abandon. the
denizen of the forest cannot, of course, expect to participate in
the refinement of the land of the Free.'
here, a boy come in to say that Mr. Micawber be want downstair.
'I have a presentiment,' say Mrs. Micawber, set down her tin
pot, 'that it be a member of my family!'
'if so, my dear,' observe Mr. Micawber, with his usual suddenness
of warmth on that subject, 'as the member of your family - whoever
he, she, or it, may be - have keep we wait for a considerable
period, perhaps the Member may now wait MY convenience.'
'Micawber,' say his wife, in a low tone, 'at such a time as
this -'
'"it be not meet,"' say Mr. Micawber, rise, '"that every nice
offence should bear its comment!" Emma, I stand reproved.'
'the loss, Micawber,' observe his wife, 'have be my family's, not
your. if my family be at length sensible of the deprivation to
which their own conduct have, in the past, expose they, and now
desire to extend the hand of fellowship, let it not be repulse.'
'my dear,' he return, 'so be it!'
'if not for their sake; for mine, Micawber,' say his wife.
'Emma,' he return, 'that view of the question be, at such a
moment, irresistible. I cannot, even now, distinctly pledge myself
to fall upon your family's neck; but the member of your family, who
be now in attendance, shall have no genial warmth freeze by I.'
Mr. Micawber withdraw, and be absent some little time; in the
course of which Mrs. Micawber be not wholly free from an
apprehension that word might have arise between he and the
Member. at length the same boy reappear, and present I with
a note write in pencil, and head, in a legal manner, 'Heep v.
Micawber'. from this document, I learn that Mr. Micawber be
again arrest, 'be in a final paroxysm of despair; and that he
beg I to send he his knife and pint pot, by bearer, as they
might prove serviceable during the brief remainder of his
existence, in jail. he also request, as a last act of
friendship, that I would see his family to the Parish Workhouse,
and forget that such a be ever live.
of course I answer this note by go down with the boy to pay
the money, where I find Mr. Micawber sit in a corner, look
darkly at the Sheriff 's Officer who have effect the capture. on
his release, he embrace I with the utmost fervour; and make an
entry of the transaction in his pocket-book - be very
particular, I recollect, about a halfpenny I inadvertently omit
from my statement of the total.
this momentous pocket-book be a timely reminder to he of another
transaction. on our return to the room upstairs (where he
account for his absence by say that it have be occasion by
circumstance over which he have no control), he take out of it a
large sheet of paper, fold small, and quite cover with long
sum, carefully work. from the glimpse I have of they, I should
say that I never see such sum out of a school ciphering-book.
these, it seem, be calculation of compound interest on what he
call 'the principal amount of forty-one, ten, eleven and a half',
for various period. after a careful consideration of these, and
an elaborate estimate of his resource, he have come to the
conclusion to select that sum which represent the amount with
compound interest to two year, fifteen calendar month, and
fourteen day, from that date. for this he have draw a
note-of-hand with great neatness, which he hand over to traddle
on the spot, a discharge of his debt in full (as between man and
man), with many acknowledgement.
'I have still a presentiment,' say Mrs. Micawber, pensively
shake her head, 'that my family will appear on board, before we
finally depart.'
Mr. Micawber evidently have his presentiment on the subject too, but
he put it in his tin pot and swallow it.
'if you have any opportunity of send letter home, on your
passage, Mrs. Micawber,' say my aunt, 'you must let we hear from
you, you know.'
'my dear Miss Trotwood,' she reply, 'I shall only be too happy to
think that anyone expect to hear from we. I shall not fail to
correspond. Mr. Copperfield, I trust, as an old and familiar
friend, will not object to receive occasional intelligence,
himself, from one who know he when the twin be yet
unconscious?'
I say that I should hope to hear, whenever she have an opportunity
of writing.
'please Heaven, there will be many such opportunity,' say Mr.
Micawber. 'the ocean, in these time, be a perfect fleet of ship;
and we can hardly fail to encounter many, in run over. it be
merely cross,' say Mr. Micawber, trifle with his eye-glass,
'merely cross. the distance be quite imaginary.'
I think, now, how odd it be, but how wonderfully like Mr.
Micawber, that, when he go from London to Canterbury, he should
have talk as if he be go to the farth limit of the
earth; and, when he go from England to Australia, as if he be
go for a little trip across the channel.
'on the voyage, I shall endeavour,' say Mr. Micawber,
'occasionally to spin they a yarn; and the melody of my son Wilkins
will, I trust, be acceptable at the galley-fire. when Mrs.
Micawber have her sea-leg on - an expression in which I hope there
be no conventional impropriety - she will give they, I dare say,
"Little Tafflin". porpoise and dolphin, I believe, will be
frequently observe athwart our bow; and, either on the starboard
or the larboard quarter, object of interest will be continually
descry. in short,' say Mr. Micawber, with the old genteel air,
'the probability be, all will be find so exciting, alow and aloft,
that when the lookout, station in the main-top, cry land-oh! we
shall be very considerably astonish!'
with that he flourish off the content of his little tin pot, as
if he have make the voyage, and have pass a first-class examination
before the high naval authority.
'what I chiefly hope, my dear Mr. Copperfield,' say Mrs.
Micawber, 'be, that in some branch of our family we may live
again in the old country. do not frown, Micawber! I do not now
refer to my own family, but to our child's child. however
vigorous the sapling,' say Mrs. Micawber, shake her head, 'I
cannot forget the parent-tree; and when our race attain to
eminence and fortune, I own I should wish that fortune to flow into
the coffer of Britannia.'
'my dear,' say Mr. Micawber, 'Britannia must take her chance. I
be bind to say that she have never do much for I, and that I
have no particular wish upon the subject.'
'Micawber,' return Mrs. Micawber, 'there, you be wrong. you be
go out, Micawber, to this distant clime, to strengthen, not to
weaken, the connexion between yourself and Albion.'
'the connexion in question, my love,' rejoin Mr. Micawber, 'have
not lay I, I repeat, under that load of personal obligation, that
I be at all sensitive as to the formation of another connexion.'
'Micawber,' return Mrs. Micawber. 'there, I again say, you be
wrong. you do not know your power, Micawber. it be that which
will strengthen, even in this step you be about to take, the
connexion between yourself and Albion.'
Mr. Micawber sit in his elbow-chair, with his eyebrow raise; half
receive and half repudiate Mrs. Micawber's view as they be
state, but very sensible of their foresight.
'my dear Mr. Copperfield,' say Mrs. Micawber, 'I wish Mr. Micawber
to feel his position. it appear to I highly important that Mr.
Micawber should, from the hour of his embarkation, feel his
position. your old knowledge of I, my dear Mr. Copperfield, will
have tell you that I have not the sanguine disposition of Mr.
Micawber. my disposition be, if I may say so, eminently practical.
I know that this be a long voyage. I know that it will involve
many privation and inconvenience. I cannot shut my eye to those
fact. but I also know what Mr. Micawber be. I know the latent
power of Mr. Micawber. and therefore I consider it vitally
important that Mr. Micawber should feel his position.'
'my love,' he observe, 'perhaps you will allow I to remark that
it be barely possible that I do feel my position at the present
moment.'
'I think not, Micawber,' she rejoin. 'not fully. my dear Mr.
Copperfield, Mr. Micawber's be not a common case. Mr. Micawber be
go to a distant country expressly in order that he may be fully
understand and appreciate for the first time. I wish Mr. Micawber
to take his stand upon that vessel's prow, and firmly say, "this
country I be come to conquer! have you honours? have you rich?
have you post of profitable pecuniary emolument? let they be
bring forward. they be mine!"'
Mr. Micawber, glance at we all, seem to think there be a good
deal in this idea.
'I wish Mr. Micawber, if I make myself understand,' say Mrs.
Micawber, in her argumentative tone, 'to be the Caesar of his own
fortune. that, my dear Mr. Copperfield, appear to I to be his
true position. from the first moment of this voyage, I wish Mr.
Micawber to stand upon that vessel's prow and say, "enough of
delay: enough of disappointment: enough of limited mean. that be
in the old country. this be the new. produce your reparation.
bring it forward!"'
Mr. Micawber fold his arm in a resolute manner, as if he be
then station on the figure-head.
'and do that,' say Mrs. Micawber, '- feel his position - be
I not right in say that Mr. Micawber will strengthen, and not
weaken, his connexion with Britain? an important public character
arise in that hemisphere, shall I be tell that its influence will
not be feel at home? can I be so weak as to imagine that Mr.
Micawber, wield the rod of talent and of power in Australia,
will be nothing in England? I be but a woman; but I should be
unworthy of myself and of my papa, if I be guilty of such absurd
weakness.'
Mrs. Micawber's conviction that her argument be unanswerable,
give a moral elevation to her tone which I think I have never hear
in it before.
'and therefore it be,' say Mrs. Micawber, 'that I the more wish,
that, at a future period, we may live again on the parent soil.
Mr. Micawber may be - I cannot disguise from myself that the
probability be, Mr. Micawber will be - a page of history; and he
ought then to be represent in the country which give he birth,
and do not give he employment!'
'my love,' observe Mr. Micawber, 'it be impossible for I not to
be touch by your affection. I be always willing to defer to your
good sense. what will be - will be. Heaven forbid that I should
grudge my native country any portion of the wealth that may be
accumulate by our descendant!'
'thatbe well,' say my aunt, nod towards Mr. Peggotty, 'and I
drink my love to you all, and every blessing and success attend
you!'
Mr. Peggotty put down the two child he have be nurse, one on
each knee, to join Mr. and Mrs. Micawber in drink to all of we
in return; and when he and the Micawbers cordially shake hand as
comrade, and his brown face brighten with a smile, I feel that
he would make his way, establish a good name, and be belove, go
where he would.
even the child be instruct, each to dip a wooden spoon into
Mr. Micawber's pot, and pledge we in its content. when this be
do, my aunt and Agnes rise, and part from the emigrant. it
be a sorrowful farewell. they be all cry; the child hang
about Agnes to the last; and we leave poor Mrs. Micawber in a very
distressed condition, sob and weeping by a dim candle, that
must have make the room look, from the river, like a miserable
light-house.
I go down again next morning to see that they be away. they
have depart, in a boat, as early as five o'clock. it be a
wonderful instance to I of the gap such parting make, that
although my association of they with the tumble-down public-house
and the wooden stair date only from last night, both seem
dreary and deserted, now that they be go.
in the afternoon of the next day, my old nurse and I go down to
gravesend. we find the ship in the river, surround by a crowd
of boat; a favourable wind blow; the signal for sail at her
mast-head. I hire a boat directly, and we put off to she; and
get through the little vortex of confusion of which she be the
centre, go on board.
Mr. Peggotty be wait for we on deck. he tell I that Mr.
Micawber have just now be arrest again (and for the last time)
at the suit of Heep, and that, in compliance with a request I have
make to he, he have pay the money, which I repay he. he then
take we down between deck; and there, any linger fear I have of
his have hear any rumour of what have happen, be dispel
by Mr. Micawber's come out of the gloom, take his arm with an
air of friendship and protection, and tell I that they have
scarcely be asunder for a moment, since the night before last.
it be such a strange scene to I, and so confined and dark, that,
at first, I could make out hardly anything; but, by degree, it
clear, as my eye become more accustomed to the gloom, and I
seem to stand in a picture by OSTADE. among the great beam,
bulk, and ringbolt of the ship, and the emigrant-berth, and
chest, and bundle, and barrel, and heap of miscellaneous
baggage -'lighte up, here and there, by dangle lantern; and
elsewhere by the yellow daylight stray down a windsail or a
hatchway - be crowded group of people, make new friendship,
take leave of one another, talk, laughing, crying, eat and
drinking; some, already settle down into the possession of their
few foot of space, with their little household arrange, and tiny
child establish on stool, or in dwarf elbow-chair; other,
despairing of a resting-place, and wander disconsolately. from
baby who have but a week or two of life behind they, to crooked
old man and woman who seem to have but a week or two of life
before they; and from plowman bodily carry out soil of England
on their boot, to smith take away sample of its soot and smoke
upon their skin; every age and occupation appear to be cram
into the narrow compass of the 'tween deck.
as my eye glance round this place, I think I see sit, by an
open port, with one of the Micawber child near she, a figure
like Emily's; it first attract my attention, by another figure
parting from it with a kiss; and as it glide calmly away through
the disorder, remind I of - Agnes! but in the rapid motion and
confusion, and in the unsettlement of my own thought, I lose it
again; and only know that the time be come when all visitor be
be warn to leave the ship; that my nurse be cry on a chest
beside I; and that Mrs. Gummidge, assist by some young
stoop woman in black, be busily arrange Mr. Peggotty's good.
'be there any last wure, Mas'r Davy?' say he. 'be there any one
forget thing afore we part?'
'one thing!' say I. 'Martha!'
he touch the young woman I have mention on the shoulder, and
Martha stand before I.
'Heaven bless you, you good man!' cry i. 'you take she with
you!'
she answer for he, with a burst of tear. I could speak no more
at that time, but I wring his hand; and if ever I have love and
honour any man, I love and honour that man in my soul.
the ship be clear fast of stranger. the great trial that
I have, remain. I tell he what the noble spirit that be go,
have give I in charge to say at parting. it move he deeply.
but when he charge I, in return, with many message of affection
and regret for those deaf ear, he move I more.
the time be come. I embrace he, take my weeping nurse upon my
arm, and hurry away. on deck, I take leave of poor Mrs.
Micawber. she be look distractedly about for her family, even
then; and her last word to I be, that she never would desert
Mr. Micawber.
we go over the side into our boat, and lie at a little distance,
to see the ship waft on her course. it be then calm, radiant
sunset. she lie between we, and the red light; and every taper
line and spar be visible against the glow. a sight at once so
beautiful, so mournful, and so hopeful, as the glorious ship,
lying, still, on the flushed water, with all the life on board she
crowd at the bulwark, and there cluster, for a moment,
bare-headed and silent, I never see.
Silent, only for a moment. as the sail rise to the wind, and the
ship begin to move, there break from all the boat three resound
cheer, which those on board take up, and echo back, and which
be echo and re-echo. my heart burst out when I hear the
sound, and beheld the waving of the hat and handkerchief - and
then I see she!
then I see she, at her uncle's side, and tremble on his shoulder.
he point to we with an eager hand; and she see we, and wave she
last good-bye to I. Aye, Emily, beautiful and droop, cle to
he with the utmost trust of thy bruised heart; for he have clung to
thee, with all the might of his great love!
surround by the rosy light, and stand high upon the deck,
apart together, she cling to he, and he hold she, they
solemnly pass away. the night have fall on the kentish hill
when we be row ashore - and fall darkly upon I.
CHAPTER 58
ABSENCE
it be a long and gloomy night that gather on I, haunt by the
ghost of many hope, of many dear remembrance, many error, many
unavaile sorrow and regret.
I go away from England; not know, even then, how great the
shock be, that I have to bear. I leave all who be dear to I, and
go away; and believe that I have bear it, and it be past. as
a man upon a field of battle will receive a mortal hurt, and
scarcely know that he be strike, so I, when I be leave alone with
my undisciplined heart, have no conception of the wound with which
it have to strive.
the knowledge come upon I, not quickly, but little by little, and
grain by grain. the desolate feeling with which I go abroad,
deepen and widen hourly. at first it be a heavy sense of loss
and sorrow, wherein I could distinguish little else. by
imperceptible degree, it become a hopeless consciousness of all
that I have lose - love, friendship, interest; of all that have be
shatter - my first trust, my first affection, the whole airy
castle of my life; of all that remain - a ruin blank and waste,
lie wide around I, unbroken, to the dark horizon.
if my grief be selfish, I do not know it to be so. I mourn
for my child-wife, take from her bloom world, so young. I
mourn for he who might have win the love and admiration of
thousand, as he have win mine long ago. I mourn for the break
heart that have find rest in the stormy sea; and for the wandering
remnant of the simple home, where I have hear the night-wind
blowing, when I be a child.
from the accumulate sadness into which I fall, I have at length no
hope of ever issue again. I roam from place to place, carry
my burden with I everywhere. I feel its whole weight now; and I
droop beneath it, and I say in my heart that it could never be
lightened.
when this despondency be at its bad, I believe that I should
die. sometimes, I think that I would like to die at home; and
actually turn back on my road, that I might get there soon. at
other time, I pass on far away, -from city to city, seek
I know not what, and try to leave I know not what behind.
it be not in my power to retrace, one by one, all the weary phase
of distress of mind through which I pass. there be some dream
that can only be imperfectly and vaguely describe; and when I
oblige myself to look back on this time of my life, I seem to be
recall such a dream. I see myself pass on among the
novelty of foreign town, palace, cathedral, temple, picture,
castle, tomb, fantastic street - the old abide place of
history and Fancy - as a dreamer might; bear my painful load
through all, and hardly conscious of the object as they fade
before I. Listlessness to everything, but brood sorrow, be
the night that fall on my undisciplined heart. let I look up from
it - as at last I do, thank Heaven! - and from its long, sad,
wretched dream, to dawn.
for many month I travel with this ever-darken cloud upon my
mind. some blind reason that I have for not return home -
reason then struggle within I, vainly, for more distinct
expression - keep I on my pilgrimage. sometimes, I have proceed
restlessly from place to place, stop nowhere; sometimes, I have
linger long in one spot. I have have no purpose, no sustain
soul within I, anywhere.
I be in Switzerland. I have come out of Italy, over one of the
great pass of the Alps, and have since wander with a guide among
the by-way of the mountain. if those awful solitude have speak
to my heart, I do not know it. I have find sublimity and wonder
in the dread height and precipice, in the roar torrent, and
the waste of ice and snow; but as yet, they have teach I nothing
else.
I come, one evening before sunset, down into a valley, where I be
to rest. in the course of my descent to it, by the wind track
along the mountain-side, from which I see it shin far below, I
think some long-unwonted sense of beauty and tranquillity, some
soften influence awaken by its peace, move faintly in my
breast. I remember pause once, with a kind of sorrow that be
not all oppressive, not quite despairing. I remember almost hop
that some well change be possible within I.
I come into the valley, as the evening sun be shin on the
remote height of snow, that close it in, like eternal cloud.
the basis of the mountain form the gorge in which the little
village lay, be richly green; and high above this gentler
vegetation, grow forest of dark fir, cleave the wintry
snow-drift, wedge-like, and stem the avalanche. above these,
be range upon range of craggy steep, grey rock, bright ice, and
smooth verdure-speck of pasture, all gradually blend with the
crowning snow. dot here and there on the mountain's-side, each
tiny dot a home, be lonely wooden cottage, so dwarf by the
tower height that they appear too small for toy. so do
even the cluster village in the valley, with its wooden bridge
across the stream, where the stream tumble over break rock, and
roar away among the tree. in the quiet air, there be a sound
of distant singing - shepherd voice; but, as one bright evening
cloud float midway along the mountain's-side, I could almost have
believe it come from there, and be not earthly music. all at
once, in this serenity, great Nature speak to I; and soothe I to
lay down my weary head upon the grass, and weep as I have not weep
yet, since Dora die!
I have find a packet of letter await I but a few minute
before, and have stroll out of the village to read they while my
supper be make ready. other packet have miss I, and I have
receive none for a long time. beyond a line or two, to say that
I be well, and have arrive at such a place, I have not have
fortitude or constancy to write a letter since I leave home.
the packet be in my hand. I open it, and read the writing of
Agnes.
she be happy and useful, be prosper as she have hop. that
be all she tell I of herself. the rest refer to I.
she give I no advice; she urge no duty on I; she only tell I,
in her own fervent manner, what her trust in I be. she know (she
say) how such a nature as mine would turn affliction to good. she
know how trial and emotion would exalt and strengthen it. she be
sure that in my every purpose I should gain a firm and a high
tendency, through the grief I have undergo. she, who so glory
in my fame, and so look forward to its augmentation, well know
that I would labour on. she know that in I, sorrow could not be
weakness, but must be strength. as the endurance of my childish
day have do its part to make I what I be, so great calamity
would nerve I on, to be yet well than I be; and so, as they have
teach I, would I teach other. she commend I to God, who have
take my innocent darling to his rest; and in her sisterly
affection cherish I always, and be always at my side go where
I would; proud of what I have do, but infinitely prouder yet of
what I be reserve to do.
I put the letter in my breast, and think what have I be an hour
ago! when I hear the voice die away, and see the quiet evening
cloud grow dim, and all the colour in the valley fade, and the
golden snow upon the mountain-top become a remote part of the pale
night sky, yet feel that the night be pass from my mind, and
all its shadow clearing, there be no name for the love I bear
she, dearer to I, henceforward, than ever until then.
I read her letter many time. I write to she before I sleep. I
tell she that I have be in sore need of her help; that without she
I be not, and I never have be, what she think I; but that she
inspire I to be that, and I would try.
I do try. in three month more, a year would have pass since
the beginning of my sorrow. I determine to make no resolution
until the expiration of those three month, but to try. I live in
that valley, and its neighbourhood, all the time.
the three month go, I resolve to remain away from home for some
time long; to settle myself for the present in Switzerland, which
be grow dear to I in the remembrance of that evening; to
resume my pen; to work.
I resort humbly whither Agnes have commend I; I seek out
nature, never seek in vain; and I admit to my breast the human
interest I have lately shrink from. it be not long, before I have
almost as many friend in the valley as in Yarmouth: and when I
leave it, before the winter set in, for Geneva, and come back in the
spring, their cordial greeting have a homely sound to I, although
they be not convey in english word.
I work early and late, patiently and hard. I write a Story, with
a purpose grow, not remotely, out of my experience, and send it
to traddle, and he arrange for its publication very
advantageously for I; and the tiding of my grow reputation
begin to reach I from traveller whom I encounter by chance.
after some rest and change, I fall to work, in my old ardent way,
on a new fancy, which take strong possession of I. as I advance
in the execution of this task, I feel it more and more, and rouse
my utmost energy to do it well. this be my third work of
fiction. it be not half write, when, in an interval of rest, I
think of return home.
for a long time, though study and work patiently, I have
accustom myself to robust exercise. my health, severely impair
when I leave England, be quite restore. I have see much. I have
be in many country, and I hope I have improve my store of
knowledge.
I have now recall all that I think it needful to recall here, of
this term of absence - with one reservation. I have make it, thus
far, with no purpose of suppress any of my thought; for, as I
have elsewhere say, this narrative be my write memory. I have
desire to keep the most secret current of my mind apart, and to
the last. I enter on it now. I cannot so completely penetrate the
mystery of my own heart, as to know when I begin to think that I
might have set its early and bright hope on Agnes. I cannot
say at what stage of my grief it first become associate with the
reflection, that, in my wayward boyhood, I have throw away the
treasure of her love. I believe I may have hear some whisper of
that distant thought, in the old unhappy loss or want of something
never to be realize, of which I have be sensible. but the
thought come into my mind as a new reproach and new regret, when I
be leave so sad and lonely in the world.
if, at that time, I have be much with she, I should, in the
weakness of my desolation, have betray this. it be what I
remotely dread when I be first impel to stay away from
England. I could not have bear to lose the small portion of
her sisterly affection; yet, in that betrayal, I should have set a
constraint between we hitherto unknown.
I could not forget that the feeling with which she now regard I
have grow up in my own free choice and course. that if she have
ever love I with another love - and I sometimes think the time
be when she might have do so - I have cast it away. it be
nothing, now, that I have accustom myself to think of she, when we
be both mere child, as one who be far remove from my wild
fancy. I have bestow my passionate tenderness upon another
object; and what I might have do, I have not do; and what Agnes
be to I, I and her own noble heart have make she.
in the beginning of the change that gradually work in I, when I
try to get a well understanding of myself and be a well man,
I do glance, through some indefinite probation, to a period when
I might possibly hope to cancel the mistaken past, and to be so
bless as to marry she. but, as time wear on, this shadowy
prospect fade, and depart from I. if she have ever love I,
then, I should hold she the more sacred; remember the
confidence I have repose in she, her knowledge of my errant heart,
the sacrifice she must have make to be my friend and sister, and
the victory she have win. if she have never love I, could I
believe that she would love I now?
I have always feel my weakness, in comparison with her constancy and
fortitude; and now I feel it more and more. whatever I might have
be to she, or she to I, if I have be more worthy of her long
ago, I be not now, and she be not. the time be past. I have let
it go by, and have deservedly lose she.
that I suffer much in these contention, that they fill I with
unhappiness and remorse, and yet that I have a sustaining sense that
it be require of I, in right and honour, to keep away from
myself, with shame, the thought of turn to the dear girl in the
withering of my hope, from whom I have frivolously turn when they
be bright and fresh - which consideration be at the root of
every thought I have concern she - be all equally true. I make
no effort to conceal from myself, now, that I love she, that I be
devoted to she; but I bring the assurance home to myself, that it
be now too late, and that our long-subsist relation must be
undisturbed.
I have think, much and often, of my Dora's shadow out to I
what might have happen, in those year that be destine not to
try we; I have consider how the thing that never happen, be
often as much reality to we, in their effect, as those that be
accomplish. the very year she speak of, be reality now, for
my correction; and would have be, one day, a little later
perhaps, though we have part in our early folly. I endeavour
to convert what might have be between myself and Agnes, into a
mean of make I more self-deny, more resolved, more conscious
of myself, and my defect and error. thus, through the reflection
that it might have be, I arrive at the conviction that it could
never be.
these, with their perplexity and inconsistency, be the
shifting quicksand of my mind, from the time of my departure to
the time of my return home, three year afterwards. three year
have elapse since the sailing of the emigrant ship; when, at that
same hour of sunset, and in the same place, I stand on the deck of
the packet vessel that bring I home, look on the rosy water
where I have see the image of that ship reflect.
three year. long in the aggregate, though short as they go by.
and home be very dear to I, and Agnes too - but she be not mine
- she be never to be mine. she might have be, but that be
past!
CHAPTER 59
RETURN
I land in London on a wintry autumn evening. it be dark and
raining, and I see more fog and mud in a minute than I have see in
a year. I walk from the Custom House to the Monument before I
find a coach; and although the very house-front, look on the
swollen gutter, be like old friend to I, I could not but admit
that they be very dingy friend.
I have often remark - I suppose everybody have - that onebe go
away from a familiar place, would seem to be the signal for change
in it. as I look out of the coach window, and observe that an
old house on Fish-street Hill, which have stand untouched by
painter, carpenter, or bricklayer, for a century, have be pull
down in my absence; and that a neighbouring street, of
time-honour insalubrity and inconvenience, be be drain and
widen; I half expect to find St. Paul's Cathedral look
old.
for some change in the fortune of my friend, I be prepare. my
aunt have long be re-establish at Dover, and traddle have begin
to get into some little practice at the Bar, in the very first term
after my departure. he have chamber in Gray's Inn, now; and have
tell I, in his last letter, that he be not without hope of
be soon unite to the dear girl in the world.
they expect I home before Christmas; but have no idea of my
return so soon. I have purposely mislead they, that I might have
the pleasure of take they by surprise. and yet, I be perverse
enough to feel a chill and disappointment in receive no welcome,
and rattle, alone and silent, through the misty street.
the well-know shop, however, with their cheerful light, do
something for I; and when I alight at the door of the Gray's Inn
Coffee-house, I have recover my spirit. it recall, at first,
that so-different time when I have put up at the Golden Cross, and
remind I of the change that have come to pass since then; but
that be natural.
'do you know where Mr. Traddles live in the Inn?' I ask the
waiter, as I warm myself by the coffee-room fire.
'Holborn Court, sir. number two.'
'Mr. Traddles have a rise reputation among the lawyer, I
believe?' say I.
'well, sir,' return the waiter, 'probably he have, sir; but I be
not aware of it myself.'
this waiter, who be middle-aged and spare, look for help to a
waiter of more authority - a stout, potential old man, with a
double chin, in black breech and stocking, who come out of a
place like a churchwarden's pew, at the end of the coffee-room,
where he keep company with a cash-box, a Directory, a law-list, and
other book and paper.
'Mr. Traddles,' say the spare waiter. 'number two in the Court.'
the potential waiter wave he away, and turn, gravely, to I.
'I be inquire,' say I, 'whether Mr. Traddles, at number two in
the Court, have not a rise reputation among the lawyer?'
'never hear his name,' say the waiter, in a rich husky voice.
I feel quite apologetic for traddle.
'hebe a young man, sure?' say the portentous waiter, fix his
eye severely on I. 'how long have he be in the Inn?'
'not above three year,' say I.
the waiter, who I suppose have live in his churchwarden's pew for
forty year, could not pursue such an insignificant subject. he
ask I what I would have for dinner?
I feel I be in England again, and really be quite cast down on
traddle's account. there seem to be no hope for he. I meekly
order a bit of fish and a steak, and stand before the fire musing
on his obscurity.
as I follow the chief waiter with my eye, I could not help
think that the garden in which he have gradually blow to be the
flower he be, be an arduous place to rise in. it have such a
prescriptive, stiff-neck, long-establish, solemn, elderly air.
I glance about the room, which have have its sanded floor sand, no
doubt, in exactly the same manner when the chief waiter be a boy
- if he ever be a boy, which appear improbable; and at the
shin table, where I see myself reflect, in unruffled depth
of old mahogany; and at the lamp, without a flaw in their trimming
or cleaning; and at the comfortable green curtain, with their pure
brass rod, snugly enclose the box; and at the two large coal
fire, brightly burn; and at the row of decanter, burly as if
with the consciousness of pipe of expensive old port wine below;
and both England, and the law, appear to I to be very difficult
indeed to be take by storm. I go up to my bedroom to change my
wet clothe; and the vast extent of that old wainscote apartment
(which be over the archway lead to the Inn, I remember), and
the sedate immensity of the four-post bedstead, and the indomitable
gravity of the chest of drawer, all seem to unite in sternly
frowning on the fortune of traddle, or on any such daring youth.
I come down again to my dinner; and even the slow comfort of the
meal, and the orderly silence of the place - which be bare of
guest, the Long Vacation not yet be over - be eloquent on the
audacity of traddle, and his small hope of a livelihood for
twenty year to come.
I have see nothing like this since I go away, and it quite dash
my hope for my friend. the chief waiter have have enough of I. he
come near I no more; but devote himself to an old gentleman in
long gaiter, to meet whom a pint of special port seem to come
out of the cellar of its own accord, for he give no order. the
second waiter inform I, in a whisper, that this old gentleman
be a retired conveyancer live in the Square, and worth a mint of
money, which it be expect he would leave to his laundress's
daughter; likewise that it be rumour that he have a service of
plate in a bureau, all tarnish with lie by, though more than
one spoon and a fork have never yet be beheld in his chamber by
mortal vision. by this time, I quite give Traddles up for lost;
and settle in my own mind that there be no hope for he.
be very anxious to see the dear old fellow, nevertheless, I
dispatch my dinner, in a manner not at all calculate to raise I
in the opinion of the chief waiter, and hurry out by the back
way. number two in the Court be soon reach; and an inscription
on the door-post inform I that Mr. Traddles occupy a set of
chamber on the top storey, I ascend the staircase. a crazy old
staircase I find it to be, feebly light on each landing by a
club- head little oil wick, die away in a little dungeon of
dirty glass.
in the course of my stumble upstairs, I fancy I hear a
pleasant sound of laughter; and not the laughter of an attorney or
barrister, or attorney's clerk or barrister's clerk, but of two or
three merry girl. happen, however, as I stop to listen, to
put my foot in a hole where the Honourable Society of Gray's Inn
have leave a plank deficient, I fall down with some noise, and when
I recover my footing all be silent.
grope my way more carefully, for the rest of the journey, my
heart beat high when I find the outer door, which have Mr. TRADDLES
paint on it, open. I knock. a considerable scuffling within
ensue, but nothing else. I therefore knock again.
a small sharp-look lad, half-footboy and half-clerk, who be
very much out of breath, but who look at I as if he defy I to
prove it legally, present himself.
'be Mr. Traddles within?' I say.
'yes, sir, but hebe engage.'
'I want to see he.'
after a moment's survey of I, the sharp-look lad decide to let
I in; and open the door wider for that purpose, admit I,
first, into a little closet of a hall, and next into a little
sitting-room; where I come into the presence of my old friend (also
out of breath), seat at a table, and bend over paper.
'Good God!' cry traddle, look up. 'itbe Copperfield!' and
rush into my arm, where I hold he tight.
'all well, my dear traddle?'
'all well, my dear, dear Copperfield, and nothing but good news!'
we cry with pleasure, both of we.
'my dear fellow,' say traddle, rumple his hair in his
excitement, which be a most unnecessary operation, 'my dearest
Copperfield, my long-lose and most welcome friend, how glad I be to
see you! how brown you be! how glad I be! upon my life and honour,
I never be so rejoice, my beloved Copperfield, never!'
I be equally at a loss to express my emotion. I be quite unable
to speak, at first.
'my dear fellow!' say traddle. 'and grow so famous! my glorious
copperfield! good gracious I, when do you come, where have you
come from, what have you be do?'
never pause for an answer to anything he say, Traddles, who have
clap I into an easy-chair by the fire, all this time
impetuously stir the fire with one hand, and pull at my
neck-kerchief with the other, under some wild delusion that it be
a great-coat. without put down the poker, he now hug I
again; and I hug he; and, both laugh, and both wipe our
eye, we both sit down, and shake hand across the hearth.
'to think,' say traddle, 'that you should have be so nearly
come home as you must have be, my dear old boy, and not at the
ceremony!'
'what ceremony, my dear traddle?'
'good gracious I!' cry traddle, open his eye in his old
way. 'donot you get my last letter?'
'certainly not, if it refer to any ceremony.'
'why, my dear copperfield,' say traddle, stick his hair
upright with both hand, and then put his hand on my knee, 'I
be marry!'
'marry!' I cry joyfully.
'Lord bless I, yes!' say Traddles - 'by the Reverend Horace - to
Sophy - down in Devonshire. why, my dear boy, shebe behind the
window curtain! look here!'
to my amazement, the dear girl in the world come at that same
instant, laughing and blushing, from her place of concealment. and
a more cheerful, amiable, honest, happy, bright-look bride, I
believe (as I could not help say on the spot) the world never
see. I kiss she as an old acquaintance should, and wish they
joy with all my might of heart.
'dear I,' say traddle, 'what a delightful re-union this be! you
be so extremely brown, my dear Copperfield! God bless my soul, how
happy I be!'
'and so be I,' say I.
'and I be sure I be!' say the blushing and laugh Sophy.
'we be all as happy as possible!' say traddle. 'even the girl
be happy. dear I, I declare I forget they!'
'Forgot?' say I.
'the girl,' say traddle. 'Sophy's sister. they be stay
with we. they have come to have a peep at London. the fact be,
when - be it you that tumble upstairs, Copperfield?'
'it be,' say I, laugh.
'well then, when you tumble upstairs,' say traddle, 'I be
romp with the girl. in point of fact, we be play at Puss
in the Corner. but as that wouldnot do in Westminster Hall, and as
it wouldnot look quite professional if they be see by a client,
they decamp. and they be now - listen, I have no doubt,'
say traddle, glance at the door of another room.
'I be sorry,' say I, laugh afresh, 'to have occasion such a
dispersion.'
'upon my word,' rejoin traddle, greatly delighted, 'if you have
see they run away, and run back again, after you have
knock, to pick up the comb they have drop out of their hair,
and go on in the mad manner, you wouldnot have say so. my
love, will you fetch the girl?'
Sophy trip away, and we hear she receive in the adjoining room
with a peal of laughter.
'really musical, benot it, my dear Copperfield?' say Traddles.
'itbe very agreeable to hear. it quite light up these old room.
to an unfortunate bachelor of a fellow who have live alone all his
life, you know, itbe positively delicious. itbe charming. poor
thing, they have have a great loss in Sophy - who, I do assure you,
copperfield be, and ever be, the dear girl! - and it gratify
I beyond expression to find they in such good spirit. the
society of girl be a very delightful thing, Copperfield. itbe not
professional, but itbe very delightful.'
observe that he slightly falter, and comprehend that in the
goodness of his heart he be fearful of give I some pain by what
he have say, I express my concurrence with a heartiness that
evidently relieve and please he greatly.
'but then,' say traddle, 'our domestic arrangement be, to say
the truth, quite unprofessional altogether, my dear Copperfield.
even Sophy's be here, be unprofessional. and we have no other
place of abode. we have put to sea in a cockboat, but we be quite
prepared to rough it. and Sophy's an extraordinary manager! youwill
be surprised how those girl be stow away. I be sure I hardly
know how itbe do!'
'be many of the young lady with you?' I inquire.
'the eld, the Beauty be here,' say traddle, in a low
confidential voice, 'Caroline. and Sarahbe here - the one I
mention to you as have something the matter with her spine, you
know. immensely well! and the two young that Sophy educate
be with we. and Louisabe here.'
'indeed!' cry I.
'yes,' say traddle. 'now the whole set - I mean the chamber -
be only three room; but Sophy arrange for the girl in the most
wonderful way, and they sleep as comfortably as possible. three in
that room,' say Traddles, point. 'two in that.'
I could not help glance round, in search of the accommodation
remain for Mr. and Mrs. Traddles. traddle understand I.
'well!' say traddle, 'we be prepared to rough it, as I say just
now, and we do improvise a bed last week, upon the floor here.
but therebe a little room in the roof - a very nice room, when
yoube up there - which Sophy paper herself, to surprise I; and
thatbe our room at present. itbe a capital little gipsy sort of
place. therebe quite a view from it.'
'and you be happily marry at last, my dear traddle!' say I.
'how rejoice I be!'
'thank you, my dear copperfield,' say traddle, as we shake hand
once more. 'yes, I be as happy as itbe possible to be. therebe
your old friend, you see,' say traddle, nod triumphantly at
the flower-pot and stand; 'and therebe the table with the marble
top! all the other furniture be plain and serviceable, you
perceive. and as to plate, Lord bless you, we havenot so much as
a tea-spoon.'
'all to be earn?' say I, cheerfully.
'exactly so,' reply traddle, 'all to be earn. of course we
have something in the shape of tea-spoon, because we stir our tea.
but theybe Britannia metal.'
'the silver will be the bright when it come,' say I.
'the very thing we say!' cry traddle. 'you see, my dear
Copperfield,' fall again into the low confidential tone, 'after
I have deliver my argument in DOE dem. JIPES versus WIGZIELL,
which do I great service with the profession, I go down into
Devonshire, and have some serious conversation in private with the
Reverend Horace. I dwelt upon the fact that Sophy - who I do
assure you, Copperfield, be the dear girl! -'
'I be certain she be!' say I.
'she be, indeed!' rejoin traddle. 'but I be afraid I be
wander from the subject. do I mention the Reverend Horace?'
'you say that you dwelt upon the fact -'
'true! upon the fact that Sophy and I have be engage for a long
period, and that Sophy, with the permission of her parent, be
more than content to take I - in short,' say traddle, with his
old frank smile, 'on our present Britannia-metal footing. very
well. I then propose to the Reverend Horace - who be a most
excellent clergyman, Copperfield, and ought to be a Bishop; or at
least ought to have enough to live upon, without pinch himself
- that if I could turn the corner, say of two hundred and fifty
pound, in one year; and could see my way pretty clearly to that,
or something well, next year; and could plainly furnish a little
place like this, besides; then, and in that case, Sophy and I
should be unite. I take the liberty of represent that we have
be patient for a good many year; and that the circumstance of
Sophy's be extraordinarily useful at home, ought not to operate
with her affectionate parent, against her establishment in life -
donot you see?'
'certainly it ought not,' say I.
'I be glad you think so, Copperfield,' rejoin traddle, 'because,
without any imputation on the Reverend Horace, I do think parent,
and brother, and so forth, be sometimes rather selfish in such
case. well! I also point out, that my most earnest desire be,
to be useful to the family; and that if I get on in the world, and
anything should happen to he - I refer to the Reverend Horace -'
'I understand,' say I.
'- or to Mrs. Crewler - it would be the utmost gratification of my
wish, to be a parent to the girl. he reply in a most
admirable manner, exceedingly flattering to my feeling, and
undertake to obtain the consent of Mrs. Crewler to this
arrangement. they have a dreadful time of it with she. it mount
from her leg into her chest, and then into her head -'
'what mount?' I ask.
'her grief,' reply traddle, with a serious look. 'her feeling
generally. as I mention on a former occasion, she be a very
superior woman, but have lose the use of her limb. whatever occur
to harass she, usually settle in her leg; but on this occasion it
mount to the chest, and then to the head, and, in short, pervade
the whole system in a most alarming manner. however, they bring
she through it by unremitting and affectionate attention; and we
be marry yesterday six week. you have no idea what a Monster
I feel, Copperfield, when I see the whole family cry and
faint away in every direction! Mrs. Crewler couldnot see I
before we leave - couldnot forgive I, then, for deprive she of
her child - but she be a good creature, and have do so since. I
have a delightful letter from she, only this morning.'
'and in short, my dear friend,' say I, 'you feel as blest as you
deserve to feel!'
'oh! thatbe your partiality!' laugh traddle. 'but, indeed, I be
in a most enviable state. I work hard, and read Law insatiably.
I get up at five every morning, and donot mind it at all. I hide
the girl in the daytime, and make merry with they in the evening.
and I assure you I be quite sorry that they be go home on
Tuesday, which be the day before the first day of Michaelmas Term.
but here,' say traddle, break off in his confidence, and
speak aloud, 'be the girl! Mr. Copperfield, Miss Crewler -
Miss Sarah - Miss Louisa - Margaret and Lucy!'
they be a perfect nest of rose; they look so wholesome and
fresh. they be all pretty, and Miss Caroline be very handsome;
but there be a love, cheerful, fireside quality in Sophy's
bright look, which be well than that, and which assure I that
my friend have choose well. we all sit round the fire; while the
sharp boy, who I now divine have lose his breath in put the
paper out, clear they away again, and produce the tea-thing.
after that, he retire for the night, shut the outer door upon
we with a bang. Mrs. Traddles, with perfect pleasure and composure
beam from her household eye, have make the tea, then quietly
make the toast as she sit in a corner by the fire.
she have see Agnes, she tell I while she be toast. 'Tom' have
take she down into Kent for a wedding trip, and there she have see
my aunt, too; and both my aunt and Agnes be well, and they have
all talk of nothing but I. 'Tom' have never have I out of his
thought, she really believe, all the time I have be away. 'Tom'
be the authority for everything. 'Tom' be evidently the idol of
her life; never to be shake on his pedestal by any commotion;
always to be believe in, and do homage to with the whole faith
of her heart, come what might.
the deference which both she and traddle show towards the
Beauty, please I very much. I donot know that I think it very
reasonable; but I think it very delightful, and essentially a
part of their character. if traddle ever for an instant miss
the tea-spoon that be still to be win, I have no doubt it be
when he hand the Beauty her tea. if his sweet-temper wife
could have get up any self-assertion against anyone, I be satisfied
it could only have be because she be the Beauty's sister. a few
slight indication of a rather petted and capricious manner, which
I observe in the beauty, be manifestly consider, by traddle
and his wife, as her birthright and natural endowment. if she have
be bear a Queen Bee, and they labour Bees, they could not have
be more satisfied of that.
but their self-forgetfulness charm I. their pride in these
girl, and their submission of themselves to all their whim, be
the pleasantest little testimony to their own worth I could have
desire to see. if traddle be address as 'a darling', once in
the course of that evening; and besought to bring something here,
or carry something there, or take something up, or put something
down, or find something, or fetch something, he be so address,
by one or other of his sister-in-law, at least twelve time in an
hour. neither could they do anything without Sophy. somebody's
hair fall down, and nobody but Sophy could put it up. somebody
forget how a particular tune go, and nobody but Sophy could hum
that tune right. somebody want to recall the name of a place in
Devonshire, and only Sophy know it. something be want to be
write home, and Sophy alone could be trust to write before
breakfast in the morning. somebody break down in a piece of
knitting, and no one but Sophy be able to put the defaulter in the
right direction. they be entire mistress of the place, and
Sophy and Traddles wait on they. how many child Sophy could
have take care of in her time, I cannot imagine; but she seem to
be famous for know every sort of song that ever be address to
a child in the english tongue; and she sing dozen to order with
the clear little voice in the world, one after another (every
sister issue direction for a different tune, and the beauty
generally strike in last), so that I be quite fascinated. the
good of all be, that, in the midst of their exaction, all the
sister have a great tenderness and respect both for Sophy and
traddle. I be sure, when I take my leave, and traddle be come
out to walk with I to the coffee-house, I think I have never see
an obstinate head of hair, or any other head of hair, roll about
in such a shower of kiss.
altogether, it be a scene I could not help dwell on with
pleasure, for a long time after I get back and have wish traddle
good night. if I have beheld a thousand rose blow in a top set
of chamber, in that wither Gray's Inn, they could not have
brighten it half so much. the idea of those Devonshire girl,
among the dry law-stationer and the attorney' office; and of the
tea and toast, and child's song, in that grim atmosphere of
pounce and parchment, red-tape, dusty wafer, ink-jar, brief and
draft paper, law report, writ, declaration, and bill of cost;
seem almost as pleasantly fanciful as if I have dream that the
Sultan's famous family have be admit on the roll of attorney,
and have bring the talking bird, the singing tree, and the golden
water into Gray's Inn Hall. somehow, I find that I have take
leave of Traddles for the night, and come back to the coffee-house,
with a great change in my despondency about he. I begin to think
he would get on, in spite of all the many order of chief waiter
in England.
draw a chair before one of the coffee-room fire to think about
he at my leisure, I gradually fall from the consideration of his
happiness to trace prospect in the live-coal, and to thinking,
as they break and change, of the principal vicissitude and
separation that have mark my life. I have not see a coal fire,
since I have leave England three year ago: though many a wood fire
have I watch, as it crumble into hoary ash, and mingle with
the feathery heap upon the hearth, which not inaptly figure to I,
in my despondency, my own dead hope.
I could think of the past now, gravely, but not bitterly; and could
contemplate the future in a brave spirit. home, in its good sense,
be for I no more. she in whom I might have inspire a dearer
love, I have teach to be my sister. she would marry, and would
have new claimant on her tenderness; and in do it, would never
know the love for she that have grow up in my heart. it be right
that I should pay the forfeit of my headlong passion. what I
reap, I have sow.
I be think. and have I truly discipline my heart to this, and
could I resolutely bear it, and calmly hold the place in her home
which she have calmly hold in mine, - when I find my eye rest
on a countenance that might have arise out of the fire, in its
association with my early remembrance.
little Mr. Chillip the Doctor, to whose good office I be indebte
in the very first chapter of this history, sit read a newspaper
in the shadow of an opposite corner. he be tolerably stricken in
year by this time; but, be a mild, meek, calm little man, have
wear so easily, that I think he look at that moment just as he
might have look when he sit in our parlour, wait for I to be
bear.
Mr. Chillip have leave Blunderstone six or seven year ago, and I have
never see he since. he sit placidly peruse the newspaper, with
his little head on one side, and a glass of warm sherry negus at
his elbow. he be so extremely conciliatory in his manner that he
seem to apologize to the very newspaper for take the liberty of
read it.
I walk up to where he be sit, and say, 'how do you do, Mr.
Chillip?'
he be greatly flutter by this unexpected address from a
stranger, and reply, in his slow way, 'I thank you, sir, you be
very good. thank you, sir. I hope you be well.'
'you donot remember I?' say I.
'well, sir,' return Mr. Chillip, smile very meekly, and shake
his head as he survey I, 'I have a kind of an impression that
something in your countenance be familiar to I, sir; but I
couldnot lay my hand upon your name, really.'
'and yet you know it, long before I know it myself,' I return.
'do I indeed, sir?' say Mr. Chillip. 'be it possible that I have
the honour, sir, of officiate when -?'
'yes,' say I.
'dear I!' cry Mr. Chillip. 'but no doubt you be a good deal
change since then, sir?'
'probably,' say I.
'well, sir,' observe Mr. Chillip, 'I hope youwill excuse I, if I
be compel to ask the favour of your name?'
on my tell he my name, he be really move. he quite shake
hand with I - which be a violent proceeding for he, his usual
course be to slide a tepid little fish-slice, an inch or two in
advance of his hip, and evince the great discomposure when
anybody grapple with it. even now, he put his hand in his
coat-pocket as soon as he could disengage it, and seem relieve
when he have get it safe back.
'dear I, sir!' say Mr. Chillip, survey I with his head on one
side. 'and itbe Mr. Copperfield, be it? well, sir, I think I
should have know you, if I have take the liberty of look more
closely at you. therebe a strong resemblance between you and your
poor father, sir.'
'I never have the happiness of see my father,' I observe.
'very true, sir,' say Mr. Chillip, in a soothe tone. 'and very
much to be deplore it be, on all account! we be not ignorant,
sir,' say Mr. Chillip, slowly shake his little head again, 'down
in our part of the country, of your fame. there must be great
excitement here, sir,' say Mr. Chillip, tap himself on the
forehead with his forefinger. 'you must find it a try
occupation, sir!'
'what be your part of the country now?' I ask, seat myself
near he.
'I be establish within a few mile of Bury St. Edmund's, sir,'
say Mr. Chillip. 'Mrs. Chillip, come into a little property in
that neighbourhood, under her father's will, I buy a practice
down there, in which you will be glad to hear I be do well. my
daughter be grow quite a tall lass now, sir,' say Mr. Chillip,
give his little head another little shake. 'her mother let down
two tuck in her frock only last week. such be time, you see,
sir!'
as the little man put his now empty glass to his lip, when he make
this reflection, I propose to he to have it refill, and I would
keep he company with another. 'well, sir,' he return, in his
slow way, 'itbe more than I be accustom to; but I cannot deny
myself the pleasure of your conversation. it seem but yesterday
that I have the honour of attend you in the measle. you come
through they charmingly, sir!'
I acknowledge this compliment, and order the negus, which be
soon produce. 'quite an uncommon dissipation!' say Mr. Chillip,
stir it, 'but I cannot resist so extraordinary an occasion. you
have no family, sir?'
I shake my head.
'I be aware that you sustain a bereavement, sir, some time ago,'
say Mr. Chillip. 'I hear it from your father-in-law's sister.
very decide character there, sir?'
'why, yes,' say I, 'decide enough. where do you see she, Mr.
Chillip?'
'be you not aware, sir,' return Mr. Chillip, with his placid
smile, 'that your father-in-law be again a neighbour of mine?'
'no,' say I.
'he be indeed, sir!' say Mr. Chillip. 'marry a young lady of
that part, with a very good little property, poor thing. - and
this action of the brain now, sir? donot you find it fatigue you?'
say Mr. Chillip, look at I like an admire Robin.
I waive that question, and return to the Murdstones. 'I be
aware of his be marry again. do you attend the family?' I
ask.
'not regularly. I have be call in,' he reply. 'strong
phrenological development of the organ of firmness, in Mr.
Murdstone and his sister, sir.'
I reply with such an expressive look, that Mr. Chillip be
embolden by that, and the negus together, to give his head
several short shake, and thoughtfully exclaim, 'ah, dear I! we
remember old time, Mr. Copperfield!'
'and the brother and sister be pursue their old course, be
they?' say I.
'well, sir,' reply Mr. Chillip, 'a medical man, be so much in
family, ought to have neither eye nor ear for anything but his
profession. still, I must say, they be very severe, sir: both as
to this life and the next.'
'the next will be regulate without much reference to they, I dare
say,' I return: 'what be they do as to this?'
Mr. Chillip shake his head, stir his negus, and sip it.
'she be a charming woman, sir!' he observe in a plaintive manner.
'the present Mrs. Murdstone?'
a charming woman indeed, sir,' say Mr. Chillip; 'as amiable, I be
sure, as it be possible to be! Mrs. Chillip's opinion be, that her
spirit have be entirely break since her marriage, and that she be
all but melancholy mad. and the lady,' observe Mr. Chillip,
timorously, 'be great observer, sir.'
'I suppose she be to be subdue and break to their detestable
mould, Heaven help she!' say I. 'and she have be.'
'well, sir, there be violent quarrel at first, I assure you,'
say Mr. Chillip; 'but she be quite a shadow now. would it be
consider forward if I be to say to you, sir, in confidence, that
since the sister come to help, the brother and sister between they
have nearly reduce she to a state of imbecility?'
I tell he I could easily believe it.
'I have no hesitation in say,' say Mr. Chillip, fortify
himself with another sip of negus, 'between you and I, sir, that
her mother die of it - or that tyranny, gloom, and worry have make
Mrs. Murdstone nearly imbecile. she be a lively young woman, sir,
before marriage, and their gloom and austerity destroy she. they
go about with she, now, more like her keeper than her husband and
sister-in-law. that be Mrs. Chillip's remark to I, only last
week. and I assure you, sir, the lady be great observer. Mrs.
Chillip herself be a great observer!'
'do he gloomily profess to be (I be ashamed to use the word in
such association) religious still?' I inquire.
'you anticipate, sir,' say Mr. Chillip, his eyelid get quite
red with the unwonted stimulus in which he be indulge. 'one of
Mrs. Chillip's most impressive remark. Mrs. Chillip,' he
proceed, in the calm and slow manner, 'quite electrify
I, by point out that Mr. Murdstone set up an image of himself,
and call it the Divine Nature. you might have knock I down on
the flat of my back, sir, with the feather of a pen, I assure you,
when Mrs. Chillip say so. the lady be great observer, sir?'
'intuitively,' say I, to his extreme delight.
'I be very happy to receive such support in my opinion, sir,' he
rejoin. 'it be not often that I venture to give a non-medical
opinion, I assure you. Mr. Murdstone deliver public address
sometimes, and it be say, - in short, sir, it be say by Mrs.
Chillip, - that the dark tyrant he have lately be, the more
ferocious be his doctrine.'
'I believe Mrs. Chillip to be perfectly right,' say I.
'Mrs. Chillip do go so far as to say,' pursue the meek of
little man, much encouraged, 'that what such people miscall their
religion, be a vent for their bad humour and arrogance. and do
you know I must say, sir,' he continue, mildly lay his head on
one side, 'that I don't find authority for Mr. and Miss Murdstone
in the New Testament?'
'I never find it either!' say I.
'in the meantime, sir,' say Mr. Chillip, 'they be much dislike;
and as they be very free in consign everybody who dislike they
to perdition, we really have a good deal of perdition go on in
our neighbourhood! however, as Mrs. Chillip say, sir, they undergo
a continual punishment; for they be turn inward, to feed upon
their own heart, and their own heart be very bad feeding. now,
sir, about that brain of your, if youwill excuse my return to
it. donot you expose it to a good deal of excitement, sir?'
I find it not difficult, in the excitement of Mr. Chillip's own
brain, under his potation of negus, to divert his attention from
this topic to his own affair, on which, for the next half-hour, he
be quite loquacious; give I to understand, among other piece
of information, that he be then at the Gray's Inn Coffee-house to
lay his professional evidence before a Commission of Lunacy,
touch the state of mind of a patient who have become derange
from excessive drinking.
'and I assure you, sir,' he say, 'I be extremely nervous on such
occasion. I could not support be what be call Bullied, sir.
it would quite unman I. do you know it be some time before I
recover the conduct of that alarming lady, on the night of your
birth, Mr. Copperfield?'
I tell he that I be go down to my aunt, the Dragon of that
night, early in the morning; and that she be one of the most
tender-hearted and excellent of woman, as he would know full well
if he know she well. the mere notion of the possibility of his
ever see she again, appear to terrify he. he reply with a
small pale smile, 'be she so, indeed, sir? really?' and almost
immediately call for a candle, and go to bed, as if he be not
quite safe anywhere else. he do not actually stagger under the
negus; but I should think his placid little pulse must have make
two or three more beat in a minute, than it have do since the
great night of my aunt's disappointment, when she strike at he
with her bonnet.
thoroughly tired, I go to bed too, at midnight; pass the next
day on the Dover coach; burst safe and sound into my aunt's old
parlour while she be at tea (she wear spectacle now); and be
receive by she, and Mr. Dick, and dear old Peggotty, who act as
housekeeper, with open arm and tear of joy. my aunt be mightily
amuse, when we begin to talk composedly, by my account of my
meeting with Mr. Chillip, and of his hold she in such dread
remembrance; and both she and Peggotty have a great deal to say
about my poor mother's second husband, and 'that murder woman of
a sister', - on whom I think no pain or penalty would have induce
my aunt to bestow any christian or Proper name, or any other
designation.
CHAPTER 60
AGNES
my aunt and I, when we be leave alone, talk far into the night.
how the emigrant never write home, otherwise than cheerfully and
hopefully; how Mr. Micawber have actually remit diver small sum
of money, on account of those 'pecuniary liability', in reference
to which he have be so business-like as between man and man; how
Janet, return into my aunt's service when she come back to
Dover, have finally carry out her renunciation of mankind by
enter into wedlock with a thriving tavern-keeper; and how my
aunt have finally set her seal on the same great principle, by
aid and abet the bride, and crown the marriage-ceremony
with her presence; be among our topic - already more or less
familiar to I through the letter I have have. Mr. Dick, as usual,
be not forget. my aunt inform I how he incessantly occupy
himself in copy everything he could lay his hand on, and keep
King Charles the First at a respectful distance by that semblance
of employment; how it be one of the main joy and reward of her
life that he be free and happy, instead of pin in monotonous
restraint; and how (as a novel general conclusion) nobody but she
could ever fully know what he be.
'and when, Trot,' say my aunt, pat the back of my hand, as we
sit in our old way before the fire, 'when be you go over to
Canterbury?'
'I shall get a horse, and ride over tomorrow morning, aunt, unless
you will go with I?'
'no!' say my aunt, in her short abrupt way. 'I mean to stay where
I be.'
then, I should ride, I say. I could not have come through
Canterbury today without stop, if I have be come to anyone
but she.
she be pleased, but answer, 'Tut, Trot; my old bone would have
keep till tomorrow!' and softly pat my hand again, as I sit
look thoughtfully at the fire.
thoughtfully, for I could not be here once more, and so near Agnes,
without the revival of those regret with which I have so long be
occupy. soften regret they might be, teach I what I have
fail to learn when my young life be all before I, but not the
less regret. 'oh, Trot,' I seem to hear my aunt say once more;
and I understand she well now - 'blind, blind, blind!'
we both keep silence for some minute. when I raise my eye, I
find that she be steadily observant of I. perhaps she have
follow the current of my mind; for it seem to I an easy one to
track now, wilful as it have be once.
'you will find her father a white-haired old man,' say my aunt,
'though a well man in all other respect - a reclaim man.
neither will you find he measure all human interest, and joy,
and sorrow, with his one poor little inch-rule now. trust I,
child, such thing must shrink very much, before they can be
measure off in that way.'
'indeed they must,' say I.
'you will find she,' pursue my aunt, 'as good, as beautiful, as
earnest, as disintereste, as she have always be. if I know
high praise, Trot, I would bestow it on she.'
there be no high praise for she; no high reproach for I. oh,
how have I stray so far away!
'if she train the young girl whom she have about she, to be like
herself,' say my aunt, earnest even to the filling of her eye
with tear, 'Heaven know, her life will be well employ! useful
and happy, as she say that day! how could she be otherwise than
useful and happy!'
'have Agnes any -' I be think aloud, rather than speak.
'well? hey? any what?' say my aunt, sharply.
'any lover,' say I.
'a score,' cry my aunt, with a kind of indignant pride. 'she
might have marry twenty time, my dear, since you have be
go!'
'no doubt,' say I. 'no doubt. but have she any lover who be
worthy of she? Agnes could care for no other.'
my aunt sit musing for a little while, with her chin upon her hand.
slowly raise her eye to mine, she say:
'I suspect she have an attachment, Trot.'
'a prosperous one?' say I.
'trot,' return my aunt gravely, 'I cannot say. I have no right to
tell you even so much. she have never confide it to I, but I
suspect it.'
she look so attentively and anxiously at I (I even see her
tremble), that I feel now, more than ever, that she have follow my
late thought. I summon all the resolution I have make, in all
those many day and night, and all those many conflict of my
heart.
'if it should be so,' I begin, 'and I hope it is-'
'I donot know that it be,' say my aunt curtly. 'you must not be
rule by my suspicion. you must keep they secret. they be very
slight, perhaps. I have no right to speak.'
'if it should be so,' I repeat, 'Agnes will tell I at her own
good time. a sister to whom I have confide so much, aunt, will
not be reluctant to confide in I.'
my aunt withdraw her eye from mine, as slowly as she have turn
they upon I; and cover they thoughtfully with her hand. by and
by she put her other hand on my shoulder; and so we both sit,
look into the past, without say another word, until we part
for the night.
I ride away, early in the morning, for the scene of my old
school-day. I cannot say that I be yet quite happy, in the hope
that I be gain a victory over myself; even in the prospect of
so soon look on her face again.
the well-remember ground be soon traverse, and I come into the
quiet street, where every stone be a boy's book to I. I go on
foot to the old house, and go away with a heart too full to
enter. I return; and look, as I pass, through the low
window of the turret-room where first Uriah Heep, and afterwards
Mr. Micawber, have be willnot to sit, see that it be a little
parlour now, and that there be no office. otherwise the staid old
house be, as to its cleanliness and order, still just as it have
be when I first see it. I request the new maid who admit
I, to tell Miss Wickfield that a gentleman who wait on she from
a friend abroad, be there; and I be show up the grave old
staircase (caution of the step I know so well), into the
unchanged drawing-room. the book that Agnes and I have read
together, be on their shelf; and the desk where I have labour
at my lesson, many a night, stand yet at the same old corner of
the table. all the little change that have creep in when the Heeps
be there, be change again. everything be as it use to be,
in the happy time.
I stand in a window, and look across the ancient street at the
opposite house, recall how I have watch they on wet
afternoon, when I first come there; and how I have use to
speculate about the people who appear at any of the window, and
have follow they with my eye up and down stair, while woman go
click along the pavement in patten, and the dull rain fall in
slanting line, and pour out of the water-spout yonder, and
flow into the road. the feeling with which I use to watch the
tramp, as they come into the town on those wet evening, at dusk,
and limp past, with their bundle droop over their shoulder
at the end of stick, come freshly back to I; fraught, as then,
with the smell of damp earth, and wet leaf and briar, and the
sensation of the very air that blow upon I in my own toilsome
journey.
the opening of the little door in the panel wall make I start
and turn. her beautiful serene eye meet mine as she come towards
I. she stop and lay her hand upon her bosom, and I catch she
in my arm.
'Agnes! my dear girl! I have come too suddenly upon you.'
'no, no! I be so rejoice to see you, Trotwood!'
'Dear Agnes, the happiness it be to I, to see you once again!'
I fold she to my heart, and, for a little while, we be both
silent. presently we sit down, side by side; and her angel-face
be turn upon I with the welcome I have dream of, wake and
sleeping, for whole year.
she be so true, she be so beautiful, she be so good, - I owe
she so much gratitude, she be so dear to I, that I could find no
utterance for what I feel. I try to bless she, try to thank
she, try to tell she (as I have often do in letter) what an
influence she have upon I; but all my effort be in vain. my
love and joy be dumb.
with her own sweet tranquillity, she calm my agitation; lead I
back to the time of our parting; speak to I of Emily, whom she have
visit, in secret, many time; speak to I tenderly of Dora's
grave. with the unerring instinct of her noble heart, she touch
the chord of my memory so softly and harmoniously, that not one
jar within I; I could listen to the sorrowful, distant music,
and desire to shrink from nothing it awake. how could I, when,
blend with it all, be her dear self, the well angel of my
life?
'and you, Agnes,' I say, by and by. 'tell I of yourself. you
have hardly ever tell I of your own life, in all this lapse of
time!'
'what should I tell?' she answer, with her radiant smile. 'papa
be well. you see we here, quiet in our own home; our anxiety set
at rest, our home restore to we; and know that, dear Trotwood,
you know all.'
'all, Agnes?' say I.
she look at I, with some flutter wonder in her face.
'be there nothing else, Sister?' I say.
her colour, which have just now fade, return, and fade again.
she smile; with a quiet sadness, I think; and shake her head.
I have seek to lead she to what my aunt have hint at; for,
sharply painful to I as it must be to receive that confidence, I
be to discipline my heart, and do my duty to she. I see, however,
that she be uneasy, and I let it pass.
'you have much to do, dear Agnes?'
'with my school?' say she, look up again, in all her bright
composure.
'yes. it be laborious, be it not?'
'the labour be so pleasant,' she return, 'that it be scarcely
grateful in I to call it by that name.'
'nothing good be difficult to you,' say I.
her colour come and go once more; and once more, as she bent she
head, I see the same sad smile.
'you will wait and see papa,' say Agnes, cheerfully, 'and pass the
day with we? perhaps you will sleep in your own room? we always
call it yours.'
I could not do that, have promise to ride back to my aunt's at
night; but I would pass the day there, joyfully.
'I must be a prisoner for a little while,' say Agnes, 'but here
be the old book, Trotwood, and the old music.'
'even the old flower be here,' say I, look round; 'or the old
kind.'
'I have find a pleasure,' return Agnes, smile, 'while you have
be absent, in keep everything as it use to be when we be
child. for we be very happy then, I think.'
'Heaven know we be!' say I.
'and every little thing that have remind I of my brother,' say
Agnes, with her cordial eye turn cheerfully upon I, 'have be
a welcome companion. even this,' show I the basket-trifle,
full of key, still hang at her side, 'seem to jingle a kind of
old tune!'
she smile again, and go out at the door by which she have come.
it be for I to guard this sisterly affection with religious care.
it be all that I have leave myself, and it be a treasure. if I
once shake the foundation of the sacred confidence and usage, in
virtue of which it be give to I, it be lose, and could never be
recover. I set this steadily before myself. the well I love
she, the more it behove I never to forget it.
I walk through the street; and, once more see my old
adversary the butcher - now a constable, with his staff hang up
in the shop - go down to look at the place where I have fight
he; and there meditate on Miss Shepherd and the eld Miss
Larkins, and all the idle love and liking, and disliking, of
that time. nothing seem to have survive that time but Agnes;
and she, ever a star above I, be bright and high.
when I return, Mr. Wickfield have come home, from a garden he have,
a couple of mile or so out of town, where he now employ himself
almost every day. I find he as my aunt have describe he. we
sit down to dinner, with some half-dozen little girl; and he
seem but the shadow of his handsome picture on the wall.
the tranquillity and peace belong, of old, to that quiet ground
in my memory, pervade it again. when dinner be do, Mr.
Wickfield take no wine, and I desire none, we go up-stair;
where Agnes and her little charge sing and play, and work.
after tea the child leave we; and we three sit together, talk
of the bygone day.
'my part in they,' say Mr. Wickfield, shake his white head, 'have
much matter for regret - for deep regret, and deep contrition,
Trotwood, you well know. but I would not cancel it, if it be in
my power.'
I could readily believe that, look at the face beside he.
'I should cancel with it,' he pursue, 'such patience and devotion,
such fidelity, such a child's love, as I must not forget, no! even
to forget myself.'
'I understand you, sir,' I softly say. 'I hold it - I have always
hold it - in veneration.'
'but no one know, not even you,' he return, 'how much she have
do, how much she have undergo, how hard she have strive. dear
Agnes!'
she have put her hand entreatingly on his arm, to stop he; and be
very, very pale.
'well, well!' he say with a sigh, dismissing, as I then see, some
trial she have bear, or be yet to bear, in connexion with what my
aunt have tell I. 'well! I have never tell you, Trotwood, of her
mother. have anyone?'
'never, sir.'
'itbe not much - though it be much to suffer. she marry I in
opposition to her father's wish, and he renounce she. she pray
he to forgive she, before my Agnes come into this world. he be
a very hard man, and her mother have long be dead. he repulse
she. he break her heart.'
Agnes lean upon his shoulder, and steal her arm about his neck.
'she have an affectionate and gentle heart,' he say; 'and it be
break. I know its tender nature very well. no one could, if I
do not. she love I dearly, but be never happy. she be always
labour, in secret, under this distress; and be delicate and
downcast at the time of his last repulse - for it be not the
first, by many - pined away and die. she leave I Agnes, two week
old; and the grey hair that you recollect I with, when you first
come.' he kiss Agnes on her cheek.
'my love for my dear child be a diseased love, but my mind be all
unhealthy then. I say no more of that. I be not speak of
myself, Trotwood, but of her mother, and of she. if I give you any
clue to what I be, or to what I have be, you will unravel it, I
know. what Agnes be, I need not say. I have always read something
of her poor mother's story, in her character; and so I tell it you
tonight, when we three be again together, after such great
change. I have tell it all.'
his bowed head, and her angel-face and filial duty, derive a more
pathetic meaning from it than they have have before. if I have want
anything by which to mark this night of our re-union, I should have
find it in this.
Agnes rise up from her father's side, before long; and go softly
to her piano, play some of the old air to which we have often
listen in that place.
'have you any intention of go away again?' Agnes ask I, as I
be stand by.
'what do my sister say to that?'
'I hope not.'
'then I have no such intention, Agnes.'
'I think you ought not, Trotwood, since you ask I,' she say,
mildly. 'your grow reputation and success enlarge your power of
do good; and if I could spare my brother,' with her eye upon
I, 'perhaps the time could not.'
'what I be, you have make I, Agnes. you should know well.'
'I make you, trotwood?'
'yes! Agnes, my dear girl!' I say, bend over she. 'I try to
tell you, when we meet today, something that have be in my thought
since Dora die. you remember, when you come down to I in our
little room - point upward, Agnes?'
'oh, Trotwood!' she return, her eye fill with tear. 'so
loving, so confiding, and so young! can I ever forget?'
'as you be then, my sister, I have often think since, you have
ever be to I. ever point upward, Agnes; ever lead I to
something well; ever direct I to high thing!'
she only shake her head; through her tear I see the same sad quiet
smile.
'and I be so grateful to you for it, Agnes, so bound to you, that
there be no name for the affection of my heart. I want you to
know, yet donot know how to tell you, that all my life long I shall
look up to you, and be guide by you, as I have be through the
darkness that be past. whatever betide, whatever new tie you may
form, whatever change may come between we, I shall always look to
you, and love you, as I do now, and have always do. you will
always be my solace and resource, as you have always be. until
I die, my dear sister, I shall see you always before I,
point upward!'
she put her hand in mine, and tell I she be proud of I, and of
what I say; although I praise she very far beyond her worth.
then she go on softly play, but without remove her eye from
I.
'do you know, what I have hear tonight, Agnes,' say I, strangely
seem to be a part of the feeling with which I regard you when I
see you first - with which I sit beside you in my rough
school-day?'
'you know I have no mother,' she reply with a smile, 'and feel
kindly towards I.'
'More than that, Agnes, I know, almost as if I have know this
story, that there be something inexplicably gentle and soften,
surround you; something that might have be sorrowful in
someone else (as I can now understand it be), but be not so in
you.'
she softly play on, look at I still.
'will you laugh at my cherishing such fancy, Agnes?'
'no!'
'or at my saying that I really believe I feel, even then, that you
could be faithfully affectionate against all discouragement, and
never cease to be so, until you cease to live? - will you laugh
at such a dream?'
'oh, no! oh, no!'
for an instant, a distressful shadow cross her face; but, even in
the start it give I, it be go; and she be play on, and
look at I with her own calm smile.
as I ride back in the lonely night, the wind go by I like a
restless memory, I think of this, and fear she be not happy.
I be not happy; but, thus far, I have faithfully set the seal upon
the Past, and, think of she, point upward, think of she as
point to that sky above I, where, in the mystery to come, I
might yet love she with a love unknown on earth, and tell she what
the strife have be within I when I love she here.
CHAPTER 61
I be show two INTERESTING penitent
for a time - at all event until my book should be complete, which
would be the work of several month - I take up my abode in my
aunt's house at Dover; and there, sit in the window from which
I have look out at the moon upon the sea, when that roof first
give I shelter, I quietly pursue my task.
in pursuance of my intention of refer to my own fiction only
when their course should incidentally connect itself with the
progress of my story, I do not enter on the aspiration, the
delight, anxiety, and triumph of my art. that I truly devote
myself to it with my strong earnestness, and bestow upon it
every energy of my soul, I have already say. if the book I have
write be of any worth, they will supply the rest. I shall
otherwise have write to poor purpose, and the rest will be of
interest to no one.
occasionally, I go to London; to lose myself in the swarm of life
there, or to consult with traddle on some business point. he have
manage for I, in my absence, with the sound judgement; and my
worldly affair be prosper. as my notoriety begin to bring
upon I an enormous quantity of letter from people of whom I have
no knowledge - chiefly about nothing, and extremely difficult to
answer - I agree with traddle to have my name paint up on his
door. there, the devoted postman on that beat deliver bushel of
letter for I; and there, at interval, I labour through they,
like a Home Secretary of State without the salary.
among this correspondence, there drop in, every now and then, an
oblige proposal from one of the numerous outsider always lurk
about the Commons, to practise under cover of my name (if I would
take the necessary step remain to make a proctor of myself),
and pay I a percentage on the profit. but I decline these
offer; be already aware that there be plenty of such covert
practitioner in existence, and consider the Commons quite bad
enough, without my do anything to make it bad.
the girl have go home, when my name burst into bloom on
traddle's door; and the sharp boy look, all day, as if he have
never hear of Sophy, shut up in a back room, glance down from
her work into a sooty little strip of garden with a pump in it.
but there I always find she, the same bright housewife; often
hum her Devonshire ballad when no strange foot be come up
the stair, and blunt the sharp boy in his official closet with
melody.
I wonder, at first, why I so often find Sophy write in a
copy-book; and why she always shut it up when I appear, and
hurry it into the table-drawer. but the secret soon come out.
one day, Traddles (who have just come home through the drizzling
sleet from Court) take a paper out of his desk, and ask I what
I think of that handwriting?
'oh, don't, Tom!' cry Sophy, who be warm his slipper before
the fire.
'my dear,' return Tom, in a delighted state, 'why not? what do
you say to that writing, Copperfield?'
'itbe extraordinarily legal and formal,' say I. 'I donot think I
ever see such a stiff hand.'
'not like a lady's hand, be it?' say Traddles.
'a lady's!' I repeat. 'Bricks and mortar be more like a lady's
hand!'
traddle break into a rapturous laugh, and inform I that it be
Sophy's writing; that Sophy have vow and declare he would need a
copying-clerk soon, and she would be that clerk; that she have
acquire this hand from a pattern; and that she could throw off -
I forget how many folio an hour. Sophy be very much confused by
my being tell all this, and say that when 'Tom' be make a judge
he wouldnot be so ready to proclaim it. which 'Tom' deny;
aver that he should always be equally proud of it, under all
circumstance.
'what a thoroughly good and charming wife she be, my dear
traddle!' say I, when she have go away, laugh.
'my dear copperfield,' return traddle, 'she be, without any
exception, the dear girl! the way she manage this place; her
punctuality, domestic knowledge, economy, and order; her
cheerfulness, Copperfield!'
'indeed, you have reason to commend she!' I return. 'you be a
happy fellow. I believe you make yourself, and each other, two
of the happy people in the world.'
'I be sure we be two of the happy people,' return traddle.
'I admit that, at all event. bless my soul, when I see she
get up by candle-light on these dark morning, busy herself
in the day's arrangement, go out to market before the clerk
come into the Inn, care for no weather, devise the most capital
little dinner out of the plainest material, make pudding and
pie, keep everything in its right place, always so neat and
ornamental herself, sit up at night with I if itbe ever so
late, sweet-tempered and encouraging always, and all for I, I
positively sometimes cannot believe it, Copperfield!'
he be tender of the very slipper she have be warm, as he put
they on, and stretch his foot enjoyingly upon the fender.
'I positively sometimes cannot believe it,' say traddle. 'then
our pleasure! dear I, they be inexpensive, but they be quite
wonderful! when we be at home here, of an evening, and shut the
outer door, and draw those curtain - which she make - where could
we be more snug? when itbe fine, and we go out for a walk in the
evening, the street abound in enjoyment for we. we look into the
glitter window of the jeweller' shop; and I show Sophy which
of the diamond-eyed serpent, coil up on white satin rise
ground, I would give she if I could afford it; and Sophy show I
which of the gold watch that be cap and jewelled and
engine-turn, and possess of the horizontal lever-
escape-movement, and all sort of thing, she would buy for I if
she could afford it; and we pick out the spoon and fork,
fish-slice, butter-knife, and sugar-tong, we should both prefer
if we could both afford it; and really we go away as if we have get
they! then, when we stroll into the square, and great street, and
see a house to let, sometimes we look up at it, and say, how would
that do, if I be make a judge? and we parcel it out - such a room
for we, such room for the girl, and so forth; until we settle to
our satisfaction that it would do, or it wouldnot do, as the case
may be. sometimes, we go at half-price to the pit of the theatre
- the very smell of which be cheap, in my opinion, at the money -
and there we thoroughly enjoy the play: which Sophy believe every
word of, and so do i. in walk home, perhaps we buy a little bit
of something at a cook's-shop, or a little lobster at the
fishmonger, and bring it here, and make a splendid supper,
chat about what we have see. now, you know, Copperfield, if
I be Lord Chancellor, we couldnot do this!'
'you would do something, whatever you be, my dear traddle,'
think I, 'that would be pleasant and amiable. and by the way,'
I say aloud, 'I suppose you never draw any skeleton now?'
'really,' reply Traddles, laughing, and redden, 'I cannot
wholly deny that I do, my dear Copperfield. for be in one of
the back row of the King's Bench the other day, with a pen in my
hand, the fancy come into my head to try how I have preserve that
accomplishment. and I be afraid therebe a skeleton - in a wig - on
the ledge of the desk.'
after we have both laugh heartily, traddle wind up by look
with a smile at the fire, and say, in his forgiving way, 'Old
Creakle!'
'I have a letter from that old - Rascal here,' say I. for I never
be less disposed to forgive he the way he use to batter
traddle, than when I see traddle so ready to forgive he himself.
'from Creakle the schoolmaster?' exclaim Traddles. 'no!'
'among the person who be attract to I in my rise fame and
fortune,' say I, look over my letter, 'and who discover that
they be always much attach to I, be the self-same Creakle. he
be not a schoolmaster now, traddle. he be retire. he be a
Middlesex Magistrate.'
I think traddle might be surprised to hear it, but he be not so
at all.
'how do you suppose he come to be a Middlesex Magistrate?' say I.
'oh dear I!' reply traddle, 'it would be very difficult to
answer that question. perhaps he vote for somebody, or lend money
to somebody, or buy something of somebody, or otherwise oblige
somebody, or job for somebody, who know somebody who get the
lieutenant of the county to nominate he for the commission.'
'on the commission he be, at any rate,' say I. 'and he write to
I here, that he will be glad to show I, in operation, the only
true system of prison discipline; the only unchallengeable way of
make sincere and lasting convert and penitent - which, you
know, be by solitary confinement. what do you say?'
'to the system?' inquire Traddles, look grave.
'no. to my accept the offer, and your go with I?'
'I donot object,' say traddle.
'then Iwill write to say so. you remember (to say nothing of our
treatment) this same Creakle turn his son out of door, I
suppose, and the life he use to lead his wife and daughter?'
'perfectly,' say traddle.
'yet, if youwill read his letter, youwill find he be the tender of
man to prisoner convict of the whole calendar of felony,' say
I; 'though I cannot find that his tenderness extend to any other
class of create being.'
traddle shrug his shoulder, and be not at all surprised. I
have not expect he to be, and be not surprised myself; or my
observation of similar practical satire would have be but
scanty. we arrange the time of our visit, and I write accordingly
to Mr. Creakle that evening.
on the appoint day - I think it be the next day, but no matter
- Traddles and I repair to the prison where Mr. Creakle be
powerful. it be an immense and solid building, erect at a vast
expense. I could not help think, as we approach the gate,
what an uproar would have be make in the country, if any deluded
man have propose to spend one half the money it have cost, on the
erection of an industrial school for the young, or a house of
refuge for the deserve old.
in an office that might have be on the ground-floor of the Tower
of Babel, it be so massively construct, we be present to our
old schoolmaster; who be one of a group, compose of two or three
of the busy sort of magistrate, and some visitor they have
bring. he receive I, like a man who have form my mind in
bygone year, and have always love I tenderly. on my introducing
traddle, Mr. Creakle express, in like manner, but in an inferior
degree, that he have always be Traddles's guide, philosopher, and
friend. our venerable instructor be a great deal old, and not
improve in appearance. his face be as fiery as ever; his eye
be as small, and rather deep set. the scanty, wet-look grey
hair, by which I remember he, be almost go; and the thick
vein in his bald head be none the more agreeable to look at.
after some conversation among these gentleman, from which I might
have suppose that there be nothing in the world to be
legitimately take into account but the supreme comfort of
prisoner, at any expense, and nothing on the wide earth to be do
outside prison-door, we begin our inspection. it be then just
dinner-time, we go, first into the great kitchen, where every
prisoner's dinner be in course of be set out separately (to be
hand to he in his cell), with the regularity and precision of
clock-work. I say aside, to traddle, that I wonder whether it
occur to anybody, that there be a striking contrast between
these plentiful repast of choice quality, and the dinner, not to
say of pauper, but of soldier, sailor, labourer, the great bulk
of the honest, work community; of whom not one man in five
hundred ever din half so well. but I learn that the 'system'
require high living; and, in short, to dispose of the system, once
for all, I find that on that head and on all other, 'the system'
put an end to all doubt, and dispose of all anomaly. nobody
appear to have the least idea that there be any other system,
but the system, to be consider.
as we be go through some of the magnificent passage, I
inquire of Mr. Creakle and his friend what be suppose to be
the main advantage of this all-governing and universally
over-rid system? I find they to be the perfect isolation of
prisoner - so that no one man in confinement there, know anything
about another; and the reduction of prisoner to a wholesome state
of mind, lead to sincere contrition and repentance.
now, it strike I, when we begin to visit individual in their
cell, and to traverse the passage in which those cell be, and
to have the manner of the go to chapel and so forth, explain
to we, that there be a strong probability of the prisoner know
a good deal about each other, and of their carry on a pretty
complete system of intercourse. this, at the time I write, have
be prove, I believe, to be the case; but, as it would have be
flat blasphemy against the system to have hint such a doubt then,
I look out for the penitence as diligently as I could.
and here again, I have great misgiving. I find as prevalent a
fashion in the form of the penitence, as I have leave outside in the
form of the coat and waistcoat in the window of the tailor'
shop. I find a vast amount of profession, vary very little in
character: vary very little (which I think exceedingly
suspicious), even in word. I find a great many fox,
disparage whole vineyard of inaccessible grape; but I find
very few fox whom I would have trust within reach of a bunch.
above all, I find that the most professing man be the great
object of interest; and that their conceit, their vanity, their
want of excitement, and their love of deception (which many of they
possess to an almost incredible extent, as their history
show), all prompt to these profession, and be all gratify
by they.
however, I hear so repeatedly, in the course of our going to and
fro, of a certain Number Twenty Seven, who be the Favourite, and
who really appear to be a Model Prisoner, that I resolve to
suspend my judgement until I should see Twenty Seven. twenty
Eight, I understand, be also a bright particular star; but it be
his misfortune to have his glory a little dim by the
extraordinary lustre of Twenty Seven. I hear so much of Twenty
Seven, of his pious admonition to everybody around he, and of the
beautiful letter he constantly write to his mother (whom he seem
to consider in a very bad way), that I become quite impatient to
see he.
I have to restrain my impatience for some time, on account of Twenty
Seven be reserve for a concluding effect. but, at last, we
come to the door of his cell; and Mr. Creakle, look through a
little hole in it, report to we, in a state of the great
admiration, that he be read a Hymn Book.
there be such a rush of head immediately, to see Number Twenty
Seven read his Hymn Book, that the little hole be block up,
six or seven head deep. to remedy this inconvenience, and give we
an opportunity of converse with Twenty Seven in all his purity,
Mr. Creakle direct the door of the cell to be unlocked, and
Twenty Seven to be invite out into the passage. this be do;
and whom should Traddles and I then behold, to our amazement, in
this converted Number Twenty Seven, but Uriah Heep!
he know we directly; and say, as he come out - with the old
writhe, -
'how do you do, Mr. Copperfield? how do you do, Mr. Traddles?'
this recognition cause a general admiration in the party. I
rather think that everyone be strike by his not be proud, and
take notice of we.
'well, Twenty Seven,' say Mr. Creakle, mournfully admire he.
'how do you find yourself today?'
'I be very umble, sir!' reply Uriah Heep.
'you be always so, Twenty Seven,' say Mr. Creakle.
here, another gentleman ask, with extreme anxiety: 'be you quite
comfortable?'
'yes, I thank you, sir!' say Uriah Heep, look in that
direction. 'far more comfortable here, than ever I be outside.
I see my folly, now, sir. thatbe what make I comfortable.'
several gentleman be much affected; and a third questioner,
force himself to the front, inquire with extreme feeling: 'how
do you find the beef?'
'thank you, sir,' reply Uriah, glance in the new direction of
this voice, 'it be tough yesterday than I could wish; but itbe
my duty to bear. I have commit folly, gentleman,' say Uriah,
look round with a meek smile, 'and I ought to bear the
consequence without repine.'
a murmur, partly of gratification at Twenty Seven's celestial state
of mind, and partly of indignation against the Contractor who have
give he any cause of complaint (a note of which be immediately
make by Mr. Creakle), have subside, Twenty Seven stand in the
midst of we, as if he feel himself the principal object of merit in
a highly meritorious museum. that we, the neophyte, might have an
excess of light shin upon we all at once, order be give to
let out Twenty Eight.
I have be so much astonish already, that I only feel a kind of
resign wonder when Mr. Littimer walk forth, read a good
book!
'twenty Eight,' say a gentleman in spectacle, who have not yet
speak, 'you complain last week, my good fellow, of the cocoa.
how have it be since?'
'I thank you, sir,' say Mr. Littimer, 'it have be well make.
if I might take the liberty of say so, sir, I donot think the
milk which be boil with it be quite genuine; but I be aware, sir,
that there be a great adulteration of milk, in London, and that the
article in a pure state be difficult to be obtain.'
it appear to I that the gentleman in spectacle back his
Twenty Eight against Mr. Creakle's Twenty Seven, for each of they
take his own man in hand.
'what be your state of mind, Twenty Eight?' say the questioner in
spectacle.
'I thank you, sir,' return Mr. Littimer; 'I see my folly now,
sir. I be a good deal trouble when I think of the sin of my
former companion, sir; but I trust they may find forgiveness.'
'you be quite happy yourself?' say the questioner, nodding
encouragement.
'I be much oblige to you, sir,' return Mr. Littimer. 'perfectly
so.'
'be there anything at all on your mind now?' say the questioner.
'if so, mention it, Twenty Eight.'
'Sir,' say Mr. Littimer, without look up, 'if my eye have not
deceive I, there be a gentleman present who be acquaint with
I in my former life. it may be profitable to that gentleman to
know, sir, that I attribute my past folly, entirely to have
live a thoughtless life in the service of young man; and to have
allow myself to be lead by they into weakness, which I have not
the strength to resist. I hope that gentleman will take warning,
sir, and will not be offend at my freedom. it be for his good.
I be conscious of my own past folly. I hope he may repent of all
the wickedness and sin to which he have be a party.'
I observe that several gentleman be shade their eye, each
with one hand, as if they have just come into church.
'this do you credit, Twenty Eight,' return the questioner. 'I
should have expect it of you. be there anything else?'
'Sir,' return Mr. Littimer, slightly lift up his eyebrow, but
not his eye, 'there be a young woman who fall into dissolute
course, that I endeavour to save, sir, but could not rescue. I
beg that gentleman, if he have it in his power, to inform that young
woman from I that I forgive she her bad conduct towards myself,
and that I call she to repentance - if he will be so good.'
'I have no doubt, Twenty Eight,' return the questioner, 'that the
gentleman you refer to feel very strongly - as we all must - what
you have so properly say. we will not detain you.'
'I thank you, sir,' say Mr. Littimer. 'gentleman, I wish you a
good day, and hop you and your family will also see your
wickedness, and amend!'
with this, Number Twenty Eight retire, after a glance between he
and Uriah; as if they be not altogether unknown to each other,
through some medium of communication; and a murmur go round the
group, as his door shut upon he, that he be a most respectable
man, and a beautiful case.
'now, Twenty Seven,' say Mr. Creakle, enter on a clear stage
with his man, 'be there anything that anyone can do for you? if
so, mention it.'
'I would umbly ask, sir,' return Uriah, with a jerk of his
malevolent head, 'for leave to write again to mother.'
'it shall certainly be grant,' say Mr. Creakle.
'thank you, sir! I be anxious about mother. I be afraid she benot
safe.'
somebody incautiously ask, what from? but there be a
scandalize whisper of 'hush!'
'immortally safe, sir,' return Uriah, writhe in the direction
of the voice. 'I should wish mother to be get into my state. I
never should have be get into my present state if I havenot come
here. I wish mother have come here. it would be well for
everybody, if they get take up, and be bring here.'
this sentiment give unbounded satisfaction - great satisfaction,
I think, than anything that have pass yet.
'before I come here,' say Uriah, steal a look at we, as if he
would have blight the outer world to which we belong, if he
could, 'I be give to folly; but now I be sensible of my
folly. therebe a deal of sin outside. therebe a deal of sin in
mother. therebe nothing but sin everywhere - except here.'
'you be quite change?' say Mr. Creakle.
'oh dear, yes, sir!' cry this hopeful penitent.
'you wouldnot relapse, if you be go out?' ask somebody else.
'oh de-ar no, sir!'
'well!' say Mr. Creakle, 'this be very gratifying. you have
address Mr. Copperfield, Twenty Seven. do you wish to say
anything far to he?'
'you know I, a long time before I come here and be change, Mr.
Copperfield,' say Uriah, look at I; and a more villainous look
I never see, even on his visage. 'you know I when, in spite of my
folly, I be umble among they that be proud, and meek among they
that be violent - you be violent to I yourself, Mr. Copperfield.
once, you strike I a blow in the face, you know.'
general commiseration. several indignant glance direct at I.
'but I forgive you, Mr. Copperfield,' say Uriah, make his
forgiving nature the subject of a most impious and awful parallel,
which I shall not record. 'I forgive everybody. it would ill
become I to bear malice. I freely forgive you, and I hope youwill
curb your passion in future. I hope Mr. W. will repent, and Miss
W., and all of that sinful lot. youhave be visit with
affliction, and I hope it may do you good; but youwould well have
come here. Mr. W. have well have come here, and Miss W. too. the
good wish I could give you, Mr. Copperfield, and give all of you
gentleman, be, that you could be take up and bring here. when I
think of my past folly, and my present state, I be sure it would
be good for you. I pity all who benot bring here!'
he sneak back into his cell, amidst a little chorus of
approbation; and both Traddles and I experience a great relief
when he be lock in.
it be a characteristic feature in this repentance, that I be fain
to ask what these two man have do, to be there at all. that
appear to be the last thing about which they have anything to say.
I address myself to one of the two warder, who, I suspect from
certain latent indication in their face, know pretty well what
all this stir be worth.
'do you know,' say I, as we walk along the passage, 'what felony
be Number Twenty Seven's last "folly"?'
the answer be that it be a Bank case.
'a fraud on the Bank of England?' I ask.
'yes, sir. fraud, forgery, and conspiracy. he and some other.
he set the other on. it be a deep plot for a large sum.
Sentence, transportation for life. twenty Seven be the knowing
bird of the lot, and have very nearly keep himself safe; but not
quite. the Bank be just able to put salt upon his tail - and only
just.'
'do you know Twenty Eight's offence?'
'Twenty Eight,' return my informant, speak throughout in a low
tone, and look over his shoulder as we walk along the passage,
to guard himself from be overhear, in such an unlawful
reference to these Immaculates, by Creakle and the rest; 'twenty
Eight (also transportation) get a place, and rob a young master
of a matter of two hundred and fifty pound in money and valuable,
the night before they be go abroad. I particularly recollect
his case, from his being take by a dwarf.'
'a what?'
'a little woman. I have forget her name?'
'not mowcher?'
'thatbe it! he have elude pursuit, and be go to America in a
flaxen wig, and whisker, and such a complete disguise as never you
see in all your bear day; when the little woman, be in
Southampton, meet he walk along the street - pick he out with
her sharp eye in a moment - run betwixt his leg to upset he - and
hold on to he like grim death.'
'Excellent Miss Mowcher!' cry I.
'youwould have say so, if you have see she, stand on a chair in
the witness-box at the trial, as I do,' say my friend. 'he cut
her face right open, and pound she in the most brutal manner,
when she take he; but she never loose her hold till he be lock
up. she hold so tight to he, in fact, that the officer be
oblige to take them both together. she give her evidence in the
game way, and be highly compliment by the Bench, and cheer
right home to her lodging. she say in Court that shewould have take
he single-handed (on account of what she know concern he), if
he have be Samson. and itbe my belief she would!'
it be mine too, and I highly respect Miss Mowcher for it.
we have now see all there be to see. it would have be in vain
to represent to such a man as the Worshipful Mr. Creakle, that
twenty Seven and Twenty Eight be perfectly consistent and
unchanged; that exactly what they be then, they have always be;
that the hypocritical knave be just the subject to make that
sort of profession in such a place; that they know its market-value
at least as well as we do, in the immediate service it would do
they when they be expatriate; in a word, that it be a rotten,
hollow, painfully suggestive piece of business altogether. we leave
they to their system and themselves, and go home wonder.
'perhaps itbe a good thing, traddle,' say I, 'to have an unsound
Hobby ride hard; for itbe the soon ridden to death.'
'I hope so,' reply Traddles.
CHAPTER 62
a light shines on MY WAY
the year come round to Christmas-time, and I have be at home above
two month. I have see Agnes frequently. however loud the general
voice might be in give I encouragement, and however fervent the
emotion and endeavour to which it rouse I, I hear she light
word of praise as I hear nothing else.
at least once a week, and sometimes oftener, I ride over there, and
pass the evening. I usually ride back at night; for the old
unhappy sense be always hover about I now - most sorrowfully
when I leave she - and I be glad to be up and out, rather than
wander over the past in weary wakefulness or miserable dream.
I wear away the long part of many wild sad night, in those
ride; revive, as I go, the thought that have occupy I in my
long absence.
or, if I be to say rather that I listen to the echo of those
thought, I should well express the truth. they speak to I from
afar off. I have put they at a distance, and accept my inevitable
place. when I read to Agnes what I write; when I see her listening
face; move she to smile or tear; and hear her cordial voice so
earnest on the shadowy event of that imaginative world in which I
live; I think what a fate mine might have be - but only
think so, as I have think after I be married to Dora, what I
could have wish my wife to be.
my duty to Agnes, who love I with a love, which, if I disquiet,
I wrong most selfishly and poorly, and could never restore; my
mature assurance that I, who have work out my own destiny, and
win what I have impetuously set my heart on, have no right to murmur,
and must bear; comprise what I feel and what I have learn. but
I love she: and now it even become some consolation to I, vaguely
to conceive a distant day when I might blamelessly avow it; when
all this should be over; when I could say 'Agnes, so it be when I
come home; and now I be old, and I never have love since!'
she do not once show I any change in herself. what she always
have be to I, she still be; wholly unaltered.
between my aunt and I there have be something, in this connexion,
since the night of my return, which I cannot call a restraint, or
an avoidance of the subject, so much as an imply understanding
that we think of it together, but do not shape our thought into
word. when, accord to our old custom, we sit before the fire
at night, we often fall into this train; as naturally, and as
consciously to each other, as if we have unreservedly say so. but
we preserve an unbroken silence. I believe that she have read, or
partly read, my thought that night; and that she fully
comprehend why I give mine no more distinct expression.
this Christmas-time be come, and Agnes have repose no new
confidence in I, a doubt that have several time arise in my mind
- whether she could have that perception of the true state of my
breast, which restrain she with the apprehension of give I
pain - begin to oppress I heavily. if that be so, my sacrifice
be nothing; my plainest obligation to her unfulfilled; and every
poor action I have shrink from, I be hourly do. I resolve to
set this right beyond all doubt; - if such a barrier be between
we, to break it down at once with a determined hand.
it be - what lasting reason have I to remember it! - a cold,
harsh, winter day. there have be snow, some hour before; and it
lay, not deep, but hard-frozen on the ground. out at sea, beyond
my window, the wind blow ruggedly from the north. I have be
think of it, sweep over those mountain waste of snow in
Switzerland, then inaccessible to any human foot; and have be
speculating which be the lonely, those solitary region, or a
deserted ocean.
'rid today, Trot?' say my aunt, put her head in at the
door.
'yes,' say I, 'I be go over to Canterbury. itbe a good day for
a ride.'
'I hope your horse may think so too,' say my aunt; 'but at present
he be hold down his head and his ear, stand before the door
there, as if he think his stable preferable.'
my aunt, I may observe, allow my horse on the forbidden ground,
but have not at all relent towards the donkey.
'he will be fresh enough, presently!' say I.
'the ride will do his master good, at all event,' observe my
aunt, glance at the paper on my table. 'ah, child, you pass a
good many hour here! I never think, when I use to read book,
what work it be to write they.'
'itbe work enough to read they, sometimes,' I return. 'as to the
writing, it have its own charm, aunt.'
'ah! I see!' say my aunt. 'ambition, love of approbation,
sympathy, and much more, I suppose? well: go along with you!'
'do you know anything more,' say I, stand composedly before she
- she have pat I on the shoulder, and sit down in my chair - 'of
that attachment of Agnes?'
she look up in my face a little while, before reply:
'I think I do, Trot.'
'be you confirm in your impression?' I inquire.
'I think I be, Trot.'
she look so steadfastly at I: with a kind of doubt, or pity, or
suspense in her affection: that I summon the strong
determination to show she a perfectly cheerful face.
'and what be more, Trot -' say my aunt.
'yes!'
'I think Agnes be go to be marry.'
'God bless she!' say I, cheerfully.
'God bless she!' say my aunt, 'and her husband too!'
I echo it, part from my aunt, and go lightly downstairs,
mount, and ride away. there be great reason than before to do
what I have resolve to do.
how well I recollect the wintry ride! the frozen particle of ice,
brush from the blade of grass by the wind, and bear across my
face; the hard clatter of the horse's hoof, beat a tune upon
the ground; the stiff-till soil; the snowdrift, lightly eddy
in the chalk-pit as the breeze ruffle it; the smoking team with
the waggon of old hay, stop to breathe on the hill-top, and
shake their bell musically; the whitened slope and sweep of
down-land lie against the dark sky, as if they be draw on a
huge slate!
I find Agnes alone. the little girl have go to their own home
now, and she be alone by the fire, reading. she put down her book
on see I come in; and have welcome I as usual, take she
work-basket and sit in one of the old-fashioned window.
I sit beside she on the window-seat, and we talk of what I be
do, and when it would be do, and of the progress I have make
since my last visit. Agnes be very cheerful; and laughingly
predict that I should soon become too famous to be talk to, on
such subject.
'so I make the most of the present time, you see,' say Agnes, 'and
talk to you while I may.'
as I look at her beautiful face, observant of her work, she
raise her mild clear eye, and see that I be look at she.
'you be thoughtful today, Trotwood!'
'Agnes, shall I tell you what about? I come to tell you.'
she put aside her work, as she be use to do when we be
seriously discuss anything; and give I her whole attention.
'my dear Agnes, do you doubt my be true to you?'
'no!' she answer, with a look of astonishment.
'do you doubt my be what I always have be to you?'
'no!' she answer, as before.
'do you remember that I try to tell you, when I come home, what
a debt of gratitude I owe you, dear Agnes, and how fervently I
feel towards you?'
'I remember it,' she say, gently, 'very well.'
'you have a secret,' say I. 'let I share it, Agnes.'
she cast down her eye, and tremble.
'I could hardly fail to know, even if I have not hear - but from
other lip than your, Agnes, which seem strange - that there be
someone upon whom you have bestow the treasure of your love. do
not shut I out of what concern your happiness so nearly! if you
can trust I, as you say you can, and as I know you may, let I be
your friend, your brother, in this matter, of all other!'
with an appealing, almost a reproachful, glance, she rise from the
window; and hurry across the room as if without know where,
put her hand before her face, and burst into such tear as smote
I to the heart.
and yet they awaken something in I, bring promise to my
heart. without my knowing why, these tear ally themselves with
the quietly sad smile which be so fixed in my remembrance, and
shake I more with hope than fear or sorrow.
'Agnes! sister! dearest! what have I do?'
'let I go away, Trotwood. I be not well. I be not myself. I
will speak to you by and by - another time. I will write to you.
donot speak to I now. donot! donot!'
I seek to recollect what she have say, when I have speak to she
on that former night, of her affection need no return. it
seem a very world that I must search through in a moment.
'Agnes, I cannot bear to see you so, and think that I have be the
cause. my dear girl, dearer to I than anything in life, if you
be unhappy, let I share your unhappiness. if you be in need of
help or counsel, let I try to give it to you. if you have indeed
a burden on your heart, let I try to lighten it. for whom do I
live now, Agnes, if it be not for you!'
'oh, spare I! I be not myself! another time!' be all I could
distinguish.
be it a selfish error that be lead I away? or, have once
a clue to hope, be there something open to I that I have not
dare to think of?
'I must say more. I cannot let you leave I so! for Heaven's sake,
Agnes, let we not mistake each other after all these year, and all
that have come and go with they! I must speak plainly. if you
have any linger thought that I could envy the happiness you will
confer; that I could not resign you to a dearer protector, of your
own choosing; that I could not, from my removed place, be a
content witness of your joy; dismiss it, for I donot deserve it!
I have not suffer quite in vain. you have not teach I quite in
vain. there be no alloy of self in what I feel for you.'
she be quiet now. in a little time, she turn her pale face
towards I, and say in a low voice, break here and there, but
very clear:
'I owe it to your pure friendship for I, Trotwood - which, indeed,
I do not doubt - to tell you, you be mistaken. I can do no more.
if I have sometimes, in the course of year, want help and
counsel, they have come to I. if I have sometimes be unhappy,
the feeling have pass away. if I have ever have a burden on my
heart, it have be lighten for I. if I have any secret, it be
- no new one; and be - not what you suppose. I cannot reveal it,
or divide it. it have long be mine, and must remain mine.'
'Agnes! stay! a moment!'
she be go away, but I detain she. I clasp my arm about her
waist. 'in the course of year!' 'it be not a new one!' new
thought and hope be whirl through my mind, and all the
colour of my life be change.
'Dearest Agnes! whom I so respect and honour - whom I so devotedly
love! when I come here today, I think that nothing could have
wrest this confession from I. I think I could have keep it in
my bosom all our life, till we be old. but, Agnes, if I have
indeed any new-bear hope that I may ever call you something more
than Sister, widely different from Sister! -'
her tear fall fast; but they be not like those she have lately
shed, and I see my hope brighten in they.
'Agnes! ever my guide, and good support! if you have be more
mindful of yourself, and less of I, when we grow up here together,
I think my heedless fancy never would have wander from you. but
you be so much well than I, so necessary to I in every boyish
hope and disappointment, that to have you to confide in, and rely
upon in everything, become a second nature, supplant for the
time the first and great one of love you as I do!'
still weep, but not sadly - joyfully! and clasp in my arm as
she have never be, as I have think she never be to be!
'when I love Dora - fondly, Agnes, as you know -'
'yes!' she cry, earnestly. 'I be glad to know it!'
'when I love she - even then, my love would have be incomplete,
without your sympathy. I have it, and it be perfect. and when
I lose she, Agnes, what should I have be without you, still!'
close in my arm, near to my heart, her tremble hand upon my
shoulder, her sweet eye shin through her tear, on mine!
'I go away, dear Agnes, love you. I stay away, love you.
I return home, love you!'
and now, I try to tell she of the struggle I have have, and the
conclusion I have come to. I try to lay my mind before she,
truly, and entirely. I try to show she how I have hop I have
come into the well knowledge of myself and of she; how I have
resign myself to what that well knowledge bring; and how I
have come there, even that day, in my fidelity to this. if she do
so love I (I say) that she could take I for her husband, she
could do so, on no deserving of mine, except upon the truth of my
love for she, and the trouble in which it have ripen to be what it
be; and hence it be that I reveal it. and O, Agnes, even out
of thy true eye, in that same time, the spirit of my child-wife
look upon I, say it be well; and win I, through thee,
to tender recollection of the blossom that have wither in its
bloom!
'I be so blest, Trotwood - my heart be so overcharged - but there
be one thing I must say.'
'Dearest, what?'
she lay her gentle hand upon my shoulder, and look calmly in
my face.
'do you know, yet, what it be?'
'I be afraid to speculate on what it be. tell I, my dear.'
'I have love you all my life!'
O, we be happy, we be happy! our tear be not for the trial
(hers so much the great) through which we have come to be thus,
but for the rapture of be thus, never to be divide more!
we walk, that winter evening, in the field together; and the
bless calm within we seem to be partake by the frosty air.
the early star begin to shine while we be linger on, and
look up to they, we thank our GOD for have guide we to this
tranquillity.
we stand together in the same old-fashioned window at night, when
the moon be shin; Agnes with her quiet eye raise up to it; I
follow her glance. long mile of road then open out before my
mind; and, toil on, I see a ragged way-wear boy, forsake and
neglect, who should come to call even the heart now beat
against mine, his own.
it be nearly dinner-time next day when we appear before my aunt.
she be up in my study, Peggotty say: which it be her pride to
keep in readiness and order for I. we find she, in her
spectacle, sit by the fire.
'goodness I!' say my aunt, peer through the dusk, 'whobe this
yoube bring home?'
'Agnes,' say I.
as we have arrange to say nothing at first, my aunt be not a
little discomfited. she dart a hopeful glance at I, when I say
'Agnes'; but see that I look as usual, she take off her
spectacle in despair, and rub her nose with they.
she greet Agnes heartily, nevertheless; and we be soon in the
light parlour downstairs, at dinner. my aunt put on her
spectacle twice or thrice, to take another look at I, but as
often take they off again, disappointed, and rub her nose with
they. much to the discomfiture of Mr. Dick, who know this to be a
bad symptom.
'by the by, aunt,' say I, after dinner; 'I have be speak to
Agnes about what you tell I.'
'then, Trot,' say my aunt, turn scarlet, 'you do wrong, and
break your promise.'
'you be not angry, aunt, I trust? I be sure you willnot be, when
you learn that Agnes be not unhappy in any attachment.'
'stuff and nonsense!' say my aunt.
as my aunt appear to be annoy, I think the good way be to
cut her annoyance short. I take Agnes in my arm to the back of her
chair, and we both lean over she. my aunt, with one clap of her
hand, and one look through her spectacle, immediately go into
hysteric, for the first and only time in all my knowledge of she.
the hysteric call up Peggotty. the moment my aunt be restore,
she fly at Peggotty, and call she a silly old creature, hug
she with all her might. after that, she hug Mr. Dick (who be
highly honour, but a good deal surprised); and after that, tell
they why. then, we be all happy together.
I could not discover whether my aunt, in her last short
conversation with I, have fall on a pious fraud, or have really
mistaken the state of my mind. it be quite enough, she say, that
she have tell I Agnes be go to be marry; and that I now know
well than anyone how true it be.
we be marry within a fortnight. traddle and Sophy, and Doctor
and Mrs. Strong, be the only guest at our quiet wedding. we
leave they full of joy; and drive away together. clasped in my
embrace, I hold the source of every worthy aspiration I have ever
have; the centre of myself, the circle of my life, my own, my wife;
my love of whom be found on a rock!
'Dearest husband!' say Agnes. 'now that I may call you by that
name, I have one thing more to tell you.'
'let I hear it, love.'
'it grow out of the night when Dora die. she send you for I.'
'she do.'
'she tell I that she leave I something. can you think what it
be?'
I believe I could. I draw the wife who have so long love I,
close to my side.
'she tell I that she make a last request to I, and leave I a last
charge.'
'and it be -'
'that only I would occupy this vacant place.'
and Agnes lay her head upon my breast, and weep; and I weep with
she, though we be so happy.
CHAPTER 63
a visitor
what I have purpose to record be nearly finish; but there be yet
an incident conspicuous in my memory, on which it often rest with
delight, and without which one thread in the web I have spin would
have a ravel end.
I have advance in fame and fortune, my domestic joy be perfect, I
have be marry ten happy year. Agnes and I be sit by the
fire, in our house in London, one night in spring, and three of our
child be play in the room, when I be tell that a stranger
wish to see I.
he have be ask if he come on business, and have answer no; he
have come for the pleasure of see I, and have come a long way.
he be an old man, my servant say, and look like a farmer.
as this sound mysterious to the child, and moreover be like
the beginning of a favourite story Agnes use to tell they,
introductory to the arrival of a wicked old Fairy in a cloak who
hat everybody, it produce some commotion. one of our boy lay
his head in his mother's lap to be out of harm's way, and little
Agnes (our eld child) leave her doll in a chair to represent she,
and thrust out her little heap of golden curl from between the
window-curtain, to see what happen next.
'let he come in here!' say I.
there soon appear, pause in the dark doorway as he enter, a
hale, grey-haired old man. Little Agnes, attract by his look,
have run to bring he in, and I have not yet clearly see his face,
when my wife, start up, cry out to I, in a pleased and
agitated voice, that it be Mr. Peggotty!
it be Mr. Peggotty. an old man now, but in a ruddy, hearty,
strong old age. when our first emotion be over, and he sit before
the fire with the child on his knee, and the blaze shin on
his face, he look, to I, as vigorous and robust, withal as
handsome, an old man, as ever I have see.
'Mas'r Davy,' say he. and the old name in the old tone fall so
naturally on my ear! 'Mas'r Davy, 'tis a joyful hour as I see you,
once more, 'long with your own trew wife!'
'a joyful hour indeed, old friend!' cry I.
'and these heer pretty one,' say Mr. Peggotty. 'to look at these
heer flower! why, Mas'r Davy, you be but the heighth of the
littlest of these, when I first see you! when Em'ly warn't no
big, and our poor lad be but a lad!'
'time have change I more than it have change you since then,' say
I. 'but let these dear rogue go to bed; and as no house in
England but this must hold you, tell I where to send for your
luggage (be the old black bag among it, that go so far, I
wonder!), and then, over a glass of Yarmouth grog, we will have the
tiding of ten year!'
'be you alone?' ask Agnes.
'yes, ma'am,' he say, kiss her hand, 'quite alone.'
we sit he between we, not know how to give he welcome enough;
and as I begin to listen to his old familiar voice, I could have
fancy he be still pursue his long journey in search of his
darling niece.
'itbe a mort of water,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'fur to come across, and
on'y stay a matter of fower week. but water ('specially when 'tis
salt) come nat'ral to I; and friend be dear, and I be heer. -
which be verse,' say Mr. Peggotty, surprised to find it out,
'though I havenot such intention.'
'be you go back those many thousand mile, so soon?' ask
Agnes.
'yes, ma'am,' he return. 'I giv the promise to Em'ly, afore I
come away. you see, I doen't grow young as the year come
round, and if I havenot sail as 'twas, most like I shouldnot never
have do 't. and itbe allus be on my mind, as I must come and
see Mas'r Davy and your own sweet bloom self, in your wed
happiness, afore I get to be too old.'
he look at we, as if he could never feast his eye on we
sufficiently. Agnes laughingly put back some scatter lock of
his grey hair, that he might see we well.
'and now tell we,' say I, 'everything relate to your fortune.'
'our fortun, Mas'r Davy,' he rejoin, 'be soon tell. we havenot
fare nohow, but fare to thrive. wehave allus thrive. wehave
work as we ought to 't, and maybe we live a leetle hard at first
or so, but we have allus thrive. what with sheep-farming, and
what with stock-farming, and what with one thing and what with
t'other, we be as well to do, as well could be. Theer's be
kiender a blessing fall upon we,' say Mr. Peggotty, reverentially
incline his head, 'and wehave do nowt but prosper. that is, in
the long run. if not yesterday, why then today. if not today, why
then tomorrow.'
'and emily?' say Agnes and I, both together.
'Em'ly,' say he, 'arter you leave she, ma'am - and I never heerd
her say of her prayer at night, t'other side the canvas screen,
when we be settle in the Bush, but what I heerd your name - and
arter she and I lose sight of Mas'r Davy, that theer shin
sundown - be that low, at first, that, if she have know'd then what
Mas'r Davy kep from we so kind and thowtful, 'tis my opinion shewould
have droop away. but theer be some poor folk aboard as have
illness among them, and she take care of they; and theer be the
child in our company, and she take care of they; and so she get
to be busy, and to be do good, and that help she.'
'when do she first hear of it?' I ask.
'I kep it from her arter I heerd on 't,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'go
on nigh a year. we be live then in a solitary place, but among
the beautifull tree, and with the rose a-cover our Beein to
the roof. theer come along one day, when I be out a-work on
the land, a traveller from our own Norfolk or Suffolk in England (I
doen't rightly mind which), and of course we take he in, and giv
he to eat and drink, and make he welcome. we all do that, all
the colony over. hewould get an old newspaper with he, and some
other account in print of the storm. thatbe how she know'd it.
when I come home at night, I find she know'd it.'
he drop his voice as he say these word, and the gravity I so
well remember overspread his face.
'do it change her much?' we ask.
'Aye, for a good long time,' he say, shake his head; 'if not to
this present hour. but I think the solitoode do she good. and
she have a deal to mind in the way of poultry and the like, and
minded of it, and come through. I wonder,' he say thoughtfully,
'if you could see my Em'ly now, Mas'r Davy, whether youwould know
she!'
'be she so alter?' I inquire.
'I doen't know. I see she ev'ry day, and doen't know; but,
odd-time, I have thowt so. a slight figure,' say Mr. Peggotty,
look at the fire, 'kiender worn; soft, sorrowful, blue eye; a
delicate face; a pritty head, lean a little down; a quiet voice
and way - timid a'most. thatbe Em'ly!'
we silently observe he as he sit, still look at the fire.
'some think,' he say, 'as her affection be ill-bestow; some,
as her marriage be break off by death. no one know how 'tis.
she might have marry well, a mort of time, "but, uncle," she
say to I, "thatbe go for ever." cheerful along with I; retire
when other be by; fond of go any distance fur to teach a child,
or fur to tend a sick person, or fur to do some kindness tow'rd a
young girl's wedding (and shebe do a many, but have never see
one); fondly love of her uncle; patient; like by young and old;
sowt out by all that have any trouble. thatbe Em'ly!'
he draw his hand across his face, and with a half-suppress sigh
look up from the fire.
'be Martha with you yet?' I ask.
'Martha,' he reply, 'get marry, Mas'r Davy, in the second year.
a young man, a farm-labourer, as come by we on his way to market
with his mas'r's dray - a journey of over five hundred mile, theer
and back - make offer fur to take her fur his wife (wife be very
scarce theer), and then to set up fur their two self in the Bush.
she speak to I fur to tell he her trew story. I do. they be
marry, and they live fower hundred mile away from any voice but
their own and the singing bird.'
'Mrs. Gummidge?' I suggest.
it be a pleasant key to touch, for Mr. Peggotty suddenly burst
into a roar of laughter, and rub his hand up and down his leg,
as he have be accustom to do when he enjoy himself in the
long-shipwreck boat.
'would you believe it!' he say. 'why, someun even make offer fur
to marry she! if a ship's cook that be turn settler, Mas'r
Davy, donot make offer fur to marry Missis Gummidge, Ibe gorme
- and I cannot say no fair than that!'
I never see Agnes laugh so. this sudden ecstasy on the part of Mr.
Peggotty be so delightful to she, that she could not leave off
laugh; and the more she laugh the more she make I laugh, and
the great Mr. Peggotty's ecstasy became, and the more he rub
his leg.
'and what do Mrs. Gummidge say?' I ask, when I be grave enough.
'if youwill believe I,' return Mr. Peggotty, 'Missis Gummidge,
'stead of say "thank you, Ibe much obleege to you, I benot
a-go fur to change my condition at my time of life," up'd with
a bucket as be stand by, and lay it over that theer ship's
cook's head 'till he sing out fur help, and I go in and reskie
of he.'
Mr. Peggotty burst into a great roar of laughter, and Agnes and I
both keep he company.
'but I must say this, for the good creetur,' he resume, wipe his
face, when we be quite exhausted; 'she have be all she say
shewould be to we, and more. shebe the willing, the trew, the
honestest-help woman, Mas'r Davy, as ever draw'd the breath of
life. I have never know'd she to be lone and lorn, for a single
minute, not even when the colony be all afore we, and we be new
to it. and think of the old 'un be a thing she never do, I do
assure you, since she leave England!'
'now, last, not least, Mr. Micawber,' say I. 'he have pay off
every obligation he incur here - even to Traddles's bill, you
remember my dear Agnes - and therefore we may take it for grant
that he be do well. but what be the late news of he?'
Mr. Peggotty, with a smile, put his hand in his breast-pocket, and
produce a flat-fold, paper parcel, from which he take out, with
much care, a little odd-look newspaper.
'you be to understan', Mas'r Davy,' say he, 'as we have leave the
Bush now, be so well to do; and have go right away round to
Port Middlebay Harbour, wheer theer's what we call a town.'
'Mr. Micawber be in the Bush near you?' say I.
'bless you, yes,' say Mr. Peggotty, 'and turn to with a will.
I never wish to meet a well gen'l'man for turn to with a will.
Ihave see that theer bald head of his a perspiring in the sun,
Mas'r Davy, till I a'most thowt it would have melt away. and now
hebe a magistrate.'
'a Magistrate, eh?' say I.
Mr. Peggotty point to a certain paragraph in the newspaper, where
I read aloud as follow, from the Port Middlebay Times:
'the public dinner to our distinguished fellow-colonist and
townsman, WILKINS MICAWBER, ESQUIRE, Port Middlebay District
Magistrate, come off yesterday in the large room of the Hotel,
which be crowd to suffocation. it be estimate that not few
than forty-seven person must have be accommodate with dinner at
one time, exclusive of the company in the passage and on the
stair. the beauty, fashion, and exclusiveness of Port Middlebay,
flock to do honour to one so deservedly esteemed, so highly
talente, and so widely popular. Doctor Mell (of Colonial
Salem-House Grammar School, Port Middlebay) preside, and on his
right sit the distinguished guest. after the removal of the cloth,
and the singing of Non Nobis (beautifully execute, and in which we
be at no loss to distinguish the bell-like note of that gifted
amateur, WILKINS MICAWBER, ESQUIRE, JUNIOR), the usual loyal and
patriotic toast be severally give and rapturously receive.
Doctor Mell, in a speech replete with feeling, then propose "our
distinguish Guest, the ornament of our town. may he never leave
we but to well himself, and may his success among we be such as
to render his better himself impossible!" the cheer with
which the toast be receive defy description. again and again
it rise and fall, like the wave of ocean. at length all be
hush, and WILKINS MICAWBER, ESQUIRE, present himself to return
thank. far be it from we, in the present comparatively imperfect
state of the resource of our establishment, to endeavour to follow
our distinguished townsman through the smoothly-flow period of
his polished and highly-ornate address! suffice it to observe, that
it be a masterpiece of eloquence; and that those passage in which
he more particularly trace his own successful career to its
source, and warn the young portion of his auditory from the
shoal of ever incur pecuniary liability which they be
unable to liquidate, bring a tear into the manly eye present.
the remain toast be DOCTOR MELL; Mrs. MICAWBER (who
gracefully bow her acknowledgement from the side-door, where a
galaxy of beauty be elevate on chair, at once to witness and
adorn the gratifying scene), Mrs. ridger beg (late Miss Micawber);
Mrs. MELL; WILKINS MICAWBER, ESQUIRE, JUNIOR (who convulse the
assembly by humorously remark that he find himself unable to
return thank in a speech, but would do so, with their permission,
in a song); Mrs. MICAWBER's FAMILY (well know, it be needless to
remark, in the mother-country), &c. &c. &c. at the conclusion of
the proceeding the table be clear as if by art-magic for
dancing. among the votary of TERPSICHORE, who disport
themselves until Sol give warn for departure, Wilkins Micawber,
Esquire, Junior, and the lovely and accomplish Miss Helena,
fourth daughter of Doctor Mell, be particularly remarkable.'
I be look back to the name of Doctor Mell, please to have
discover, in these happy circumstance, Mr. Mell, formerly poor
pinch usher to my Middlesex magistrate, when Mr. Peggotty
pointing to another part of the paper, my eye rest on my own
name, and I read thus:
' TO DAVID COPPERFIELD, ESQUIRE,
'the EMINENT AUTHOR.
'my Dear Sir,
'year have elapse, since I have an opportunity of ocularly
peruse the lineament, now familiar to the imagination of a
considerable portion of the civilized world.
'but, my dear Sir, though estrange (by the force of circumstance
over which I have have no control) from the personal society of the
friend and companion of my youth, I have not be unmindful of his
soar flight. nor have I be debar,
though sea between we braid ha' roar,
(BURNS) from participate in the intellectual feast he have spread
before we.
'I cannot, therefore, allow of the departure from this place of an
individual whom we mutually respect and esteem, without, my dear
Sir, take this public opportunity of thank you, on my own
behalf, and, I may undertake to add, on that of the whole of the
Inhabitants of Port Middlebay, for the gratification of which you
be the minister agent.
'go on, my dear Sir! you be not unknown here, you be not
unappreciated. though "remote", we be neither "unfriended",
"melancholy", nor (I may add) "slow". go on, my dear Sir, in your
Eagle course! the inhabitant of Port Middlebay may at least aspire
to watch it, with delight, with entertainment, with instruction!
'among the eye elevate towards you from this portion of the
globe, will ever be find, while it have light and life,
'the
'eye
'appertain to
'WILKINS MICAWBER,
'Magistrate.'
I find, on glance at the remain content of the newspaper,
that Mr. Micawber be a diligent and esteemed correspondent of that
journal. there be another letter from he in the same paper,
touch a bridge; there be an advertisement of a collection of
similar letter by he, to be shortly republish, in a neat
volume, 'with considerable addition'; and, unless I be very much
mistaken, the lead article be his also.
we talk much of Mr. Micawber, on many other evening while Mr.
Peggotty remain with we. he live with we during the whole term
of his stay, - which, I think, be something less than a month, -
and his sister and my aunt come to London to see he. Agnes and I
part from he aboard-ship, when he sail; and we shall never
part from he more, on earth.
but before he leave, he go with I to Yarmouth, to see a little
tablet I have put up in the churchyard to the memory of Ham. while
I be copy the plain inscription for he at his request, I see
he stoop, and gather a tuft of grass from the grave and a little
earth.
'for Em'ly,' he say, as he put it in his breast. 'I promise,
Mas'r Davy.'
CHAPTER 64
a last retrospect
and now my write story end. I look back, once more - for the
last time - before I close these leaf.
I see myself, with Agnes at my side, journey along the road of
life. I see our child and our friend around we; and I hear the
roar of many voice, not indifferent to I as I travel on.
what face be the most distinct to I in the fleeting crowd? Lo,
these; all turn to I as I ask my thought the question!
here be my aunt, in strong spectacle, an old woman of four-score
year and more, but upright yet, and a steady walker of six mile
at a stretch in winter weather.
always with she, here come Peggotty, my good old nurse, likewise
in spectacle, accustom to do needle-work at night very close to
the lamp, but never sit down to it without a bit of wax candle,
a yard-measure in a little house, and a work-box with a picture of
St. Paul's upon the lid.
the cheek and arm of Peggotty, so hard and red in my childish
day, when I wonder why the bird donot peck she in preference
to apple, be shrivel now; and her eye, that use to darken
their whole neighbourhood in her face, be fainter (though they
glitter still); but her rough forefinger, which I once associate
with a pocket nutmeg-grater, be just the same, and when I see my
least child catch at it as it totter from my aunt to she, I
think of our little parlour at home, when I could scarcely walk.
my aunt's old disappointment be set right, now. she be godmother
to a real living Betsey Trotwood; and Dora (the next in order) say
she spoil she.
there be something bulky in Peggotty's pocket. it be nothing
small than the Crocodile Book, which be in rather a dilapidate
condition by this time, with diver of the leaf tear and stitch
across, but which Peggotty exhibit to the child as a precious
relic. I find it very curious to see my own infant face, look
up at I from the Crocodile story; and to be remind by it of my
old acquaintance Brooks of Sheffield.
among my boy, this summer holiday time, I see an old man make
giant kite, and gaze at they in the air, with a delight for
which there be no word. he greet I rapturously, and whisper,
with many nod and wink, 'trotwood, you will be glad to hear that
I shall finish the Memorial when I have nothing else to do, and
that your auntbe the most extraordinary woman in the world, sir!'
who be this bent lady, support herself by a stick, and show
I a countenance in which there be some trace of old pride and
beauty, feebly contend with a querulous, imbecile, fretful
wandering of the mind? she be in a garden; and near she stand a
sharp, dark, withered woman, with a white scar on her lip. let I
hear what they say.
'Rosa, I have forget this gentleman's name.'
Rosa bend over she, and call to she, 'Mr. Copperfield.'
'I be glad to see you, sir. I be sorry to observe you be in
mourning. I hope Time will be good to you.'
her impatient attendant scold she, tell she I be not in mourning,
bid she look again, try to rouse she.
'you have see my son, sir,' say the eld lady. 'be you
reconcile?'
look fixedly at I, she put her hand to her forehead, and
moan. suddenly, she cry, in a terrible voice, 'Rosa, come to
I. he be dead!' Rosa kneeling at her foot, by turn caress she,
and quarrel with she; now fiercely tell she, 'I love he
well than you ever did!'- now soothe she to sleep on her
breast, like a sick child. thus I leave they; thus I always find
they; thus they wear their time away, from year to year.
what ship come sail home from India, and what English lady be
this, marry to a growling old Scotch Croesus with great flap of
ear? can this be Julia Mills?
indeed it be Julia Mills, peevish and fine, with a black man to
carry card and letter to she on a golden salver, and a
copper-colour woman in linen, with a bright handkerchief round
her head, to serve her Tiffin in her dressing-room. but Julia
keep no diary in these day; never sing Affection's Dirge;
eternally quarrel with the old Scotch Croesus, who be a sort of
yellow bear with a tanned hide. Julia be steep in money to the
throat, and talk and think of nothing else. I like she well
in the Desert of Sahara.
or perhaps this be the Desert of Sahara! for, though Julia have a
stately house, and mighty company, and sumptuous dinner every day,
I see no green growth near she; nothing that can ever come to fruit
or flower. what Julia call 'society', I see; among it Mr. Jack
Maldon, from his Patent Place, sneer at the hand that give it
he, and speak to I of the doctor as 'so charmingly antique'.
but when society be the name for such hollow gentleman and lady,
Julia, and when its breeding be profess indifference to
everything that can advance or can retard mankind, I think we must
have lose ourselves in that same Desert of Sahara, and have well
find the way out.
and lo, the Doctor, always our good friend, labour at his
Dictionary (somewhere about the letter d), and happy in his home
and wife. also the Old Soldier, on a considerably reduce footing,
and by no mean so influential as in day of yore!
work at his chamber in the Temple, with a busy aspect, and his
hair (where he be not bald) make more rebellious than ever by the
constant friction of his lawyer's-wig, I come, in a later time,
upon my dear old traddle. his table be cover with thick pile
of paper; and I say, as I look around I:
'if Sophy be your clerk, now, Traddles, she would have enough to
do!'
'you may say that, my dear Copperfield! but those be capital
day, too, in Holborn Court! be they not?'
'when she tell you you would be a judge? but it be not the town
talk then!'
'at all event,' say traddle, 'if I ever be one -'
'why, you know you will be.'
'well, my dear Copperfield, when I be one, I shall tell the story,
as I say I would.'
we walk away, arm in arm. I be go to have a family dinner with
traddle. it be Sophy's birthday; and, on our road, traddle
discourse to I of the good fortune he have enjoy.
'I really have be able, my dear Copperfield, to do all that I have
most at heart. therebe the Reverend Horace promote to that living
at four hundred and fifty pound a year; there be our two boy
receive the very good education, and distinguish themselves as
steady scholar and good fellow; there be three of the girl
marry very comfortably; there be three more live with we;
there be three more keep house for the Reverend Horace since
Mrs. Crewler's decease; and all of they happy.'
'except -' I suggest.
'except the beauty,' say traddle. 'yes. it be very unfortunate
that she should marry such a vagabond. but there be a certain
dash and glare about he that catch she. however, now we have get
she safe at our house, and get rid of he, we must cheer she up
again.'
Traddles's house be one of the very house - or it easily may have
be - which he and Sophy use to parcel out, in their evening
walk. it be a large house; but Traddles keep his paper in his
dressing-room and his boot with his paper; and he and Sophy
squeeze themselves into upper room, reserve the good bedroom
for the Beauty and the girl. there be no room to spare in the
house; for more of 'the girl' be here, and always be here, by
some accident or other, than I know how to count. here, when we go
in, be a crowd of they, run down to the door, and handing
traddle about to be kiss, until he be out of breath. here,
establish in perpetuity, be the poor Beauty, a widow with a
little girl; here, at dinner on Sophy's birthday, be the three
married girl with their three husband, and one of the husband's
brother, and another husband's cousin, and another husband's
sister, who appear to I to be engage to the cousin. traddle,
exactly the same simple, unaffected fellow as he ever be, sit at
the foot of the large table like a Patriarch; and Sophy beam upon
he, from the head, across a cheerful space that be certainly not
glitter with Britannia metal.
and now, as I close my task, subdue my desire to linger yet,
these face fade away. but one face, shin on I like a heavenly
light by which I see all other object, be above they and beyond
they all. and that remain.
I turn my head, and see it, in its beautiful serenity, beside I.
my lamp burn low, and I have write far into the night; but the
dear presence, without which I be nothing, bear I company.
o Agnes, o my soul, so may thy face be by I when I close my life
indeed; so may I, when reality be melt from I, like the
shadow which I now dismiss, still find thee near I, point
upward!
