Henry Fielding
the history of Tom Jones, a foundling.
to the honourable
GEORGE LYTTLETON, ESQ;
one of the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury.
Sir,
notwithstanding your constant refusal, when I have ask leave to
prefix your name to this dedication, I must still insist on my right
to desire your protection of this work.
to you, Sir, it be owe that this history be ever begin. it be by
your desire that I first think of such a composition. so many year
have since past, that you may have, perhaps, forget this
circumstance: but your desire be to I in the nature of command;
and the impression of they be never to be erase from my memory.
again, Sir, without your assistance this history have never be
complete. be not startle at the assertion. I do not intend to draw
on you the suspicion of be a romance writer. I mean no more than
that I partly owe to you my existence during great part of the time
which I have employ in compose it: another matter which it may be
necessary to remind you of; since there be certain action of which
you be apt to be extremely forgetful; but of these I hope I shall
always have a well memory than yourself.
lastly, it be owe to you that the history appear what it now be. if
there be in this work, as some have be pleased to say, a strong
picture of a truly benevolent mind than be to be find in any other,
who that know you, and a particular acquaintance of your, will doubt
whence that benevolence hath be copy? the world will not, I
believe, make I the compliment of thinking I take it from myself. I
care not: this they shall own, that the two person from whom I have
take it, that be to say, two of the good and worthy man in the
world, be strongly and zealously my friend. I might be content
with this, and yet my vanity will add a third to the number; and he
one of the great and noble, not only in his rank, but in every
public and private virtue. but here, whilst my gratitude for the
princely benefaction of the Duke of Bedford burst from my heart, you
must forgive my reminding you that it be you who first recommend I
to the notice of my benefactor.
and what be your objection to the allowance of the honour which I
have sollicite? why, you have commend the book so warmly, that you
should be ashamed of read your name before the dedication. indeed,
sir, if the book itself doth not make you ashamed of your
commendation, nothing that I can here write will, or ought. I be not
to give up my right to your protection and patronage, because you have
commend my book: for though I acknowledge so many obligation to
you, I do not add this to the number; in which friendship, I be
convince, hath so little share: since that can neither biass your
judgment, nor pervert your integrity. an enemy may at any time obtain
your commendation by only deserve it; and the utmost which the
fault of your friend can hope for, be your silence; or, perhaps, if
too severely accuse, your gentle palliation.
in short, sir, I suspect, that your dislike of public praise be your
true objection to grant my request. I have observe that you have,
in common with my two other friend, an unwillingness to hear the
least mention of your own virtue; that, as a great poet say of one
of you, (he might justly have say it of all three), you
_do good by stealth, and blush to find it fame_.
if man of this disposition be as careful to shun applause, as other
be to escape censure, how just must be your apprehension of your
character fall into my hand; since what would not a man have
reason to dread, if attack by an author who have receive from he
injury equal to my obligation to you!
and will not this dread of censure increase in proportion to the
matter which a man be conscious of have afford for it? if his
whole life, for instance, should have be one continue subject of
satire, he may well tremble when an incensed satirist take he in
hand. now, sir, if we apply this to your modest aversion to panegyric,
how reasonable will your fear of I appear!
yet surely you might have gratify my ambition, from this single
confidence, that I shall always prefer the indulgence of your
inclination to the satisfaction of my own. a very strong instance of
which I shall give you in this address, in which I be determined to
follow the example of all other dedicator, and will consider not what
my patron really deserve to have write, but what he will be good
pleased to read.
without further preface then, I here present you with the labour of
some year of my life. what merit these labour have be already know
to yourself. if, from your favourable judgment, I have conceive some
esteem for they, it cannot be impute to vanity; since I should have
agree as implicitly to your opinion, have it be give in favour of
any other man's production. negatively, at least, I may be allow to
say, that have I be sensible of any great demerit in the work, you
be the last person to whose protection I would have venture to
recommend it.
from the name of my patron, indeed, I hope my reader will be
convince, at his very entrance on this work, that he will find in the
whole course of it nothing prejudicial to the cause of religion and
virtue, nothing inconsistent with the strict rule of decency, nor
which can offend even the chaste eye in the perusal. on the
contrary, I declare, that to recommend goodness and innocence hath
be my sincere endeavour in this history. this honest purpose you
have be pleased to think I have attain: and to say the truth, it
be likeli to be attain in book of this kind; for an example be a
kind of picture, in which virtue become, as it be, an object of
sight, and strike we with an idea of that loveliness, which Plato
assert there be in her naked charm.
besides display that beauty of virtue which may attract the
admiration of mankind, I have attempt to engage a strong motive to
human action in her favour, by convince man, that their true
interest direct they to a pursuit of she. for this purpose I have
show that no acquisition of guilt can compensate the loss of that
solid inward comfort of mind, which be the sure companion of innocence
and virtue; nor can in the least balance the evil of that horror and
anxiety which, in their room, guilt introduce into our bosom. and
again, that as these acquisition be in themselves generally
worthless, so be the mean to attain they not only base and infamous,
but at good incertain, and always full of danger. lastly, I have
endeavour strongly to inculcate, that virtue and innocence can
scarce ever be injure but by indiscretion; and that it be this alone
which often betray they into the snare that deceit and villainy
spread for they. a moral which I have the more industriously labour,
as the teaching it be, of all other, the likeli to be attend
with success; since, I believe, it be much easy to make good man
wise, than to make bad man good.
for these purpose I have employ all the wit and humour of which I
be master in the follow history; wherein I have endeavour to
laugh mankind out of their favourite folly and vice. how far I have
succeed in this good attempt, I shall submit to the candid reader,
with only two request: first, that he will not expect to find
perfection in this work; and secondly, that he will excuse some part
of it, if they fall short of that little merit which I hope may appear
in other.
I will detain you, sir, no long. indeed I have run into a preface,
while I profess to write a dedication. but how can it be otherwise?
I dare not praise you; and the only mean I know of to avoid it, when
you be in my thought, be either to be entirely silent, or to turn
my thought to some other subject.
Pardon, therefore, what I have say in this epistle, not only without
your consent, but absolutely against it; and give I at least leave,
in this public manner, to declare that I be, with the high respect
and gratitude,--
Sir,
your most oblige,
Obedient, humble servant,
HENRY fielding.
the history of Tom Jones, a foundling.
BOOK I.
contain as MUCH of the birth of the foundling as be NECESSARY or
proper to ACQUAINT the reader with in the beginning of this history.
Chapter i.
the introduction to the work, or bill of fare to the feast.
an author ought to consider himself, not as a gentleman who give a
private or eleemosynary treat, but rather as one who keep a public
ordinary, at which all person be welcome for their money. in the
former case, it be well know that the entertainer provide what fare
he please; and though this should be very indifferent, and utterly
disagreeable to the taste of his company, they must not find any
fault; nay, on the contrary, good breeding force they outwardly to
approve and to commend whatever be set before they. now the contrary
of this happen to the master of an ordinary. man who pay for what
they eat will insist on gratify their palate, however nice and
whimsical these may prove; and if everything be not agreeable to their
taste, will challenge a right to censure, to abuse, and to d--n their
dinner without controul.
to prevent, therefore, give offence to their customer by any such
disappointment, it hath be usual with the honest and well-mean
host to provide a bill of fare which all person may peruse at their
first entrance into the house; and have thence acquaint themselves
with the entertainment which they may expect, may either stay and
regale with what be provide for they, or may depart to some other
ordinary well accommodate to their taste.
as we do not disdain to borrow wit or wisdom from any man who be
capable of lend we either, we have condescend to take a hint from
these honest victualler, and shall prefix not only a general bill of
fare to our whole entertainment, but shall likewise give the reader
particular bill to every course which be to be serve up in this and
the ensue volume.
the provision, then, which we have here make be no other than _human
Nature_. nor do I fear that my sensible reader, though most luxurious
in his taste, will start, cavil, or be offend, because I have name
but one article. the tortoise--as the alderman of Bristol, well
learn in eating, know by much experience--besides the delicious
calipash and calipee, contain many different kind of food; nor can
the learned reader be ignorant, that in human nature, though here
collect under one general name, be such prodigious variety, that a
cook will have soon go through all the several specie of animal
and vegetable food in the world, than an author will be able to
exhaust so extensive a subject.
an objection may perhaps be apprehend from the more delicate, that
this dish be too common and vulgar; for what else be the subject of
all the romance, novel, play, and poem, with which the stall
abound? many exquisite viand might be reject by the epicure, if it
be a sufficient cause for his contemning of they as common and
vulgar, that something be to be find in the most paltry alley under
the same name. in reality, true nature be as difficult to be meet with
in author, as the Bayonne ham, or Bologna sausage, be to be find in
the shop.
but the whole, to continue the same metaphor, consist in the cookery
of the author; for, as Mr Pope tell us--
"true wit be nature to advantage dr;
what oft be think, but ne'er so well expr."
the same animal which hath the honour to have some part of his flesh
eat at the table of a duke, may perhaps be degrade in another part,
and some of his limb gibbet, as it be, in the vile stall in
town. where, then, lie the difference between the food of the
nobleman and the porter, if both be at dinner on the same ox or calf,
but in the seasoning, the dressing, the garnishing, and the setting
forth? hence the one provoke and incite the most languid appetite,
and the other turn and pall that which be the sharp and keen.
in like manner, the excellence of the mental entertainment consist
less in the subject than in the author's skill in well dress it up.
how pleased, therefore, will the reader be to find that we have, in
the follow work, adhere closely to one of the high principle
of the good cook which the present age, or perhaps that of
Heliogabalus, hath produce. this great man, as be well known to all
lover of polite eating, begin at first by set plain thing
before his hungry guest, rise afterwards by degree as their
stomach may be suppose to decrease, to the very quintessence of
sauce and spice. in like manner, we shall represent human nature at
first to the keen appetite of our reader, in that more plain and
simple manner in which it be find in the country, and shall hereafter
hash and ragoo it with all the high french and italian seasoning of
affectation and vice which court and city afford. by these mean,
we doubt not but our reader may be render desirous to read on for
ever, as the great person just above-mention be suppose to have
make some person eat.
have premise thus much, we will now detain those who like our bill
of fare no long from their diet, and shall proceed directly to serve
up the first course of our history for their entertainment.
Chapter ii.
a short description of squire Allworthy, and a full account of Miss
Bridget Allworthy, his sister.
in that part of the western division of this kingdom which be commonly
call Somersetshire, there lately live, and perhaps live still, a
gentleman whose name be allworthy, and who might well be call the
favourite of both nature and fortune; for both of these seem to have
contend which should bless and enrich he most. in this contention,
nature may seem to some to have come off victorious, as she bestow
on he many gift, while fortune have only one gift in her power; but
in pour forth this, she be so very profuse, that other perhaps
may think this single endowment to have be more than equivalent to
all the various blessing which he enjoy from nature. from the
former of these, he derive an agreeable person, a sound constitution,
a solid understanding, and a benevolent heart; by the latter, he be
decreed to the inheritance of one of the large estate in the
county.
this gentleman have in his youth marry a very worthy and beautiful
woman, of whom he have be extremely fond: by she he have three
child, all of whom die in their infancy. he have likewise have the
misfortune of bury this beloved wife herself, about five year
before the time in which this history chuse to set out. this loss,
however great, he bear like a man of sense and constancy, though it
must be confest he would often talk a little whimsically on this head;
for he sometimes say he look on himself as still marry, and
consider his wife as only go a little before he, a journey which
he should most certainly, soon or later, take after she; and that he
have not the least doubt of meet she again in a place where he
should never part with her more--sentiment for which his sense be
arraign by one part of his neighbour, his religion by a second, and
his sincerity by a third.
he now live, for the most part, retire in the country, with one
sister, for whom he have a very tender affection. this lady be now
somewhat past the age of thirty, an aera at which, in the opinion of
the malicious, the title of old maid may with no impropriety be
assume. she be of that specie of woman whom you commend rather for
good quality than beauty, and who be generally call, by their own
sex, very good sort of woman--as good a sort of woman, madam, as you
would wish to know. indeed, she be so far from regret want of
beauty, that she never mention that perfection, if it can be call
one, without contempt; and would often thank God she be not as
handsome as Miss Such-a-one, whom perhaps beauty have lead into error
which she might have otherwise avoid. Miss Bridget Allworthy (for
that be the name of this lady) very rightly conceive the charm of
person in a woman to be no well than snare for herself, as well as
for other; and yet so discreet be she in her conduct, that her
prudence be as much on the guard as if she have all the snare to
apprehend which be ever lay for her whole sex. indeed, I have
observe, though it may seem unaccountable to the reader, that this
guard of prudence, like the train band, be always readiest to go on
duty where there be the least danger. it often basely and cowardly
desert those paragon for whom the man be all wish, sigh,
dying, and spread, every net in their power; and constantly attend
at the heel of that high order of woman for whom the other sex have
a more distant and awful respect, and whom (from despair, I suppose,
of success) they never venture to attack.
Reader, I think proper, before we proceed any far together, to
acquaint thee that I intend to digress, through this whole history, as
often as I see occasion, of which I be myself a well judge than any
pitiful critic whatever; and here I must desire all those critic to
mind their own business, and not to intermeddle with affair or work
which no way concern they; for till they produce the authority by
which they be constitute judge, I shall not plead to their
jurisdiction.
Chapter iii.
an odd accident which befel Mr Allworthy at his return home. the
decent behaviour of Mrs Deborah Wilkins, with some proper
animadversion on bastard.
I have tell my reader, in the precede chapter, that Mr Allworthy
inherit a large fortune; that he have a good heart, and no family.
hence, doubtless, it will be conclude by many that he live like an
honest man, owe no one a shilling, take nothing but what be his own,
keep a good house, entertain his neighbour with a hearty welcome at
his table, and be charitable to the poor, i.e. to those who have
rather beg than work, by give they the offal from it; that he die
immensely rich and build an hospital.
and true it be that he do many of these thing; but have he do
nothing more I should have leave he to have record his own merit on
some fair freestone over the door of that hospital. matter of a much
more extraordinary kind be to be the subject of this history, or I
should grossly mis-spend my time in write so voluminous a work; and
you, my sagacious friend, might with equal profit and pleasure travel
through some page which certain droll author have be facetiously
pleased to call _the history of England_.
Mr Allworthy have be absent a full quarter of a year in London, on
some very particular business, though I know not what it be; but
judge of its importance by its have detain he so long from home,
whence he have not be absent a month at a time during the space of
many year. he come to his house very late in the evening, and after a
short supper with his sister, retire much fatigued to his chamber.
here, have spend some minute on his knee--a custom which he never
break through on any account--he be prepare to step into bed, when,
upon open the cloathe, to his great surprize he behold an infant,
wrapt up in some coarse linen, in a sweet and profound sleep, between
his sheet. he stand some time lose in astonishment at this sight;
but, as good nature have always the ascendant in his mind, he soon
begin to be touch with sentiment of compassion for the little
wretch before he. he then ring his bell, and order an elderly
woman-servant to rise immediately, and come to he; and in the
meantime be so eager in contemplate the beauty of innocence,
appear in those lively colour with which infancy and sleep always
display it, that his thought be too much engage to reflect that he
be in his shirt when the matron come in. she have indeed give she
master sufficient time to dress himself; for out of respect to he,
and regard to decency, she have spend many minute in adjust her
hair at the look-glass, notwithstanding all the hurry in which she
have be summon by the servant, and though her master, for aught she
know, lie expire in an apoplexy, or in some other fit.
it will not be wonder at that a creature who have so strict a regard
to decency in her own person, should be shock at the least deviation
from it in another. she therefore no soon open the door, and see
her master stand by the bedside in his shirt, with a candle in his
hand, than she start back in a most terrible fright, and might
perhaps have swoon away, have he not now recollect his being
undr, and put an end to her terror by desire she to stay without
the door till he have throw some cloathe over his back, and be
become incapable of shock the pure eye of Mrs Deborah Wilkins,
who, though in the fifty-second year of her age, vow she have never
behold a man without his coat. sneerer and prophane wit may perhaps
laugh at her first fright; yet my graver reader, when he consider the
time of night, the summon from her bed, and the situation in which
she find her master, will highly justify and applaud her conduct,
unless the prudence which must be suppose to attend maiden at that
period of life at which Mrs Deborah have arrive, should a little
lessen his admiration.
when Mrs Deborah return into the room, and be acquaint by she
master with the finding the little infant, her consternation be
rather great than his have be; nor could she refrain from cry
out, with great horror of accent as well as look, "my good sir! whatbe
to be do?" Mr Allworthy answer, she must take care of the child
that evening, and in the morning he would give order to provide it a
nurse. "yes, sir," say she; "and I hope your worship will send out
your warrant to take up the hussy its mother, for she must be one of
the neighbourhood; and I should be glad to see she commit to
Bridewell, and whipt at the cart's tail. indeed, such wicked slut
cannot be too severely punish. Iwill warrant 'tis not her first, by
her impudence in lay it to your worship." "in lay it to I,
Deborah!" answer Allworthy: "I cannot think she hath any such design.
I suppose she hath only take this method to provide for her child;
and truly I be glad she hath not do bad." "I donot know what be
bad," cry Deborah, "than for such wicked strumpet to lay their
sin at honest man's door; and though your worship know your own
innocence, yet the world be censorious; and it hath be many an
honest man's hap to pass for the father of child he never begot;
and if your worship should provide for the child, it may make the
people the apter to believe; besides, why should your worship provide
for what the parish be oblige to maintain? for my own part, if it be
an honest man's child, indeed--but for my own part, it go against I
to touch these misbegotten wretch, whom I donot look upon as my
fellow-creature. Faugh! how it stink! it doth not smell like a
Christian. if I might be so bold to give my advice, I would have it
put in a basket, and send out and lay at the churchwarden's door. it
be a good night, only a little rainy and windy; and if it be well
wrapt up, and put in a warm basket, it be two to one but it live till
it be find in the morning. but if it should not, we have discharge
our duty in take proper care of it; and it be, perhaps, well for
such creature to die in a state of innocence, than to grow up and
imitate their mother; for nothing well can be expect of they."
there be some stroke in this speech which perhaps would have
offend Mr Allworthy, have he strictly attend to it; but he have now
get one of his finger into the infant's hand, which, by its gentle
pressure, seem to implore his assistance, have certainly out-plead
the eloquence of Mrs Deborah, have it be ten time great than it
be. he now give Mrs Deborah positive order to take the child to her
own bed, and to call up a maid-servant to provide it pap, and other
thing, against it wake. he likewise order that proper cloathe
should be procure for it early in the morning, and that it should be
bring to himself as soon as he be stir.
such be the discernment of Mrs Wilkins, and such the respect she bear
her master, under whom she enjoy a most excellent place, that her
scruple give way to his peremptory command; and she take the child
under her arm, without any apparent disgust at the illegality of its
birth; and declare it be a sweet little infant, walk off with it
to her own chamber.
Allworthy here betake himself to those pleasing slumber which a heart
that hunger after goodness be apt to enjoy when thoroughly satisfied.
as these be possibly sweet than what be occasion by any other
hearty meal, I should take more pain to display they to the reader,
if I know any air to recommend he to for the procure such an
appetite.
chapter iv.
the reader's neck bring into danger by a description; his escape;
and the great condescension of Miss Bridget Allworthy.
the Gothic stile of building could produce nothing noble than Mr
Allworthy's house. there be an air of grandeur in it that strike you
with awe, and rival the beauty of the good grecian architecture;
and it be as commodious within as venerable without.
it stand on the south-east side of a hill, but near the bottom than
the top of it, so as to be shelter from the north-east by a grove of
old oak which rise above it in a gradual ascent of near half a mile,
and yet high enough to enjoy a most charming prospect of the valley
beneath.
in the midst of the grove be a fine lawn, slop down towards the
house, near the summit of which rise a plentiful spring, gush out
of a rock cover with fir, and form a constant cascade of about
thirty foot, not carry down a regular flight of step, but tumble
in a natural fall over the broken and mossy stone till it come to the
bottom of the rock, then run off in a pebly channel, that with
many less fall wind along, till it fall into a lake at the foot
of the hill, about a quarter of a mile below the house on the south
side, and which be see from every room in the front. out of this
lake, which fill the center of a beautiful plain, embellish with
group of beech and elm, and feed with sheep, issue a river, that
for several mile be see to meander through an amazing variety of
meadow and wood till it empty itself into the sea, with a large
arm of which, and an island beyond it, the prospect be close.
on the right of this valley open another of less extent, adorn
with several village, and terminate by one of the tower of an old
ruin abby, grow over with ivy, and part of the front, which
remain still entire.
the left-hand scene present the view of a very fine park, compose
of very unequal ground, and agreeably vary with all the diversity
that hill, lawn, wood, and water, lay out with admirable taste, but
owe less to art than to nature, could give. beyond this, the country
gradually rise into a ridge of wild mountain, the top of which be
above the cloud.
it be now the middle of May, and the morning be remarkably serene,
when Mr Allworthy walk forth on the terrace, where the dawn open
every minute that lovely prospect we have before describe to his eye;
and now have send forth stream of light, which ascend the blue
firmament before he, as harbinger precede his pomp, in the full
blaze of his majesty rise the sun, than which one object alone in this
low creation could be more glorious, and that Mr Allworthy himself
present--a human be replete with benevolence, meditate in what
manner he might render himself most acceptable to his creator, by
do most good to his creature.
Reader, take care. I have unadvisedly lead thee to the top of as high a
hill as Mr Allworthy's, and how to get thee down without break thy
neck, I do not well know. however, let we e'en venture to slide down
together; for Miss Bridget ring her bell, and Mr Allworthy be
summon to breakfast, where I must attend, and, if you please, shall
be glad of your company.
the usual compliment have past between Mr Allworthy and Miss
Bridget, and the tea being pour out, he summon Mrs Wilkins, and
tell his sister he have a present for she, for which she thank
he--imagine, I suppose, it have be a gown, or some ornament for
her person. indeed, he very often make she such present; and she, in
complacence to he, spend much time in adorn herself. I say in
complacence to he, because she always expr the great contempt
for dress, and for those lady who make it their study.
but if such be her expectation, how be she disappoint when Mrs
Wilkins, accord to the order she have receive from her master,
produce the little infant? great surprize, as hath be observe,
be apt to be silent; and so be Miss Bridget, till her brother begin,
and tell she the whole story, which, as the reader know it already,
we shall not repeat.
Miss Bridget have always exprest so great a regard for what the lady
be pleased to call virtue, and have herself maintain such a severity
of character, that it be expect, especially by Wilkins, that she
would have vent much bitterness on this occasion, and would have
vote for send the child, as a kind of noxious animal, immediately
out of the house; but, on the contrary, she rather take the
good-natured side of the question, intimate some compassion for the
helpless little creature, and commend her brother's charity in what
he have do.
perhaps the reader may account for this behaviour from her
condescension to Mr Allworthy, when we have inform he that the good
man have end his narrative with own a resolution to take care of
the child, and to breed he up as his own; for, to acknowledge the
truth, she be always ready to oblige her brother, and very seldom, if
ever, contradict his sentiment. she would, indeed, sometimes make a
few observation, as that man be headstrong, and must have their own
way, and would wish she have be blest with an independent fortune;
but these be always vent in a low voice, and at the most amount
only to what be call mutter.
however, what she withhold from the infant, she bestow with the
utmost profuseness on the poor unknown mother, whom she call an
impudent slut, a wanton hussy, an audacious harlot, a wicked jade, a
vile strumpet, with every other appellation with which the tongue of
virtue never fail to lash those who bring a disgrace on the sex.
a consultation be now enter into how to proceed in order to
discover the mother. a scrutiny be first make into the character of
the female servant of the house, who be all acquit by Mrs
Wilkins, and with apparent merit; for she have collect they herself,
and perhaps it would be difficult to find such another set of
scarecrow.
the next step be to examine among the inhabitant of the parish; and
this be refer to Mrs Wilkins, who be to enquire with all
imaginable diligence, and to make her report in the afternoon.
matter be thus settle, Mr Allworthy withdraw to his study, as be
his custom, and leave the child to his sister, who, at his desire, have
undertake the care of it.
Chapter v.
contain a few common matter, with a very uncommon observation upon
they.
when her master be depart, Mrs Deborah stand silent, expect she
cue from Miss Bridget; for as to what have past before her master, the
prudent housekeeper by no mean rely upon it, as she have often know
the sentiment of the lady in her brother's absence to differ greatly
from those which she have express in his presence. Miss Bridget do
not, however, suffer she to continue long in this doubtful situation;
for have look some time earnestly at the child, as it lie asleep
in the lap of Mrs Deborah, the good lady could not forbear give it a
hearty kiss, at the same time declare herself wonderfully please
with its beauty and innocence. Mrs Deborah no soon observe this
than she fall to squeeze and kissing, with as great rapture as
sometimes inspire the sage dame of forty and five towards a youthful
and vigorous bridegroom, cry out, in a shrill voice, "o, the dear
little creature!--the dear, sweet, pretty creature! well, I vow it be
as fine a boy as ever be see!"
these exclamation continue till they be interrupt by the lady,
who now proceed to execute the commission give she by her brother,
and give order for provide all necessary for the child,
appoint a very good room in the house for his nursery. her order
be indeed so liberal, that, have it be a child of her own, she
could not have exceed they; but, lest the virtuous reader may
condemn she for show too great regard to a base-bear infant, to
which all charity be condemn by law as irreligious, we think proper
to observe that she conclude the whole with say, "since it be her
brother's whim to adopt the little brat, she suppose little master
must be treat with great tenderness. for her part, she could not
help think it be an encouragement to vice; but that she know too
much of the obstinacy of mankind to oppose any of their ridiculous
humour."
with reflection of this nature she usually, as have be hint,
accompany every act of compliance with her brother's inclination;
and surely nothing could more contribute to heighten the merit of this
compliance than a declaration that she know, at the same time, the
folly and unreasonableness of those inclination to which she
submit. tacit obedience imply no force upon the will, and
consequently may be easily, and without any pain, preserve; but when
a wife, a child, a relation, or a friend, perform what we desire,
with grumbling and reluctance, with expression of dislike and
dissatisfaction, the manifest difficulty which they undergo must
greatly enhance the obligation.
as this be one of those deep observation which very few reader can
be suppose capable of make themselves, I have think proper to
lend they my assistance; but this be a favour rarely to be expect in
the course of my work. indeed, I shall seldom or never so indulge he,
unless in such instance as this, where nothing but the inspiration
with which we writer be gift, can possibly enable any one to make
the discovery.
Chapter vi.
Mrs Deborah be introduce into the parish with a simile. a short
account of Jenny Jones, with the difficulty and discouragement
which may attend young woman in the pursuit of learn.
Mrs Deborah, have dispose of the child accord to the will of she
master, now prepare to visit those habitation which be suppose to
conceal its mother.
not otherwise than when a kite, tremendous bird, be beheld by the
feather generation soar aloft, and hover over their head, the
amorous dove, and every innocent little bird, spread wide the alarm,
and fly tremble to their hiding-place. he proudly beat the air,
conscious of his dignity, and meditate intend mischief.
so when the approach of Mrs Deborah be proclaim through the street,
all the inhabitant run tremble into their house, each matron
dread lest the visit should fall to her lot. she with stately step
proudly advance over the field: aloft she bear her tower head,
fill with conceit of her own pre-eminence, and scheme to effect her
intend discovery.
the sagacious reader will not from this simile imagine these poor
people have any apprehension of the design with which Mrs Wilkins be
now come towards they; but as the great beauty of the simile may
possibly sleep these hundred year, till some future commentator shall
take this work in hand, I think proper to lend the reader a little
assistance in this place.
it be my intention, therefore, to signify, that, as it be the nature
of a kite to devour little bird, so be it the nature of such person
as Mrs Wilkins to insult and tyrannize over little people. this be
indeed the mean which they use to recompense to themselves their
extreme servility and condescension to their superior; for nothing
can be more reasonable, than that slave and flatterer should exact
the same taxis on all below they, which they themselves pay to all
above they.
whenever Mrs Deborah have occasion to exert any extraordinary
condescension to Mrs Bridget, and by that mean have a little soured
her natural disposition, it be usual with she to walk forth among
these people, in order to refine her temper, by venting, and, as it
be, purge off all ill humour; on which account she be by no
mean a welcome visitant: to say the truth, she be universally
dread and hat by they all.
on her arrival in this place, she go immediately to the habitation
of an elderly matron; to whom, as this matron have the good fortune to
resemble herself in the comeliness of her person, as well as in her
age, she have generally be more favourable than to any of the rest.
to this woman she impart what have happen, and the design upon
which she be come thither that morning. these two begin presently to
scrutinize the character of the several young girl who live in any
of those house, and at last fix their strong suspicion on one
Jenny Jones, who, they both agree, be the likeli person to have
commit this fact.
this Jenny Jones be no very comely girl, either in her face or
person; but nature have somewhat compensate the want of beauty with
what be generally more esteemed by those lady whose judgment be
arrive at year of perfect maturity, for she have give she a very
uncommon share of understanding. this gift Jenny have a good deal
improve by erudition. she have live several year a servant with a
schoolmaster, who, discover a great quickness of part in the girl,
and an extraordinary desire of learn--for every leisure hour she
be always find reading in the book of the scholar--have the
good-nature, or folly--just as the reader please to call it--to
instruct she so far, that she obtain a competent skill in the Latin
language, and be, perhaps, as good a scholar as most of the young man
of quality of the age. this advantage, however, like most other of an
extraordinary kind, be attend with some small inconvenience: for
as it be not to be wonder at, that a young woman so well
accomplish should have little relish for the society of those whom
fortune have make she equal, but whom education have render so much
her inferior; so be it matter of no great astonishment, that this
superiority in Jenny, together with that behaviour which be its
certain consequence, should produce among the rest some little envy
and ill-will towards she; and these have, perhaps, secretly burn in
the bosom of her neighbour ever since her return from her service.
their envy do not, however, display itself openly, till poor Jenny,
to the surprize of everybody, and to the vexation of all the young
woman in these part, have publickly shine forth on a Sunday in a new
silk gown, with a laced cap, and other proper appendage to these.
the flame, which have before lain in embryo, now burst forth. Jenny
have, by her learning, increase her own pride, which none of she
neighbour be kind enough to feed with the honour she seem to
demand; and now, instead of respect and adoration, she gain nothing
but hatred and abuse by her finery. the whole parish declare she
could not come honestly by such thing; and parent, instead of
wish their daughter the same, felicitate themselves that their
child have they not.
hence, perhaps, it be, that the good woman first mention the name
of this poor girl to Mrs Wilkins; but there be another circumstance
that confirm the latter in her suspicion; for Jenny have lately be
often at Mr Allworthy's house. she have officiate as nurse to Miss
Bridget, in a violent fit of illness, and have sit up many night with
that lady; besides which, she have be see there the very day before
Mr Allworthy's return, by Mrs Wilkins herself, though that sagacious
person have not at first conceive any suspicion of she on that
account: for, as she herself say, "she have always esteem Jenny as a
very sober girl (though indeed she know very little of she), and have
rather suspect some of those wanton trollop, who give themselves
air, because, forsooth, they think themselves handsome."
Jenny be now summon to appear in person before Mrs Deborah, which
she immediately do. when Mrs Deborah, put on the gravity of a
judge, with somewhat more than his austerity, begin an oration with
the word, "you audacious strumpet!" in which she proceed rather to
pass sentence on the prisoner than to accuse she.
Though Mrs Deborah be fully satisfied of the guilt of Jenny, from the
reason above shewn, it be possible Mr Allworthy might have require
some strong evidence to have convict she; but she save she
accuser any such trouble, by freely confess the whole fact with
which she be charge.
this confession, though deliver rather in term of contrition, as it
appear, do not at all mollify Mrs Deborah, who now pronounce a
second judgment against she, in more opprobrious language than before;
nor have it any well success with the bystander, who be now grow
very numerous. many of they cry out, "they think what madam's silk
gown would end in;" other speak sarcastically of her learning. not a
single female be present but find some mean of express she
abhorrence of poor Jenny, who bear all very patiently, except the
malice of one woman, who reflect upon her person, and toss up her
nose, say, "the man must have a good stomach who would give silk
gown for such sort of trumpery!" Jenny reply to this with a
bitterness which might have surprize a judicious person, who have
observe the tranquillity with which she bear all the affront to her
chastity; but her patience be perhaps tired out, for this be a virtue
which be very apt to be fatigue by exercise.
Mrs Deborah have succeed beyond her hope in her inquiry, return
with much triumph, and, at the appoint hour, make a faithful report
to Mr Allworthy, who be much surprize at the relation; for he have
hear of the extraordinary part and improvement of this girl, whom
he intend to have give in marriage, together with a small living,
to a neighbouring curate. his concern, therefore, on this occasion,
be at least equal to the satisfaction which appear in Mrs Deborah,
and to many reader may seem much more reasonable.
Miss Bridget bless herself, and say, "for her part, she should
never hereafter entertain a good opinion of any woman." for Jenny
before this have the happiness of be much in her good grace also.
the prudent housekeeper be again dispatch to bring the unhappy
culprit before Mr Allworthy, in order, not as it be hop by some,
and expect by all, to be send to the house of correction, but to
receive wholesome admonition and reproof; which those who relish that
kind of instructive writing may peruse in the next chapter.
Chapter vii.
contain such grave matter, that the reader cannot laugh once
through the whole chapter, unless peradventure he should laugh at the
author.
when Jenny appear, Mr Allworthy take she into his study, and speak
to she as follow: "you know, child, it be in my power as a
magistrate, to punish you very rigorously for what you have do; and
you will, perhaps, be the more apt to fear I should execute that
power, because you have in a manner lay your sin at my door.
"but, perhaps, this be one reason which hath determine I to act in a
milder manner with you: for, as no private resentment should ever
influence a magistrate, I will be so far from consider your have
deposit the infant in my house as an aggravation of your offence,
that I will suppose, in your favour, this to have proceed from a
natural affection to your child, since you might have some hope to
see it thus well provide for than be in the power of yourself, or
its wicked father, to provide for it. I should indeed have be highly
offend with you have you expose the little wretch in the manner of
some inhuman mother, who seem no less to have abandon their
humanity, than to have part with their chastity. it be the other
part of your offence, therefore, upon which I intend to admonish you,
I mean the violation of your chastity;--a crime, however lightly it
may be treat by debauched person, very heinous in itself, and very
dreadful in its consequence.
"the heinous nature of this offence must be sufficiently apparent to
every Christian, inasmuch as it be commit in defiance of the law
of our religion, and of the express command of he who found that
religion.
"and here its consequence may well be argue to be dreadful; for what
can be more so, than to incur the divine displeasure, by the breach of
the divine command; and that in an instance against which the high
vengeance be specifically denounce?
"but these thing, though too little, I be afraid, regard, be so
plain, that mankind, however they may want to be remind, can never
need information on this head. a hint, therefore, to awaken your sense
of this matter, shall suffice; for I would inspire you with
repentance, and not drive you to desperation.
"there be other consequence, not indeed so dreadful or replete with
horror as this; and yet such, as, if attentively consider, must, one
would think, deter all of your sex at least from the commission of
this crime.
"for by it you be render infamous, and drive, like leper of old,
out of society; at least, from the society of all but wicked and
reprobate person; for no other will associate with you.
"if you have fortune, you be hereby render incapable of enjoy
they; if you have none, you be disabled from acquire any, nay
almost of procure your sustenance; for no person of character will
receive you into their house. thus you be often drive by necessity
itself into a state of shame and misery, which unavoidably end in the
destruction of both body and soul.
"can any pleasure compensate these evil? can any temptation have
sophistry and delusion strong enough to persuade you to so simple a
bargain? or can any carnal appetite so overpower your reason, or so
totally lie it asleep, as to prevent your fly with affright and
terror from a crime which carry such punishment always with it?
"how base and mean must that woman be, how void of that dignity of
mind, and decent pride, without which we be not worthy the name of
human creature, who can bear to level herself with the low animal,
and to sacrifice all that be great and noble in she, all her heavenly
part, to an appetite which she hath in common with the vile branch
of the creation! for no woman, sure, will plead the passion of love
for an excuse. this would be to own herself the mere tool and bubble
of the man. love, however barbarously we may corrupt and pervert its
meaning, as it be a laudable, be a rational passion, and can never be
violent but when reciprocal; for though the scripture bid we love our
enemy, it mean not with that fervent love which we naturally bear
towards our friend; much less that we should sacrifice to they our
life, and what ought to be dearer to we, our innocence. now in what
light, but that of an enemy, can a reasonable woman regard the man who
solicit she to entail on herself all the misery I have describe to
you, and who would purchase to himself a short, trivial, contemptible
pleasure, so greatly at her expense! for, by the law of custom, the
whole shame, with all its dreadful consequence, fall intirely upon
she. can love, which always seek the good of its object, attempt to
betray a woman into a bargain where she be so greatly to be the loser?
if such corrupter, therefore, should have the impudence to pretend a
real affection for she, ought not the woman to regard he not only as
an enemy, but as the bad of all enemy, a false, designing,
treacherous, pretended friend, who intend not only to debauch her
body, but her understanding at the same time?"
here Jenny express great concern, Allworthy pause a moment, and
then proceed: "I have talk thus to you, child, not to insult you
for what be past and irrevocable, but to caution and strengthen you
for the future. nor should I have take this trouble, but from some
opinion of your good sense, notwithstanding the dreadful slip you have
make; and from some hope of your hearty repentance, which be found
on the openness and sincerity of your confession. if these do not
deceive I, I will take care to convey you from this scene of your
shame, where you shall, by be unknown, avoid the punishment which,
as I have say, be allot to your crime in this world; and I hope,
by repentance, you will avoid the much heavy sentence denounce
against it in the other. be a good girl the rest of your day, and
want shall be no motive to your going astray; and, believe I, there
be more pleasure, even in this world, in an innocent and virtuous
life, than in one debauched and vicious.
"as to your child, let no thought concern it mol you; I will
provide for it in a well manner than you can ever hope. and now
nothing remain but that you inform I who be the wicked man that
seduce you; for my anger against he will be much great than you
have experience on this occasion."
Jenny now lift her eye from the ground, and with a modest look and
decent voice thus began:--
"to know you, sir, and not love your goodness, would be an argument of
total want of sense or goodness in any one. in I it would amount to
the high ingratitude, not to feel, in the most sensible manner, the
great degree of goodness you have be pleased to exert on this
occasion. as to my concern for what be past, I know you will spare my
blush the repetition. my future conduct will much well declare my
sentiment than any profession I can now make. I beg leave to assure
you, sir, that I take your advice much kind than your generous offer
with which you conclude it; for, as you be pleased to say, sir, it
be an instance of your opinion of my understanding."--Here her tear
flow apace, she stop a few moment, and then proceed
thus:--"indeed, sir, your kindness overcome I; but I will endeavour
to deserve this good opinion: for if I have the understanding you be
so kindly pleased to allow I, such advice cannot be throw away upon
I. I thank you, sir, heartily, for your intend kindness to my poor
helpless child: he be innocent, and I hope will live to be grateful
for all the favour you shall show he. but now, sir, I must on my
knee entreat you not to persist in ask I to declare the father of
my infant. I promise you faithfully you shall one day know; but I be
under the most solemn tie and engagement of honour, as well as the
most religious vow and protestation, to conceal his name at this
time. and I know you too well, to think you would desire I should
sacrifice either my honour or my religion."
Mr Allworthy, whom the least mention of those sacred word be
sufficient to stagger, hesitate a moment before he reply, and then
tell she, she have do wrong to enter into such engagement to a
villain; but since she have, he could not insist on she break they.
he say, it be not from a motive of vain curiosity he have inquire,
but in order to punish the fellow; at least, that he might not
ignorantly confer favour on the undeserving.
as to these point, Jenny satisfy he by the most solemn assurance,
that the man be entirely out of his reach; and be neither subject to
his power, nor in any probability of become an object of his
goodness.
the ingenuity of this behaviour have gain Jenny so much credit with
this worthy man, that he easily believe what she tell he; for as she
have disdain to excuse herself by a lie, and have hazard his further
displeasure in her present situation, rather than she would forfeit
her honour or integrity by betray another, he have but little
apprehension that she would be guilty of falsehood towards himself.
he therefore dismiss she with assurance that he would very soon
remove she out of the reach of that obloquy she have incur;
conclude with some additional document, in which he recommend
repentance, say, "consider, child, there be one still to reconcile
yourself to, whose favour be of much great importance to you than
mine."
Chapter viii.
a dialogue between Mesdames Bridget and Deborah; contain more
amusement, but less instruction, than the former.
when Mr Allworthy have retire to his study with Jenny Jones, as hath
be see, Mrs Bridget, with the good housekeeper, have betake
themselves to a post next adjoining to the say study; whence, through
the conveyance of a keyhole, they suck in at their ear the
instructive lecture deliver by Mr Allworthy, together with the
answer of Jenny, and indeed every other particular which pass in
the last chapter.
this hole in her brother's study-door be indeed as well know to Mrs
Bridget, and have be as frequently apply to by she, as the famous
hole in the wall be by Thisbe of old. this serve to many good
purpose. for by such mean Mrs Bridget become often acquainted with
her brother's inclination, without give he the trouble of
repeat they to she. it be true, some inconvenience attend this
intercourse, and she have sometimes reason to cry out with Thisbe, in
Shakspeare, "o, wicked, wicked wall!" for as Mr Allworthy be a
justice of peace, certain thing occur in examination concern
bastard, and such like, which be apt to give great offence to the
chaste ear of virgin, especially when they approach the age of
forty, as be the case of Mrs Bridget. however, she have, on such
occasion, the advantage of conceal her blush from the eye of
man; and _De non apparentibus, et non existentibus eadem est
ratio_--in English, "when a woman be not see to blush, she doth not
blush at all."
both the good woman keep strict silence during the whole scene between
Mr Allworthy and the girl; but as soon as it be end, and that
gentleman be out of hearing, Mrs Deborah could not help exclaim
against the clemency of her master, and especially against his
suffer she to conceal the father of the child, which she swear she
would have out of she before the sun set.
at these word Mrs Bridget discompose her feature with a smile (a
thing very unusual to she). not that I would have my reader imagine,
that this be one of those wanton smile which Homer would have you
conceive come from Venus, when he call she the laughter-love
goddess; nor be it one of those smile which Lady Seraphina shoot
from the stage-box, and which Venus would quit her immortality to be
able to equal. no, this be rather one of those smile which might be
suppose to have come from the dimpled cheek of the august tisiphone,
or from one of the miss, her sister.
with such a smile then, and with a voice sweet as the evening breeze
of Boreas in the pleasant month of November, Mrs Bridget gently
reprove the curiosity of Mrs Deborah; a vice with which it seem the
latter be too much taint, and which the former inveigh against
with great bitterness, add, "that, among all her fault, she
thank Heaven her enemy could not accuse she of pry into the
affair of other people."
she then proceed to commend the honour and spirit with which Jenny
have act. she say, she could not help agree with her brother,
that there be some merit in the sincerity of her confession, and in
her integrity to her lover: that she have always think she a very
good girl, and doubt not but she have be seduce by some rascal,
who have be infinitely more to blame than herself, and very probably
have prevail with she by a promise of marriage, or some other
treacherous proceeding.
this behaviour of Mrs Bridget greatly surprise Mrs Deborah; for this
well-breed woman seldom open her lip, either to her master or his
sister, till she have first sound their inclination, with which her
sentiment be always consonant. here, however, she think she might
have launch forth with safety; and the sagacious reader will not
perhaps accuse she of want of sufficient forecast in so do, but
will rather admire with what wonderful celerity she tack about, when
she find herself steer a wrong course.
"Nay, madam," say this able woman, and truly great politician, "I
must own I cannot help admire the girl's spirit, as well as your
ladyship. and, as your ladyship say, if she be deceive by some
wicked man, the poor wretch be to be pity. and to be sure, as your
ladyship say, the girl hath always appear like a good, honest,
plain girl, and not vain of her face, forsooth, as some wanton hussey
in the neighbourhood be."
"you say true, Deborah," say Miss Bridget. "if the girl have be one
of those vain trollop, of which we have too many in the parish, I
should have condemn my brother for his lenity towards she. I see two
farmer' daughter at church, the other day, with bare neck. I
protest they shock I. if wench will hang out lur for fellow,
it be no matter what they suffer. I detest such creature; and it
would be much well for they that their face have be seam with
the smallpox; but I must confess, I never see any of this wanton
behaviour in poor Jenny: some artful villain, I be convince, hath
betray, nay perhaps force she; and I pity the poor wretch with all
my heart."
Mrs Deborah approve all these sentiment, and the dialogue conclude
with a general and bitter invective against beauty, and with many
compassionate consideration for all honest plain girl who be
delude by the wicked art of deceitful man.
Chapter ix.
contain matter which will surprize the reader.
Jenny return home well pleased with the reception she have meet with
from Mr Allworthy, whose indulgence to she she industriously make
public; partly perhaps as a sacrifice to her own pride, and partly
from the more prudent motive of reconcile her neighbour to she, and
silence their clamour.
but though this latter view, if she indeed have it, may appear
reasonable enough, yet the event do not answer her expectation; for
when she be convene before the justice, and it be universally
apprehend that the house of correction would have be her fate,
though some of the young woman cry out "it be good enough for she,"
and divert themselves with the thought of her beat hemp in a
silk gown; yet there be many other who begin to pity her condition:
but when it be know in what manner Mr Allworthy have behave, the
tide turn against she. one say, "Iwill assure you, madam hath have
good luck." a second cryed, "see what it be to be a favourite!" a
third, "ay, this come of her learning." every person make some
malicious comment or other on the occasion, and reflect on the
partiality of the justice.
the behaviour of these people may appear impolitic and ungrateful to
the reader, who consider the power and benevolence of Mr Allworthy.
but as to his power, he never use it; and as to his benevolence, he
exert so much, that he have thereby disoblige all his neighbour;
for it be a secret well known to great man, that, by confer an
obligation, they do not always procure a friend, but be certain of
create many enemy.
Jenny be, however, by the care and goodness of Mr Allworthy, soon
remove out of the reach of reproach; when malice be no long able
to vent its rage on she, begin to seek another object of its
bitterness, and this be no less than Mr Allworthy, himself; for a
whisper soon go abroad, that he himself be the father of the
foundling child.
this supposition so well reconcile his conduct to the general
opinion, that it meet with universal assent; and the outcry against his
lenity soon begin to take another turn, and be change into an
invective against his cruelty to the poor girl. very grave and good
woman exclaim against man who begot child, and then disown
they. nor be there want some, who, after the departure of Jenny,
insinuate that she be spirit away with a design too black to be
mention, and who give frequent hint that a legal inquiry ought to
be make into the whole matter, and that some people should be force
to produce the girl.
these calumny might have probably produce ill consequence, at the
least might have occasion some trouble, to a person of a more
doubtful and suspicious character than Mr Allworthy be bless with;
but in his case they have no such effect; and, be heartily despise
by he, they serve only to afford an innocent amusement to the good
gossip of the neighbourhood.
but as we cannot possibly divine what complection our reader may be
of, and as it will be some time before he will hear any more of Jenny,
we think proper to give he a very early intimation, that Mr Allworthy
be, and will hereafter appear to be, absolutely innocent of any
criminal intention whatever. he have indeed commit no other than an
error in politic, by temper justice with mercy, and by refuse to
gratify the good-natured disposition of the mob,[*] with an object for
their compassion to work on in the person of poor Jenny, whom, in
order to pity, they desire to have see sacrifice to ruin and
infamy, by a shameful correction in Bridewell.
[*]whenever this word occur in our writing, it intend person
without virtue or sense, in all station; and many of the high
rank be often mean by it.
so far from comply with this their inclination, by which all hope
of reformation would have be abolish, and even the gate shut
against she if her own inclination should ever hereafter lead she to
chuse the road of virtue, Mr Allworthy rather choose to encourage the
girl to return thither by the only possible mean; for too true I be
afraid it be, that many woman have become abandon, and have sink to
the last degree of vice, by be unable to retrieve the first slip.
this will be, I be afraid, always the case while they remain among
their former acquaintance; it be therefore wisely do by Mr
Allworthy, to remove Jenny to a place where she might enjoy the
pleasure of reputation, after have taste the ill consequence of
lose it.
to this place therefore, wherever it be, we will wish she a good
journey, and for the present take leave of she, and of the little
foundle her child, have matter of much high importance to
communicate to the reader.
Chapter x.
the hospitality of Allworthy; with a short sketch of the character of
two brother, a doctor and a captain, who be entertain by that
gentleman.
neither Mr Allworthy's house, nor his heart, be shut against any
part of mankind, but they be both more particularly open to man of
merit. to say the truth, this be the only house in the kingdom where
you be sure to gain a dinner by deserve it.
above all other, man of genius and learning share the principal
place in his favour; and in these he have much discernment: for though
he have miss the advantage of a learn education, yet, be blest
with vast natural ability, he have so well profit by a vigorous
though late application to letter, and by much conversation with man
of eminence in this way, that he be himself a very competent judge in
most kind of literature.
it be no wonder that in an age when this kind of merit be so little in
fashion, and so slenderly provide for, person possess of it should
very eagerly flock to a place where they be sure of be receive
with great complaisance; indeed, where they might enjoy almost the
same advantage of a liberal fortune as if they be entitle to it in
their own right; for Mr Allworthy be not one of those generous
person who be ready most bountifully to bestow meat, drink, and
lodge on man of wit and learning, for which they expect no other
return but entertainment, instruction, flattery, and subserviency; in
a word, that such person should be enrol in the number of
domestic, without wear their master's cloathe, or receive
wage.
on the contrary, every person in this house be perfect master of his
own time: and as he might at his pleasure satisfy all his appetite
within the restriction only of law, virtue, and religion; so he
might, if his health require, or his inclination prompt he to
temperance, or even to abstinence, absent himself from any meal, or
retire from they, whenever he be so disposed, without even a
sollicitation to the contrary: for, indeed, such sollicitation from
superior always savour very strongly of command. but all here be
free from such impertinence, not only those whose company be in all
other place esteem a favour from their equality of fortune, but
even those whose indigent circumstance make such an eleemosynary
abode convenient to they, and who be therefore less welcome to a
great man's table because they stand in need of it.
among other of this kind be Dr Blifil, a gentleman who have the
misfortune of lose the advantage of great talent by the obstinacy
of a father, who would breed he to a profession he dislike. in
obedience to this obstinacy the doctor have in his youth be oblige
to study physic, or rather to say he study it; for in reality book
of this kind be almost the only one with which he be unacquainted;
and unfortunately for he, the doctor be master of almost every other
science but that by which he be to get his bread; the consequence of
which be, that the doctor at the age of forty have no bread to eat.
such a person as this be certain to find a welcome at Mr Allworthy's
table, to whom misfortune be ever a recommendation, when they be
derive from the folly or villany of other, and not of the
unfortunate person himself. besides this negative merit, the doctor
have one positive recommendation;--this be a great appearance of
religion. whether his religion be real, or consist only in
appearance, I shall not presume to say, as I be not possess of any
touchstone which can distinguish the true from the false.
if this part of his character please Mr Allworthy, it delight Miss
Bridget. she engage he in many religious controversy; on which
occasion she constantly express great satisfaction in the doctor's
knowledge, and not much less in the compliment which he frequently
bestow on her own. to say the truth, she have read much english
divinity, and have puzzle more than one of the neighbouring curate.
indeed, her conversation be so pure, her look so sage, and her whole
deportment so grave and solemn, that she seem to deserve the name of
saint equally with her namesake, or with any other female in the roman
kalendar.
as sympathy of all kind be apt to beget love, so experience
teach we that none have a more direct tendency this way than those
of a religious kind between person of different sex. the doctor
find himself so agreeable to Miss Bridget, that he now begin to
lament an unfortunate accident which have happen to he about ten
year before; namely, his marriage with another woman, who be not
only still alive, but, what be bad, know to be so by Mr Allworthy.
this be a fatal bar to that happiness which he otherwise see
sufficient probability of obtain with this young lady; for as to
criminal indulgence, he certainly never think of they. this be
owe either to his religion, as be most probable, or to the purity of
his passion, which be fix on those thing which matrimony only, and
not criminal correspondence, could put he in possession of, or could
give he any title to.
he have not long ruminate on these matter, before it occur to his
memory that he have a brother who be under no such unhappy incapacity.
this brother he make no doubt would succeed; for he discern, as he
think, an inclination to marriage in the lady; and the reader
perhaps, when he hear the brother's qualification, will not blame
the confidence which he entertain of his success.
this gentleman be about thirty-five year of age. he be of a middle
size, and what be call well-build. he have a scar on his forehead,
which do not so much injure his beauty as it denote his valour (for
he be a half-pay officer). he have good tooth, and something affable,
when he please, in his smile; though naturally his countenance, as
well as his air and voice, have much of roughness in it: yet he could
at any time deposit this, and appear all gentleness and good-humour.
he be not ungenteel, nor entirely devoid of wit, and in his youth have
abound in sprightliness, which, though he have lately put on a more
serious character, he could, when he please, resume.
he have, as well as the doctor, an academic education; for his father
have, with the same paternal authority we have mention before,
decreed he for holy order; but as the old gentleman die before he
be ordain, he choose the church military, and prefer the king's
commission to the bishop's.
he have purchase the post of lieutenant of dragoon, and afterwards
come to be a captain; but have quarrel with his colonel, be by
his interest oblige to sell; from which time he have entirely
rusticate himself, have betake himself to study the scripture,
and be not a little suspect of an inclination to methodism.
it seem, therefore, not unlikely that such a person should succeed
with a lady of so saint-like a disposition, and whose inclination
be no otherwise engage than to the marriage state in general; but
why the doctor, who certainly have no great friendship for his brother,
should for his sake think of make so ill a return to the hospitality
of Allworthy, be a matter not so easy to be account for.
be it that some nature delight in evil, as other be think to
delight in virtue? or be there a pleasure in be accessory to a
theft when we cannot commit it ourselves? or lastly (which experience
seem to make probable), have we a satisfaction in aggrandize our
family, even though we have not the least love or respect for they?
whether any of these motif operate on the doctor, we will not
determine; but so the fact be. he send for his brother, and easily
find mean to introduce he at Allworthy's as a person who intend
only a short visit to himself.
the captain have not be in the house a week before the doctor have
reason to felicitate himself on his discernment. the captain be
indeed as great a master of the art of love as Ovid be formerly. he
have besides receive proper hint from his brother, which he fail
not to improve to the good advantage.
Chapter xi.
contain many rule, and some example, concern fall in love:
description of beauty, and other more prudential inducement to
matrimony.
it hath be observe, by wise man or woman, I forget which, that all
person be doom to be in love once in their life. no particular
season be, as I remember, assign for this; but the age at which Miss
Bridget be arrive, seem to I as proper a period as any to be fix
on for this purpose: it often, indeed, happen much early; but when
it doth not, I have observe it seldom or never fail about this time.
moreover, we may remark that at this season love be of a more serious
and steady nature than what sometimes show itself in the young
part of life. the love of girl be uncertain, capricious, and so
foolish that we cannot always discover what the young lady would be
at; nay, it may almost be doubt whether she always know this
herself.
now we be never at a loss to discern this in woman about forty; for
as such grave, serious, and experienced lady well know their own
meaning, so it be always very easy for a man of the least sagacity to
discover it with the utmost certainty.
Miss Bridget be an example of all these observation. she have not be
many time in the captain's company before she be seize with this
passion. nor do she go pin and mop about the house, like a
puny, foolish girl, ignorant of her distemper: she feel, she know, and
she enjoy, the pleasing sensation, of which, as she be certain it
be not only innocent but laudable, she be neither afraid nor
ashamed.
and to say the truth, there be, in all point, great difference
between the reasonable passion which woman at this age conceive
towards man, and the idle and childish liking of a girl to a boy,
which be often fix on the outside only, and on thing of little
value and no duration; as on cherry-cheek, small, lily-white hand,
sloe-black eye, flow lock, downy chin, dapper shape; nay,
sometimes on charm more worthless than these, and less the party's
own; such be the outward ornament of the person, for which man be
beholden to the taylor, the laceman, the periwig-maker, the hatter,
and the milliner, and not to nature. such a passion girl may well be
ashamed, as they generally be, to own either to themselves or other.
the love of Miss Bridget be of another kind. the captain owe nothing
to any of these fop-maker in his dress, nor be his person much more
beholden to nature. both his dress and person be such as, have they
appear in an assembly or a drawing-room, would have be the
contempt and ridicule of all the fine lady there. the former of
these be indeed neat, but plain, coarse, ill-fancied, and out of
fashion. as for the latter, we have expressly describe it above. so
far be the skin on his cheek from be cherry-colour, that you
could not discern what the natural colour of his cheek be, they
be totally overgrown by a black beard, which ascend to his eye.
his shape and limb be indeed exactly proportion, but so large
that they denote the strength rather of a ploughman than any other.
his shoulder be broad beyond all size, and the calf of his leg
large than those of a common chairman. in short, his whole person
want all that elegance and beauty which be the very reverse of
clumsy strength, and which so agreeably set off most of our fine
gentleman; be partly owe to the high blood of their ancestor,
viz., blood make of rich sauce and generous wine, and partly to an
early town education.
though Miss Bridget be a woman of the great delicacy of taste, yet
such be the charm of the captain's conversation, that she totally
overlook the defect of his person. she imagine, and perhaps very
wisely, that she should enjoy more agreeable minute with the captain
than with a much pretty fellow; and forewent the consideration of
please her eye, in order to procure herself much more solid
satisfaction.
the captain no soon perceive the passion of Miss Bridget, in which
discovery he be very quick-sighted, than he faithfully return it.
the lady, no more than her lover, be remarkable for beauty. I would
attempt to draw her picture, but that be do already by a more able
master, Mr Hogarth himself, to whom she sit many year ago, and hath
be lately exhibit by that gentleman in his print of a winter's
morning, of which she be no improper emblem, and may be see walk
(for walk she doth in the print) to Covent Garden church, with a
starve foot-boy behind carry her prayer-book.
the captain likewise very wisely preferred the more solid enjoyment
he expect with this lady, to the fleeting charm of person. he be
one of those wise man who regard beauty in the other sex as a very
worthless and superficial qualification; or, to speak more truly, who
rather chuse to possess every convenience of life with an ugly woman,
than a handsome one without any of those convenience. and have a
very good appetite, and but little nicety, he fancy he should play
his part very well at the matrimonial banquet, without the sauce of
beauty.
to deal plainly with the reader, the captain, ever since his arrival,
at least from the moment his brother have propose the match to he,
long before he have discover any flattering symptom in Miss Bridget,
have be greatly enamour; that be to say, of Mr Allworthy's house
and garden, and of his land, tenement, and hereditament; of all
which the captain be so passionately fond, that he would most
probably have contract marriage with they, have he be oblige to
have take the witch of Endor into the bargain.
as Mr Allworthy, therefore, have declare to the doctor that he never
intend to take a second wife, as his sister be his near
relation, and as the doctor have fish out that his intention be to
make any child of hers his heir, which indeed the law, without his
interposition, would have do for he; the doctor and his brother
think it an act of benevolence to give be to a human creature,
who would be so plentifully provide with the most essential mean of
happiness. the whole thought, therefore, of both the brother be
how to engage the affection of this amiable lady.
but fortune, who be a tender parent, and often doth more for her
favourite offspring than either they deserve or wish, have be so
industrious for the captain, that whilst he be lay scheme to
execute his purpose, the lady conceive the same desire with himself,
and be on her side contrive how to give the captain proper
encouragement, without appear too forward; for she be a strict
observer of all rule of decorum. in this, however, she easily
succeed; for as the captain be always on the look-out, no glance,
gesture, or word escape he.
the satisfaction which the captain receive from the kind behaviour of
Miss Bridget, be not a little abate by his apprehension of Mr
Allworthy; for, notwithstanding his disinterested profession, the
captain imagine he would, when he come to act, follow the example of
the rest of the world, and refuse his consent to a match so
disadvantageous, in point of interest, to his sister. from what oracle
he receive this opinion, I shall leave the reader to determine: but
however he come by it, it strangely perplex he how to regulate his
conduct so as at once to convey his affection to the lady, and to
conceal it from her brother. he at length resolve to take all private
opportunity of make his address; but in the presence of Mr
Allworthy to be as reserve and as much upon his guard as be
possible; and this conduct be highly approve by the brother.
he soon find mean to make his address, in express term, to his
mistress, from whom he receive an answer in the proper form, viz.:
the answer which be first make some thousand of year ago, and which
hath be hand down by tradition from mother to daughter ever since.
if I be to translate this into Latin, I should render it by these two
word, _Nolo Episcopari_: a phrase likewise of immemorial use on
another occasion.
the captain, however he come by his knowledge, perfectly well
understand the lady, and very soon after repeat his application with
more warmth and earnestness than before, and be again, accord to
due form, reject; but as he have increase in the eagerness of his
desire, so the lady, with the same propriety, decrease in the
violence of her refusal.
not to tire the reader, by lead he through every scene of this
courtship (which, though in the opinion of a certain great author, it
be the pleasant scene of life to the actor, be, perhaps, as dull
and tiresome as any whatever to the audience), the captain make his
advance in form, the citadel be defend in form, and at length, in
proper form, surrender at discretion.
during this whole time, which fill the space of near a month, the
captain preserve great distance of behaviour to his lady in the
presence of the brother; and the more he succeed with she in
private, the more reserved be he in public. and as for the lady, she
have no soon secure her lover than she behave to he before company
with the high degree of indifference; so that Mr Allworthy must
have have the insight of the devil (or perhaps some of his bad
quality) to have entertain the least suspicion of what be go
forward.
Chapter xii.
contain what the reader may, perhaps, expect to find in it.
in all bargain, whether to fight or to marry, or concern any other
such business, little previous ceremony be require to bring the
matter to an issue when both party be really in earnest. this be
the case at present, and in less than a month the captain and his lady
be man and wife.
the great concern now be to break the matter to Mr Allworthy; and
this be undertake by the doctor.
one day, then, as Allworthy be walk in his garden, the doctor come
to he, and, with great gravity of aspect, and all the concern which
he could possibly affect in his countenance, say, "I be come, sir, to
impart an affair to you of the utmost consequence; but how shall I
mention to you what it almost distract I to think of!" he then
launch forth into the most bitter invective both against man and
woman; accuse the former of have no attachment but to their
interest, and the latter of be so addicted to vicious inclination
that they could never be safely trust with one of the other sex.
"could I," say he, "sir, have suspect that a lady of such prudence,
such judgment, such learning, should indulge so indiscreet a passion!
or could I have imagine that my brother--why do I call he so? he be
no long a brother of mine----"
"indeed but he be," say Allworthy, "and a brother of mine too."
"bless I, sir!" say the doctor, "do you know the shocking affair?"
"Look'ee, Mr Blifil," answer the good man, "it hath be my constant
maxim in life to make the good of all matter which happen. my sister,
though many year young than I, be at least old enough to be at the
age of discretion. have he impose on a child, I should have be more
averse to have forgive he; but a woman upwards of thirty must
certainly be suppose to know what will make she most happy. she hath
marry a gentleman, though perhaps not quite she equal in fortune;
and if he hath any perfection in her eye which can make up that
deficiency, I see no reason why I should object to her choice of her
own happiness; which I, no more than herself, imagine to consist only
in immense wealth. I might, perhaps, from the many declaration I have
make of comply with almost any proposal, have expect to have be
consult on this occasion; but these matter be of a very delicate
nature, and the scruple of modesty, perhaps, be not to be overcome.
as to your brother, I have really no anger against he at all. he hath
no obligation to I, nor do I think he be under any necessity of
ask my consent, since the woman be, as I have say, _sui juris_,
and of a proper age to be entirely answerable only, to herself for her
conduct."
the doctor accuse Mr Allworthy of too great lenity, repeat his
accusation against his brother, and declare that he should never
more be bring either to see, or to own he for his relation. he then
launch forth into a panegyric on Allworthy's goodness; into the
high encomium on his friendship; and conclude by say, he
should never forgive his brother for have put the place which he
bear in that friendship to a hazard.
Allworthy thus answer: "have I conceive any displeasure against your
brother, I should never have carry that resentment to the innocent:
but I assure you I have no such displeasure. your brother appear to
I to be a man of sense and honour. I do not disapprove the taste of
my sister; nor will I doubt but that she be equally the object of his
inclination. I have always think love the only foundation of
happiness in a married state, as it can only produce that high and
tender friendship which should always be the cement of this union;
and, in my opinion, all those marriage which be contract from
other motif be greatly criminal; they be a profanation of a most
holy ceremony, and generally end in disquiet and misery: for surely we
may call it a profanation to convert this most sacred institution into
a wicked sacrifice to lust or avarice: and what well can be say of
those match to which man be induce merely by the consideration of
a beautiful person, or a great fortune?
"to deny that beauty be an agreeable object to the eye, and even
worthy some admiration, would be false and foolish. beautiful be an
epithet often use in Scripture, and always mention with honour. it
be my own fortune to marry a woman whom the world think handsome,
and I can truly say I like she the well on that account. but to
make this the sole consideration of marriage, to lust after it so
violently as to overlook all imperfection for its sake, or to require
it so absolutely as to reject and disdain religion, virtue, and sense,
which be quality in their nature of much high perfection, only
because an elegance of person be want: this be surely inconsistent,
either with a wise man or a good Christian. and it be, perhaps, be
too charitable to conclude that such person mean anything more by
their marriage than to please their carnal appetite; for the
satisfaction of which, we be teach, it be not ordain.
"in the next place, with respect to fortune. worldly prudence,
perhaps, exact some consideration on this head; nor will I absolutely
and altogether condemn it. as the world be constitute, the demand of
a married state, and the care of posterity, require some little regard
to what we call circumstance. yet this provision be greatly
increase, beyond what be really necessary, by folly and vanity, which
create abundantly more want than nature. equipage for the wife, and
large fortune for the child, be by custom enrol in the list of
necessary; and to procure these, everything truly solid and sweet,
and virtuous and religious, be neglect and overlook.
"and this in many degree; the last and great of which seem scarce
distinguishable from madness;--I mean where person of immense
fortune contract themselves to those who be, and must be,
disagreeable to they--to fool and knave--in order to increase an
estate already large even than the demand of their pleasure. surely
such person, if they will not be think mad, must own, either that
they be incapable of taste the sweet of the tender friendship,
or that they sacrifice the great happiness of which they be
capable to the vain, uncertain, and senseless law of vulgar opinion,
which owe as well their force as their foundation to folly."
here Allworthy conclude his sermon, to which Blifil have listen with
the profound attention, though it cost he some pain to prevent
now and then a small discomposure of his muscle. he now praise every
period of what he have hear with the warmth of a young divine, who
hath the honour to dine with a bishop the same day in which his
lordship hath mount the pulpit.
Chapter xiii.
which conclude the first book; with an instance of ingratitude,
which, we hope, will appear unnatural.
the reader, from what hath be say, may imagine that the
reconciliation (if indeed it could be so call) be only matter of
form; we shall therefore pass it over, and hasten to what must surely
be think matter of substance.
the doctor have acquaint his brother with what have past between Mr
Allworthy and he; and add with a smile, "I promise you I pay you
off; nay, I absolutely desire the good gentleman not to forgive you:
for you know after he have make a declaration in your favour, I might
with safety venture on such a request with a person of his temper; and
I be willing, as well for your sake as for my own, to prevent the
least possibility of a suspicion."
Captain Blifil take not the least notice of this, at that time; but he
afterwards make a very notable use of it.
one of the maxim which the devil, in a late visit upon earth, leave to
his disciple, be, when once you be get up, to kick the stool from
under you. in plain English, when you have make your fortune by the
good office of a friend, you be advise to discard he as soon as
you can.
whether the captain act by this maxim, I will not positively
determine: so far we may confidently say, that his action may be
fairly derive from this diabolical principle; and indeed it be
difficult to assign any other motive to they: for no soon be he
possess of Miss Bridget, and reconcile to Allworthy, than he begin
to show a coldness to his brother which increase daily; till at
length it grow into rudeness, and become very visible to every one.
the doctor remonstrate to he privately concern this behaviour,
but could obtain no other satisfaction than the follow plain
declaration: "if you dislike anything in my brother's house, sir, you
know you be at liberty to quit it." this strange, cruel, and almost
unaccountable ingratitude in the captain, absolutely break the poor
doctor's heart; for ingratitude never so thoroughly pierce the human
breast as when it proceed from those in whose behalf we have be
guilty of transgression. reflection on great and good action,
however they be receive or return by those in whose favour they
be perform, always administer some comfort to we; but what
consolation shall we receive under so bite a calamity as the
ungrateful behaviour of our friend, when our wound conscience at the
same time fly in our face, and upbraid we with have spot it in
the service of one so worthless!
Mr Allworthy himself speak to the captain in his brother's behalf, and
desire to know what offence the doctor have commit; when the
hard-hearted villain have the baseness to say that he should never
forgive he for the injury which he have endeavour to do he in his
favour; which, he say, he have pump out of he, and be such a
cruelty that it ought not to be forgive.
Allworthy speak in very high term upon this declaration, which, he
say, become not a human creature. he express, indeed, so much
resentment against an unforgive temper, that the captain at last
pretend to be convince by his argument, and outwardly profess to
be reconcile.
as for the bride, she be now in her honeymoon, and so passionately
fond of her new husband that he never appear to she to be in the
wrong; and his displeasure against any person be a sufficient reason
for her dislike to the same.
the captain, at Mr Allworthy's instance, be outwardly, as we have
say, reconcile to his brother; yet the same rancour remain in his
heart; and he find so many opportunity of give he private hint
of this, that the house at last grow insupportable to the poor doctor;
and he choose rather to submit to any inconvenience which he might
encounter in the world, than long to bear these cruel and ungrateful
insult from a brother for whom he have do so much.
he once intend to acquaint Allworthy with the whole; but he could
not bring himself to submit to the confession, by which he must take
to his share so great a portion of guilt. besides, by how much the
bad man he represent his brother to be, so much the great would
his own offence appear to Allworthy, and so much the great, he have
reason to imagine, would be his resentment.
he feign, therefore, some excuse of business for his departure, and
promise to return soon again; and take leave of his brother with so
well-dissemble content, that, as the captain play his part to the
same perfection, Allworthy remain well satisfied with the truth of
the reconciliation.
the doctor go directly to London, where he die soon after of a
broken heart; a distemper which kill many more than be generally
imagine, and would have a fair title to a place in the bill of
mortality, do it not differ in one instance from all other
disease--viz., that no physician can cure it.
now, upon the most diligent enquiry into the former life of these two
brother, I find, besides the cursed and hellish maxim of policy above
mention, another reason for the captain's conduct: the captain,
besides what we have before say of he, be a man of great pride and
fierceness, and have always treat his brother, who be of a different
complexion, and greatly deficient in both these quality, with the
utmost air of superiority. the doctor, however, have much the large
share of learning, and be by many repute to have the well
understanding. this the captain know, and could not bear; for though
envy be at good a very malignant passion, yet be its bitterness
greatly heighten by mix with contempt towards the same object;
and very much afraid I be, that whenever an obligation be join to
these two, indignation and not gratitude will be the product of all
three.
BOOK II.
contain SCENES of matrimonial felicity in different degrees of
life; and various other transaction during the first two year after
the marriage between CAPTAIN BLIFIL and MISS BRIDGET ALLWORTHY.
Chapter i.
show what kind of a history this be; what it be like, and what it
be not like.
though we have properly enough entitle this our work, a history, and
not a life; nor an apology for a life, as be more in fashion; yet we
intend in it rather to pursue the method of those writer, who profess
to disclose the revolution of country, than to imitate the painful
and voluminous historian, who, to preserve the regularity of his
series, think himself oblige to fill up as much paper with the
detail of month and year in which nothing remarkable happen, as he
employ upon those notable aera when the great scene have be
transact on the human stage.
such history as these do, in reality, very much resemble a
newspaper, which consist of just the same number of word, whether
there be any news in it or not. they may likewise be compare to a
stage coach, which perform constantly the same course, empty as well
as full. the writer, indeed, seem to think himself oblige to keep
even pace with time, whose amanuensis he be; and, like his master,
travel as slowly through century of monkish dulness, when the world
seem to have be asleep, as through that bright and busy age so
nobly distinguish by the excellent Latin poet--
_ad confligendum venientibus undique poeni,
Omnia cum belli trepido concussa tumultu
Horrida contremuere sub altis aetheris auris;
in dubioque fuit sub utrorum regna cadendum
Omnibus humani esset, terraque marique._
of which we wish we could give our reader a more adequate translation
than that by Mr Creech--
when dreadful Carthage fright Rome with arm,
and all the world be shake with fierce alarm;
Whilst undecided yet, which part should fall,
which nation rise the glorious lord of all.
now it be our purpose, in the ensue page, to pursue a contrary
method. when any extraordinary scene present itself (as we trust will
often be the case), we shall spare no pain nor paper to open it at
large to our reader; but if whole year should pass without produce
anything worthy his notice, we shall not be afraid of a chasm in our
history; but shall hasten on to matter of consequence, and leave such
period of time totally unobserved.
these be indeed to be consider as blank in the grand lottery of
time. we therefore, who be the register of that lottery, shall
imitate those sagacious person who deal in that which be draw at
Guildhall, and who never trouble the public with the many blank they
dispose of; but when a great prize happen to be draw, the newspaper
be presently fill with it, and the world be sure to be inform at
whose office it be sell: indeed, commonly two or three different
office lie claim to the honour of have dispose of it; by which, I
suppose, the adventurer be give to understand that certain broker
be in the secret of Fortune, and indeed of her cabinet council.
my reader then be not to be surprize, if, in the course of this work,
he shall find some chapter very short, and other altogether as long;
some that contain only the time of a single day, and other that
comprise year; in a word, if my history sometimes seem to stand
still, and sometimes to fly. for all which I shall not look on myself
as accountable to any court of critical jurisdiction whatever: for as
I be, in reality, the founder of a new province of writing, so I be at
liberty to make what law I please therein. and these law, my
reader, whom I consider as my subject, be bind to believe in and
to obey; with which that they may readily and cheerfully comply, I do
hereby assure they that I shall principally regard their ease and
advantage in all such institution: for I do not, like a _jure divino_
tyrant, imagine that they be my slave, or my commodity. I be,
indeed, set over they for their own good only, and be create for
their use, and not they for mine. nor do I doubt, while I make their
interest the great rule of my writing, they will unanimously concur
in support my dignity, and in render I all the honour I shall
deserve or desire.
Chapter ii.
religious caution against show too much favour to bastard; and a
great discovery make by Mrs Deborah Wilkins.
eight month after the celebration of the nuptial between Captain
Blifil and Miss Bridget Allworthy, a young lady of great beauty,
merit, and fortune, be Miss Bridget, by reason of a fright, deliver
of a fine boy. the child be indeed to all appearance perfect; but
the midwife discover it be bear a month before its full time.
though the birth of an heir by his beloved sister be a circumstance
of great joy to Mr Allworthy, yet it do not alienate his affection
from the little foundling, to whom he have be godfather, have give
his own name of Thomas, and whom he have hitherto seldom fail of
visit, at least once a day, in his nursery.
he tell his sister, if she please, the new-bear infant should be breed
up together with little Tommy; to which she consent, though with
some little reluctance: for she have truly a great complacence for her
brother; and hence she have always behave towards the foundling with
rather more kindness than lady of rigid virtue can sometimes bring
themselves to show to these child, who, however innocent, may be
truly call the live monument of incontinence.
the captain could not so easily bring himself to bear what he
condemn as a fault in Mr Allworthy. he give he frequent hint, that
to adopt the fruit of sin, be to give countenance to it. he quote
several text (for he be well read in Scripture), such as, _he visit
the sin of the father upon the child; and the father have eat
sour grape, and the child's tooth be set on edge_,&c. whence he
argue the legality of punish the crime of the parent on the
bastard. he say, "though the law do not positively allow the
destroy such base-bear child, yet it hold they to be the
child of nobody; that the Church consider they as the child of
nobody; and that at the good, they ought to be bring up to the
low and vilest office of the commonwealth."
Mr Allworthy answer to all this, and much more, which the captain
have urge on this subject, "that, however guilty the parent might be,
the child be certainly innocent: that as to the text he have
quote, the former of they be a particular denunciation against the
Jews, for the sin of idolatry, of relinquish and hat their
heavenly king; and the latter be parabolically speak, and rather
intend to denote the certain and necessary consequence of sin, than
any express judgment against it. but to represent the Almighty as
avenge the sin of the guilty on the innocent, be indecent, if not
blasphemous, as it be to represent he act against the first
principle of natural justice, and against the original notion of
right and wrong, which he himself have implant in our mind; by which
we be to judge not only in all matter which be not reveal, but
even of the truth of revelation itself. he say he know many hold the
same principle with the captain on this head; but he be himself
firmly convinced to the contrary, and would provide in the same manner
for this poor infant, as if a legitimate child have have fortune to have
be find in the same place."
while the captain be take all opportunity to press these and such
like argument, to remove the little foundling from Mr Allworthy's, of
whose fondness for he he begin to be jealous, Mrs Deborah have make a
discovery, which, in its event, threaten at least to prove more
fatal to poor Tommy than all the reasoning of the captain.
whether the insatiable curiosity of this good woman have carry she on
to that business, or whether she do it to confirm herself in the good
grace of Mrs Blifil, who, notwithstanding her outward behaviour to
the foundling, frequently abuse the infant in private, and her
brother too, for his fondness to it, I will not determine; but she have
now, as she conceive, fully detect the father of the foundling.
now, as this be a discovery of great consequence, it may be necessary
to trace it from the fountain-head. we shall therefore very minutely
lie open those previous matter by which it be produce; and for that
purpose we shall be oblige to reveal all the secret of a little
family with which my reader be at present entirely unacquainted; and
of which the oeconomy be so rare and extraordinary, that I fear it
will shock the utmost credulity of many married person.
Chapter iii.
the description of a domestic government found upon rule directly
contrary to those of Aristotle.
my reader may please to remember he hath be inform that Jenny
Jones have live some year with a certain schoolmaster, who have, at
her earnest desire, instruct she in Latin, in which, to do justice
to her genius, she have so improve herself, that she be become a
well scholar than her master.
indeed, though this poor man have undertake a profession to which
learning must be allow necessary, this be the least of his
commendation. he be one of the well-natured fellow in the world,
and be, at the same time, master of so much pleasantry and humour,
that he be repute the wit of the country; and all the neighbouring
gentleman be so desirous of his company, that as deny be not his
talent, he spend much time at their house, which he might, with more
emolument, have spend in his school.
it may be imagine that a gentleman so qualified and so disposed, be
in no danger of become formidable to the learn seminary of Eton
or Westminster. to speak plainly, his scholar be divide into two
class: in the upper of which be a young gentleman, the son of a
neighbouring squire, who, at the age of seventeen, be just enter
into his Syntaxis; and in the low be a second son of the same
gentleman, who, together with seven parish-boy, be learn to read
and write.
the stipend arise hence would hardly have indulge the schoolmaster
in the luxury of life, have he not add to this office those of
clerk and barber, and have not Mr Allworthy add to the whole an
annuity of ten pound, which the poor man receive every Christmas,
and with which he be enable to cheer his heart during that sacred
festival.
among his other treasure, the pedagogue have a wife, whom he have
marry out of Mr Allworthy's kitchen for her fortune, viz., twenty
pound, which she have there amass.
this woman be not very amiable in her person. whether she sit to my
friend Hogarth, or no, I will not determine; but she exactly resemble
the young woman who be pour out her mistress's tea in the third
picture of the Harlot's Progress. she be, besides, a prof follower
of that noble sect found by Xantippe of old; by mean of which she
become more formidable in the school than her husband; for, to confess
the truth, he be never master there, or anywhere else, in her
presence.
though her countenance do not denote much natural sweetness of
temper, yet this be, perhaps, somewhat sour by a circumstance which
generally poison matrimonial felicity; for child be rightly
call the pledge of love; and her husband, though they have be
marry nine year, have give she no such pledge; a default for which
he have no excuse, either from age or health, be not yet thirty
year old, and what they call a jolly brisk young man.
hence arise another evil, which produce no little uneasiness to the
poor pedagogue, of whom she maintain so constant a jealousy, that he
durst hardly speak to one woman in the parish; for the least degree of
civility, or even correspondence, with any female, be sure to bring
his wife upon she back, and his own.
in order to guard herself against matrimonial injury in her own
house, as she keep one maid-servant, she always take care to chuse she
out of that order of female whose face be take as a kind of
security for their virtue; of which number Jenny Jones, as the reader
hath be before inform, be one.
as the face of this young woman might be call pretty good security
of the before-mention kind, and as her behaviour have be always
extremely modest, which be the certain consequence of understanding in
woman; she have pass above four year at Mr Partridge's (for that be
the schoolmaster's name) without create the least suspicion in her
mistress. Nay, she have be treat with uncommon kindness, and her
mistress have permit Mr Partridge to give she those instruction
which have be before commemorate.
but it be with jealousy as with the gout: when such distemper be in
the blood, there be never any security against their break out; and
that often on the slight occasion, and when least suspect.
thus it happen to Mrs Partridge, who have submit four year to her
husband's teaching this young woman, and have suffer she often to
neglect her work, in order to pursue her learning. for, pass by one
day, as the girl be read, and her master lean over she, the
girl, I know not for what reason, suddenly start up from her chair:
and this be the first time that suspicion ever enter into the head
of her mistress. this do not, however, at that time discover itself,
but lie lurk in her mind, like a conceal enemy, who wait for a
reinforcement of additional strength before he openly declare himself
and proceed upon hostile operation: and such additional strength
soon arrive to corroborate her suspicion; for not long after, the
husband and wife be at dinner, the master say to his maid, _Da
mihi aliquid potum:_ upon which the poor girl smile, perhaps at the
badness of the Latin, and, when her mistress cast her eye on she,
blush, possibly with a consciousness of have laugh at her
master. Mrs Partridge, upon this, immediately fall into a fury, and
discharge the trencher on which she be eat, at the head of poor
Jenny, cry out, "you impudent whore, do you play trick with my
husband before my face?" and at the same instant rise from her chair
with a knife in her hand, with which, most probably, she would have
execute very tragical vengeance, have not the girl take the advantage
of be nearer the door than her mistress, and avoid her fury by
run away: for, as to the poor husband, whether surprize have
render he motionless, or fear (which be full as probable) have
restrain he from venture at any opposition, he sit star and
tremble in his chair; nor do he once offer to move or speak, till
his wife, return from the pursuit of Jenny, make some defensive
measure necessary for his own preservation; and he likewise be
oblige to retreat, after the example of the maid.
this good woman be, no more than Othello, of a disposition
to make a life of jealousy
and follow still the change of the moon
with fresh suspicions--
with she, as well as he,
--to be once in doubt,
be once to be resolvd--
she therefore order Jenny immediately to pack up her all and
begone, for that she be determined she should not sleep that night
within her wall.
Mr Partridge have profit too much by experience to interpose in a
matter of this nature. he therefore have recourse to his usual receipt
of patience, for, though he be not a great adept in Latin, he
remember, and well understand, the advice contain in these word
--_Leve fit quod bene fertur onus_
in English:
a burden become lightest when it be well borne--
which he have always in his mouth; and of which, to say the truth, he
have often occasion to experience the truth.
Jenny offer to make protestation of her innocence; but the temp
be too strong for she to be hear. she then betook herself to the
business of packing, for which a small quantity of brown paper
suffice, and, have receive her small pittance of wage, she
return home.
the schoolmaster and his consort pass their time unpleasantly enough
that evening, but something or other happen before the next morning,
which a little abate the fury of Mrs Partridge; and she at length
admit her husband to make his excuse: to which she give the
readier belief, as he have, instead of desire she to recall Jenny,
profess a satisfaction in she be dismiss, say, she be grow
of little use as a servant, spend all her time in reading, and be
become, moreover, very pert and obstinate; for, indeed, she and her
master have lately have frequent dispute in literature; in which, as
hath be say, she be become greatly his superior. this, however, he
would by no means allow; and as he call she persist in the right,
obstinacy, he begin to hate she with no small inveteracy.
chapter iv.
contain one of the most bloody battle, or rather duel, that be
ever record in domestic history.
for the reason mention in the precede chapter, and from some
other matrimonial concession, well know to most husband, and which,
like the secret of freemasonry, should be divulge to none who be
not member of that honourable fraternity, Mrs Partridge be pretty
well satisfied that she have condemn her husband without cause, and
endeavour by act of kindness to make he amend for her false
suspicion. her passion be indeed equally violent, whichever way
they incline; for as she could be extremely angry, so could she be
altogether as fond.
but though these passion ordinarily succeed each other, and scarce
twenty-four hour ever pass in which the pedagogue be not, in some
degree, the object of both; yet, on extraordinary occasion, when the
passion of anger have rag very high, the remission be usually
long: and so be the case at present; for she continue long in a
state of affability, after this fit of jealousy be end, than she
husband have ever know before: and, have it not be for some little
exercise, which all the follower of Xantippe be oblige to perform
daily, Mr Partridge would have enjoy a perfect serenity of several
month.
perfect calm at sea be always suspect by the experienced mariner
to be the forerunner of a storm, and I know some person, who,
without be generally the devotee of superstition, be apt to
apprehend that great and unusual peace or tranquillity will be
attend with its opposite. for which reason the antient use, on
such occasion, to sacrifice to the goddess Nemesis, a deity who be
think by they to look with an invidious eye on human felicity, and
to have a peculiar delight in overturn it.
as we be very far from believe in any such heathen goddess, or from
encourage any superstition, so we wish Mr John fr----, or some other
such philosopher, would bestir himself a little, in order to find out
the real cause of this sudden transition from good to bad fortune,
which hath be so often remark, and of which we shall proceed to
give an instance; for it be our province to relate fact, and we shall
leave cause to person of much high genius.
Mankind have always take great delight in know and descant on
the action of other. hence there have be, in all age and nation,
certain place set apart for public rendezvous, where the curious
might meet and satisfy their mutual curiosity. among these, the
barber' shop have justly bear the pre-eminence. among the Greeks,
barber' news be a proverbial expression; and Horace, in one of his
epistle, make honourable mention of the roman barber in the same
light.
those of England be know to be no wise inferior to their greek or
roman predecessor. you there see foreign affair discuss in a
manner little inferior to that with which they be handle in the
coffee-house; and domestic occurrence be much more largely and
freely treat in the former than in the latter. but this serve only
for the man. now, whereas the female of this country, especially
those of the low order, do associate themselves much more than those
of other nation, our polity would be highly deficient, if they have
not some place set apart likewise for the indulgence of their
curiosity, see they be in this no way inferior to the other half
of the specie.
in enjoy, therefore, such place of rendezvous, the british fair
ought to esteem themselves more happy than any of their foreign
sister; as I do not remember either to have read in history, or to
have see in my travel, anything of the like kind.
this place then be no other than the chandler's shop, the know seat
of all the news; or, as it be vulgarly call, gossip, in every
parish in England.
Mrs Partridge be one day at this assembly of female, be ask by
one of her neighbour, if she have hear no news lately of Jenny Jones?
to which she answer in the negative. upon this the other reply,
with a smile, that the parish be very much oblige to she for have
turn Jenny away as she do.
Mrs Partridge, whose jealousy, as the reader well know, be long
since cure, and who have no other quarrel to her maid, answer
boldly, she do not know any obligation the parish have to she on that
account; for she believe Jenny have scarce leave she equal behind she.
"no, truly," say the gossip, "I hope not, though I fancy we have
slut enow too. then you have not hear, it seem, that she hath be
bring to bed of two bastard? but as they be not bear here, my
husband and the other overseer say we shall not be oblige to keep
they."
"two bastard!" answer Mrs Partridge hastily: "you surprize I! I
donot know whether we must keep they; but I be sure they must have
be beget here, for the wench hath not be nine month go
away."
nothing can be so quick and sudden as the operation of the mind,
especially when hope, or fear, or jealousy, to which the two other
be but journeymen, set it to work. it occur instantly to she, that
Jenny have scarce ever be out of her own house while she live with
she. the lean over the chair, the sudden start up, the Latin,
the smile, and many other thing, rush upon she all at once. the
satisfaction her husband express in the departure of Jenny, appear
now to be only dissemble; again, in the same instant, to be real; but
yet to confirm her jealousy, proceed from satiety, and a hundred
other bad cause. in a word, she be convince of her husband's guilt,
and immediately leave the assembly in confusion.
as fair Grimalkin, who, though the young of the feline family,
degenerate not in ferocity from the eld branch of her house, and
though inferior in strength, be equal in fierceness to the noble tiger
himself, when a little mouse, whom it hath long torment in sport,
escape from her clutch for a while, fret, scold, growl, swear;
but if the trunk, or box, behind which the mouse lie hide be again
remove, she fly like lightning on her prey, and, with envenomed
wrath, bite, scratch, mumble, and tear the little animal.
not with less fury do Mrs Partridge fly on the poor pedagogue. her
tongue, tooth, and hand, fall all upon he at once. his wig be in an
instant tear from his head, his shirt from his back, and from his face
descend five stream of blood, denote the number of claw with
which nature have unhappily arm the enemy.
Mr Partridge act for some time on the defensive only; indeed he
attempt only to guard his face with his hand; but as he find that
his antagonist abate nothing of her rage, he think he might, at
least, endeavour to disarm she, or rather to confine her arm; in
do which her cap fall off in the struggle, and her hair be too
short to reach her shoulder, erect itself on her head; her stay
likewise, which be lace through one single hole at the bottom,
burst open; and her breast, which be much more redundant than her
hair, hang down below her middle; her face be likewise mark with
the blood of her husband: her tooth gnash with rage; and fire, such
as sparkle from a smith's forge, dart from her eye. so that,
altogether, this amazonian heroine might have be an object of terror
to a much bold man than Mr Partridge.
he have, at length, the good fortune, by get possession of her
arm, to render those weapon which she wear at the end of her
finger useless; which she no soon perceive, than the softness of
her sex prevail over her rage, and she presently dissolve in tear,
which soon after conclude in a fit.
that small share of sense which Mr Partridge have hitherto preserve
through this scene of fury, of the cause of which he be hitherto
ignorant, now utterly abandon he. he run instantly into the street,
hallow out that his wife be in the agony of death, and
beseech the neighbour to fly with the utmost haste to her
assistance. several good woman obey his summon, who enter his
house, and apply the usual remedy on such occasion, Mrs
Partridge be at length, to the great joy of her husband, bring to
herself.
as soon as she have a little recollect her spirit, and somewhat
compose herself with a cordial, she begin to inform the company of
the manifold injury she have receive from her husband; who, she
say, be not content to injure she in her bed; but, upon she
upbraid he with it, have treat she in the cruel manner
imaginable; have tear her cap and hair from her head, and her stay
from her body, give she, at the same time, several blow, the mark
of which she should carry to the grave.
the poor man, who bear on his face many more visible mark of the
indignation of his wife, stand in silent astonishment at this
accusation; which the reader will, I believe, bear witness for he,
have greatly exceed the truth; for indeed he have not strike she once;
and this silence be interpret to be a confession of the charge by
the whole court, they all begin at once, _una voce_, to rebuke and
revile he, repeat often, that none but a coward ever strike a
woman.
Mr Partridge bear all this patiently; but when his wife appeal to
the blood on her face, as an evidence of his barbarity, he could not
help lay claim to his own blood, for so it really be; as he
think it very unnatural, that this should rise up (as we be teach
that of a murder person often doth) in vengeance against he.
to this the woman make no other answer, than that it be a pity it have
not come from his heart, instead of his face; all declare, that, if
their husband should lift their hand against they, they would have
their heart' blood out of their body.
after much admonition for what be past, and much good advice to Mr
Partridge for his future behaviour, the company at length depart,
and leave the husband and wife to a personal conference together, in
which Mr Partridge soon learn the cause of all his suffering.
Chapter v.
contain much matter to exercise the judgment and reflection of the
reader.
I believe it be a true observation, that few secret be divulge to
one person only; but certainly, it would be next to a miracle that a
fact of this kind should be know to a whole parish, and not transpire
any far.
and, indeed, a very few day have past, before the country, to use a
common phrase, rung of the schoolmaster of Little Baddington; who be
say to have beat his wife in the most cruel manner. Nay, in some
place it be report he have murder she; in other, that he have
break her arm; in other, her leg: in short, there be scarce an
injury which can be do to a human creature, but what Mrs Partridge
be somewhere or other affirm to have receive from her husband.
the cause of this quarrel be likewise variously report; for as some
people say that Mrs Partridge have catch her husband in bed with his
maid, so many other reason, of a very different kind, go abroad.
Nay, some transfer the guilt to the wife, and the jealousy to the
husband.
Mrs Wilkins have long ago hear of this quarrel; but, as a different
cause from the true one have reach her ear, she think proper to
conceal it; and the rather, perhaps, as the blame be universally lay
on Mr Partridge; and his wife, when she be servant to Mr Allworthy,
have in something offend Mrs Wilkins, who be not of a very forgiving
temper.
but Mrs Wilkins, whose eye could see object at a distance, and who
could very well look forward a few year into futurity, have perceive
a strong likelihood of Captain Blifil's be hereafter her master;
and as she plainly discern that the captain bear no great goodwill
to the little foundling, she fancy it would be render he an
agreeable service, if she could make any discovery that might lessen
the affection which Mr Allworthy seem to have contract for this
child, and which give visible uneasiness to the captain, who could not
entirely conceal it even before Allworthy himself; though his wife,
who act her part much well in public, frequently recommend to
he her own example, of connive at the folly of her brother, which,
she say, she at least as well perceive, and as much resent, as any
other possibly could.
Mrs Wilkins have therefore, by accident, get a true scent of the
above story,--though long after it have happen, fail not to satisfy
herself thoroughly of all the particular; and then acquaint the
captain, that she have at last discover the true father of the little
bastard, which she be sorry, she say, to see her master lose his
reputation in the country, by take so much notice of.
the captain chide she for the conclusion of her speech, as an improper
assurance in judging of her master's action: for if his honour, or
his understanding, would have suffer the captain to make an alliance
with Mrs Wilkins, his pride would by no mean have admit it. and to
say the truth, there be no conduct less politic, than to enter into
any confederacy with your friend's servant against their master: for
by these mean you afterwards become the slave of these very servant;
by whom you be constantly liable to be betray. and this
consideration, perhaps it be, which prevent Captain Blifil from
be more explicit with Mrs Wilkins, or from encourage the abuse
which she have bestow on Allworthy.
but though he declare no satisfaction to Mrs Wilkins at this
discovery, he enjoy not a little from it in his own mind, and
resolve to make the good use of it he be able.
he keep this matter a long time conceal within his own breast, in
hope that Mr Allworthy might hear it from some other person; but Mrs
Wilkins, whether she resent the captain's behaviour, or whether his
cunning be beyond she, and she fear the discovery might displease
he, never afterwards open her lip about the matter.
I have think it somewhat strange, upon reflection, that the
housekeeper never acquaint Mrs Blifil with this news, as woman be
more inclined to communicate all piece of intelligence to their own
sex, than to ours. the only way, as it appear to I, of solve this
difficulty, be, by impute it to that distance which be now grow
between the lady and the housekeeper: whether this arise from a
jealousy in Mrs Blifil, that Wilkins show too great a respect to the
foundling; for while she be endeavour to ruin the little infant,
in order to ingratiate herself with the captain, she be every day
more and more commend it before Allworthy, as his fondness for it
every day increase. this, notwithstanding all the care she take at
other time to express the direct contrary to Mrs Blifil, perhaps
offend that delicate lady, who certainly now hat Mrs Wilkins; and
though she do not, or possibly could not, absolutely remove she from
her place, she find, however, the mean of make her life very
uneasy. this Mrs Wilkins, at length, so resent, that she very openly
show all manner of respect and fondness to little Tommy, in
opposition to Mrs Blifil.
the captain, therefore, find the story in danger of perish, at
last take an opportunity to reveal it himself.
he be one day engage with Mr Allworthy in a discourse on charity: in
which the captain, with great learning, prove to Mr Allworthy, that
the word charity in Scripture nowhere mean beneficence or generosity.
"the christian religion," he say, "be institute for much nobler
purpose, than to enforce a lesson which many heathen philosopher have
teach we long before, and which, though it might perhaps be call a
moral virtue, savour but little of that sublime, Christian-like
disposition, that vast elevation of thought, in purity approach to
angelic perfection, to be attain, express, and feel only by grace.
those," he say, "come near to the scripture meaning, who understand
by it candour, or the forming of a benevolent opinion of our brother,
and pass a favourable judgment on their action; a virtue much
high, and more extensive in its nature, than a pitiful distribution
of alm, which, though we would never so much prejudice, or even ruin
our family, could never reach many; whereas charity, in the other
and truer sense, might be extend to all mankind."
he say, "consider who the disciple be, it would be absurd to
conceive the doctrine of generosity, or give alm, to have be
preach to they. and, as we could not well imagine this doctrine
should be preach by its Divine Author to man who could not practise
it, much less should we think it understand so by those who can
practise it, and do not.
"but though," continue he, "there be, I be afraid, little merit in
these benefaction, there would, I must confess, be much pleasure in
they to a good mind, if it be not abate by one consideration. I
mean, that we be liable to be impose upon, and to confer our
choicest favour often on the undeserving, as you must own be your
case in your bounty to that worthless fellow Partridge: for two or
three such example must greatly lessen the inward satisfaction which
a good man would otherwise find in generosity; nay, may even make he
timorous in bestowing, lest he should be guilty of support vice,
and encourage the wicked; a crime of a very black dye, and for which
it will by no mean be a sufficient excuse, that we have not actually
intend such an encouragement; unless we have use the utmost caution
in chuse the object of our beneficence. a consideration which, I
make no doubt, hath greatly check the liberality of many a worthy
and pious man."
Mr Allworthy answer, "he could not dispute with the captain in the
greek language, and therefore could say nothing as to the true sense
of the word which be translate charity; but that he have always
think it be interpret to consist in action, and that give alm
constitute at least one branch of that virtue.
"as to the meritorious part," he say, "he readily agree with the
captain; for where could be the merit of barely discharge a duty?
which," he say, "let the word charity have what construction it
would, it sufficiently appear to be from the whole tenor of the New
Testament. and as he think it an indispensable duty, enjoin both
by the christian law, and by the law of nature itself; so be it
withal so pleasant, that if any duty could be say to be its own
reward, or to pay we while we be discharge it, it be this.
"to confess the truth," say he, "there be one degree of generosity
(of charity I would have call it), which seem to have some show of
merit, and that be, where, from a principle of benevolence and
christian love, we bestow on another what we really want ourselves;
where, in order to lessen the distress of another, we condescend to
share some part of they, by give what even our own necessity
cannot well spare. this be, I think, meritorious; but to relieve our
brother only with our superfluity; to be charitable (I must use the
word) rather at the expense of our coffer than ourselves; to save
several family from misery rather than hang up an extraordinary
picture in our house or gratify any other idle ridiculous
vanity--this seem to be only be human creature. Nay, I will
venture to go far, it be be in some degree epicure: for what
could the great epicure wish rather than to eat with many mouth
instead of one? which I think may be predicate of any one who know
that the bread of many be owe to his own largess.
"as to the apprehension of bestow bounty on such as may hereafter
prove unworthy object, because many have prove such; surely it can
never deter a good man from generosity. I do not think a few or many
example of ingratitude can justify a man's harden his heart
against the distress of his fellow-creature; nor do I believe it
can ever have such effect on a truly benevolent mind. nothing less
than a persuasion of universal depravity can lock up the charity of a
good man; and this persuasion must lead he, I think, either into
atheism, or enthusiasm; but surely it be unfair to argue such
universal depravity from a few vicious individual; nor be this, I
believe, ever do by a man, who, upon search his own mind, find
one certain exception to the general rule." he then conclude by
ask, "who that Partridge be, whom he have call a worthless
fellow?"
"I mean," say the captain, "partridge the barber, the schoolmaster,
what do you call he? Partridge, the father of the little child which
you find in your bed."
Mr Allworthy expr great surprize at this account, and the captain
as great at his ignorance of it; for he say he have know it above a
month: and at length recollect with much difficulty that he be tell
it by Mrs Wilkins.
upon this, Wilkins be immediately summon; who have confirm what
the captain have say, be by Mr Allworthy, by and with the captain's
advice, dispatch to Little Baddington, to inform herself of the
truth of the fact: for the captain expr great dislike at all hasty
proceeding in criminal matter, and say he would by no mean have Mr
Allworthy take any resolution either to the prejudice of the child or
its father, before he be satisfied that the latter be guilty; for
though he have privately satisfy himself of this from one of
Partridge's neighbour, yet he be too generous to give any such
evidence to Mr Allworthy.
Chapter vi.
the trial of Partridge, the schoolmaster, for incontinency; the
evidence of his wife; a short reflection on the wisdom of our law;
with other grave matter, which those will like good who understand
they most.
it may be wonder that a story so well know, and which have furnish
so much matter of conversation, should never have be mention to Mr
Allworthy himself, who be perhaps the only person in that country who
have never hear of it.
to account in some measure for this to the reader, I think proper to
inform he, that there be no one in the kingdom less interested in
oppose that doctrine concern the meaning of the word charity,
which hath be see in the precede chapter, than our good man.
indeed, he be equally intitle to this virtue in either sense; for as
no man be ever more sensible of the want, or more ready to relieve
the distress of other, so none could be more tender of their
character, or slow to believe anything to their disadvantage.
scandal, therefore, never find any access to his table; for as it
hath be long since observe that you may know a man by his
companion, so I will venture to say, that, by attend to the
conversation at a great man's table, you may satisfy yourself of his
religion, his politic, his taste, and indeed of his entire
disposition: for though a few odd fellow will utter their own
sentiment in all place, yet much the great part of mankind have
enough of the courtier to accommodate their conversation to the taste
and inclination of their superior.
but to return to Mrs Wilkins, who, have execute her commission with
great dispatch, though at fifteen mile distance, bring back such a
confirmation of the schoolmaster's guilt, that Mr Allworthy determine
to send for the criminal, and examine he _viva voce_. Mr Partridge,
therefore, be summon to attend, in order to his defence (if he
could make any) against this accusation.
at the time appoint, before Mr Allworthy himself, at Paradise-hall,
come as well the say Partridge, with Anne, his wife, as Mrs Wilkins
his accuser.
and now Mr Allworthy be seat in the chair of justice, Mr
Partridge be bring before he. have hear his accusation from the
mouth of Mrs Wilkins, he plead not guilty, make many vehement
protestation of his innocence.
Mrs Partridge be then examine, who, after a modest apology for be
oblige to speak the truth against her husband, relate all the
circumstance with which the reader hath already be acquaint; and
at last conclude with her husband's confession of his guilt.
whether she have forgive he or no, I will not venture to determine;
but it be certain she be an unwilling witness in this cause; and it
be probable from certain other reason, would never have be bring
to depose as she do, have not Mrs Wilkins, with great art, fish all
out of she at her own house, and have she not indeed make promise, in
Mr Allworthy's name, that the punishment of her husband should not be
such as might anywise affect his family.
Partridge still persist in assert his innocence, though he
admit he have make the above-mention confession; which he however
endeavour to account for, by protest that he be force into it
by the continue importunity she use: who vow, that, as she be
sure of his guilt, she would never leave torment he till he have
own it; and faithfully promise, that, in such case, she would never
mention it to he more. hence, he say, he have be induce falsely to
confess himself guilty, though he be innocent; and that he believe
he should have confest a murder from the same motive.
Mrs Partridge could not bear this imputation with patience; and have
no other remedy in the present place but tear, she call forth a
plentiful assistance from they, and then address herself to Mr
Allworthy, she say (or rather cry), "may it please your worship,
there never be any poor woman so injure as I be by that base man;
for this be not the only instance of his falsehood to I. no, may it
please your worship, he hath injure my bed manybe the good time and
often. I could have put up with his drunkenness and neglect of his
business, if he have not break one of the sacred commandment. besides,
if it have be out of door I have not matter it so much; but with my
own servant, in my own house, under my own roof, to defile my own
chaste bed, which to be sure he hath, with his beastly stink
whore. yes, you villain, you have defile my own bed, you have; and
then you have charge I with bullocke you into own the truth. it
be very likely, an't please your worship, that I should bullock he? I
have mark enow about my body to show of his cruelty to I. if you have
be a man, you villain, you would have scorn to injure a woman in
that manner. but you an't half a man, you know it. nor have you be
half a husband to I. you need run after whore, you need, when Ibe
sure--and since he provoke I, I be ready, an't please your worship,
to take my bodily oath that I find they a-bed together. what, you
have forget, I suppose, when you beat I into a fit, and make the
blood run down my forehead, because I only civilly tax you with
adultery! but I can prove it by all my neighbour. you have almost
break my heart, you have, you have."
here Mr Allworthy interrupt, and beg she to be pacify,
promise she that she should have justice; then turn to Partridge,
who stand aghast, one half of his wit be hurry away by surprize
and the other half by fear, he say he be sorry to see there be so
wicke a man in the world. he assure he that his prevaricating and
lie backward and forward be a great aggravation of his guilt; for
which the only atonement he could make be by confession and
repentance. he exhort he, therefore, to begin by immediately
confess the fact, and not to persist in deny what be so plainly
prove against he even by his own wife.
here, reader, I beg your patience a moment, while I make a just
compliment to the great wisdom and sagacity of our law, which refuse
to admit the evidence of a wife for or against her husband. this, say
a certain learn author, who, I believe, be never quote before in
any but a law-book, would be the mean of create an eternal
dissension between they. it would, indeed, be the mean of much
perjury, and of much whipping, fin, imprisoning, transporting, and
hang.
Partridge stand a while silent, till, be bid to speak, he say he
have already speak the truth, and appeal to Heaven for his
innocence, and lastly to the girl herself, whom he desire his worship
immediately to send for; for he be ignorant, or at least pretend to
be so, that she have leave that part of the country.
Mr Allworthy, whose natural love of justice, join to his coolness of
temper, make he always a most patient magistrate in hear all the
witness which an accuse person could produce in his defence, agree
to defer his final determination of this matter till the arrival of
Jenny, for whom he immediately dispatch a messenger; and then have
recommend peace between Partridge and his wife (though he address
himself chiefly to the wrong person), he appoint they to attend
again the third day; for he have send Jenny a whole day's journey from
his own house.
at the appoint time the party all assemble, when the messenger
return bring word, that Jenny be not to be find; for that she
have leave her habitation a few day before, in company with a
recruiting officer.
Mr Allworthy then declare that the evidence of such a slut as she
appear to be would have deserve no credit; but he say he could not
help think that, have she be present, and would have declare the
truth, she must have confirm what so many circumstance, together
with his own confession, and the declaration of his wife that she have
catch her husband in the fact, do sufficiently prove. he therefore
once more exhort Partridge to confess; but he still avow his
innocence, Mr Allworthy declare himself satisfied of his guilt, and
that he be too bad a man to receive any encouragement from he. he
therefore deprive he of his annuity, and recommend repentance to
he on account of another world, and industry to maintain himself and
his wife in this.
there be not, perhaps, many more unhappy person than poor
Partridge. he have lose the good part of his income by the evidence of
his wife, and yet be daily upbraided by she for have, among other
thing, be the occasion of deprive she of that benefit; but such
be his fortune, and he be oblige to submit to it.
though I call he poor Partridge in the last paragraph, I would have
the reader rather impute that epithet to the compassion in my temper
than conceive it to be any declaration of his innocence. whether he
be innocent or not will perhaps appear hereafter; but if the historic
muse hath entrust I with any secret, I will by no mean be guilty
of discover they till she shall give I leave.
here therefore the reader must suspend his curiosity. certain it be
that, whatever be the truth of the case, there be evidence more than
sufficient to convict he before Allworthy; indeed, much less would
have satisfy a bench of justice on an order of bastardy; and yet,
notwithstanding the positiveness of Mrs Partridge, who would have
take the sacrament upon the matter, there be a possibility that the
schoolmaster be entirely innocent: for though it appear clear on
compare the time when Jenny depart from Little Baddington with
that of her delivery that she have there conceive this infant, yet it
by no mean follow of necessity that Partridge must have be its
father; for, to omit other particular, there be in the same house a
lad near eighteen, between whom and Jenny there have subsist
sufficient intimacy to found a reasonable suspicion; and yet, so blind
be jealousy, this circumstance never once enter into the head of the
enraged wife.
whether Partridge repent or not, accord to Mr Allworthy's advice,
be not so apparent. certain it be that his wife repent heartily of
the evidence she have give against he: especially when she find Mrs
Deborah have deceive she, and refuse to make any application to Mr
allworthy on her behalf. she have, however, somewhat well success
with Mrs Blifil, who be, as the reader must have perceive, a much
well-temper woman, and very kindly undertake to solicit her
brother to restore the annuity; in which, though good-nature might
have some share, yet a strong and more natural motive will appear in
the next chapter.
these solicitation be nevertheless unsuccessful: for though Mr
Allworthy do not think, with some late writer, that mercy consist
only in punish offender; yet he be as far from think that it
be proper to this excellent quality to pardon great criminal
wantonly, without any reason whatever. any doubtfulness of the fact,
or any circumstance of mitigation, be never disregard: but the
petition of an offender, or the intercession of other, do not in
the least affect he. in a word, he never pardon because the
offender himself, or his friend, be unwilling that he should be
punish.
Partridge and his wife be therefore both oblige to submit to their
fate; which be indeed severe enough: for so far be he from double
his industry on the account of his lessen income, that he do in a
manner abandon himself to despair; and as he be by nature indolent,
that vice now increase upon he, by which mean he lose the little
school he have; so that neither his wife nor himself would have have any
bread to eat, have not the charity of some good Christian interpose,
and provide they with what be just sufficient for their sustenance.
as this support be convey to they by an unknown hand, they
imagine, and so, I doubt not, will the reader, that Mr Allworthy
himself be their secret benefactor; who, though he would not openly
encourage vice, could yet privately relieve the distress of the
vicious themselves, when these become too exquisite and
disproportionate to their demerit. in which light their wretchedness
appear now to Fortune herself; for she at length take pity on this
miserable couple, and considerably lessen the wretched state of
Partridge, by put a final end to that of his wife, who soon after
catch the small-pox, and die.
the justice which Mr Allworthy have execute on Partridge at first meet
with universal approbation; but no soon have he feel its
consequence, than his neighbour begin to relent, and to
compassionate his case; and presently after, to blame that as rigour
and severity which they before call justice. they now exclaim
against punish in cold blood, and sing forth the praise of mercy
and forgiveness.
these cry be considerably increase by the death of Mrs Partridge,
which, though owe to the distemper above mention, which be no
consequence of poverty or distress, many be not ashamed to impute to
Mr Allworthy's severity, or, as they now term it, cruelty.
Partridge have now lose his wife, his school, and his annuity, and
the unknown person have now discontinue the last-mention charity,
resolve to change the scene, and leave the country, where he be in
danger of starving, with the universal compassion of all his
neighbour.
Chapter vii.
a short sketch of that felicity which prudent couple may extract from
hatred: with a short apology for those people who overlook
imperfection in their friend.
though the captain have effectually demolish poor Partridge, yet have
he not reap the harvest he hop for, which be to turn the
foundling out of Mr Allworthy's house.
on the contrary, that gentleman grow every day fonder of little Tommy,
as if he intend to counterbalance his severity to the father with
extraordinary fondness and affection towards the son.
this a good deal sour the captain's temper, as do all the other
daily instance of Mr Allworthy's generosity; for he look on all
such largess to be diminution of his own wealth.
in this, we have say, he do not agree with his wife; nor, indeed, in
anything else: for though an affection place on the understanding be,
by many wise person, think more durable than that which be found
on beauty, yet it happen otherwise in the present case. Nay, the
understanding of this couple be their principal bone of contention,
and one great cause of many quarrel, which from time to time arise
between they; and which at last end, on the side of the lady, in a
sovereign contempt for her husband; and on the husband's, in an utter
abhorrence of his wife.
as these have both exercise their talent chiefly in the study of
divinity, this be, from their first acquaintance, the most common
topic of conversation between they. the captain, like a well-breed man,
have, before marriage, always give up his opinion to that of the lady;
and this, not in the clumsy awkward manner of a conceited blockhead,
who, while he civilly yield to a superior in an argument, be desirous
of be still know to think himself in the right. the captain, on
the contrary, though one of the proud fellow in the world, so
absolutely yield the victory to his antagonist, that she, who have
not the least doubt of his sincerity, retire always from the dispute
with an admiration of her own understanding and a love for his.
but though this complacence to one whom the captain thoroughly
despise, be not so uneasy to he as it would have be have any hope
of preferment make it necessary to show the same submission to a
Hoadley, or to some other of great reputation in the science, yet even
this cost he too much to be endure without some motive. Matrimony,
therefore, have remove all such motif, he grow weary of this
condescension, and begin to treat the opinion of his wife with that
haughtiness and insolence, which none but those who deserve some
contempt themselves can bestow, and those only who deserve no contempt
can bear.
when the first torrent of tenderness be over, and when, in the calm
and long interval between the fit, reason begin to open the eye of
the lady, and she see this alteration of behaviour in the captain, who
at length answer all her argument only with pish and pshaw, she be
far from endure the indignity with a tame submission. indeed, it at
first so highly provoke she, that it might have produce some
tragical event, have it not take a more harmless turn, by fill she
with the utmost contempt for her husband's understanding, which
somewhat qualify her hatred towards he; though of this likewise she
have a pretty moderate share.
the captain's hatred to she be of a purer kind: for as to any
imperfection in her knowledge or understanding, he no more despise
she for they, than for she not be six foot high. in his opinion of
the female sex, he exceed the moroseness of Aristotle himself: he
look on a woman as on an animal of domestic use, of somewhat high
consideration than a cat, since her office be of rather more
importance; but the difference between these two be, in his
estimation, so small, that, in his marriage contract with Mr
Allworthy's land and tenement, it would have be pretty equal which
of they he have take into the bargain. and yet so tender be his
pride, that it feel the contempt which his wife now begin to express
towards he; and this, add to the surfeit he have before take of her
love, create in he a degree of disgust and abhorrence, perhaps
hardly to be exceed.
one situation only of the married state be exclude from pleasure: and
that be, a state of indifference: but as many of my reader, I hope,
know what an exquisite delight there be in conveying pleasure to a
beloved object, so some few, I be afraid, may have experience the
satisfaction of torment one we hate. it be, I apprehend, to come at
this latter pleasure, that we see both sex often give up that ease
in marriage which they might otherwise possess, though their mate be
never so disagreeable to they. hence the wife often put on fit of
love and jealousy, nay, even deny herself any pleasure, to disturb
and prevent those of her husband; and he again, in return, put
frequent restraint on himself, and stay at home in company which he
dislike, in order to confine his wife to what she equally detest.
hence, too, must flow those tear which a widow sometimes so
plentifully shed over the ash of a husband with whom she lead a life
of constant disquiet and turbulency, and whom now she can never hope
to torment any more.
but if ever any couple enjoy this pleasure, it be at present
experience by the captain and his lady. it be always a sufficient
reason to either of they to be obstinate in any opinion, that the
other have previously assert the contrary. if the one propose any
amusement, the other constantly object to it: they never love or
hat, commend or abuse, the same person. and for this reason, as
the captain look with an evil eye on the little foundling, his wife
begin now to caress it almost equally with her own child.
the reader will be apt to conceive, that this behaviour between the
husband and wife do not greatly contribute to Mr Allworthy's repose,
as it tend so little to that serene happiness which he have design
for all three from this alliance; but the truth be, though he might be
a little disappointed in his sanguine expectation, yet he be far
from be acquaint with the whole matter; for, as the captain be,
from certain obvious reason, much on his guard before he, the lady
be oblige, for fear of her brother's displeasure, to pursue the same
conduct. in fact, it be possible for a third person to be very
intimate, nay even to live long in the same house, with a married
couple, who have any tolerable discretion, and not even guess at the
sour sentiment which they bear to each other: for though the whole
day may be sometimes too short for hatred, as well as for love; yet
the many hour which they naturally spend together, apart from all
observer, furnish people of tolerable moderation with such ample
opportunity for the enjoyment of either passion, that, if they love,
they can support be a few hour in company without toy, or if
they hate, without spit in each other's face.
it be possible, however, that Mr Allworthy see enough to render he a
little uneasy; for we be not always to conclude, that a wise man be
not hurt, because he doth not cry out and lament himself, like those
of a childish or effeminate temper. but indeed it be possible he might
see some fault in the captain without any uneasiness at all; for man
of true wisdom and goodness be content to take person and thing
as they be, without complain of their imperfection, or attempt
to amend they. they can see a fault in a friend, a relation, or an
acquaintance, without ever mention it to the party themselves, or
to any other; and this often without lessen their affection.
indeed, unless great discernment be temper with this overlook
disposition, we ought never to contract friendship but with a degree
of folly which we can deceive; for I hope my friend will pardon I
when I declare, I know none of they without a fault; and I should be
sorry if I could imagine I have any friend who could not see mine.
forgiveness of this kind we give and demand in turn. it be an exercise
of friendship, and perhaps none of the least pleasant. and this
forgiveness we must bestow, without desire of amendment. there be,
perhaps, no surer mark of folly, than an attempt to correct the
natural infirmity of those we love. the fine composition of human
nature, as well as the fine china, may have a flaw in it; and this,
I be afraid, in either case, be equally incurable; though,
nevertheless, the pattern may remain of the high value.
upon the whole, then, Mr Allworthy certainly see some imperfection in
the captain; but as this be a very artful man, and eternally upon his
guard before he, these appear to he no more than blemish in a
good character, which his goodness make he overlook, and his wisdom
prevent he from discover to the captain himself. very different
would have be his sentiment have he discover the whole; which
perhaps would in time have be the case, have the husband and wife
long continue this kind of behaviour to each other; but this kind
Fortune take effectual mean to prevent, by force the captain to do
that which render he again dear to his wife, and restore all her
tenderness and affection towards he.
Chapter viii.
a receipt to regain the lost affection of a wife, which hath never
be know to fail in the most desperate case.
the captain be make large amend for the unpleasant minute which he
pass in the conversation of his wife (and which be as few as he
could contrive to make they), by the pleasant meditation he enjoy
when alone.
these meditation be entirely employ on Mr Allworthy's fortune;
for, first, he exercise much thought in calculate, as well as he
could, the exact value of the whole: which calculation he often see
occasion to alter in his own favour: and, secondly and chiefly, he
please himself with intend alteration in the house and garden,
and in project many other scheme, as well for the improvement of
the estate as of the grandeur of the place: for this purpose he
apply himself to the study of architecture and gardening, and read
over many book on both these subject; for these science, indeed,
employ his whole time, and form his only amusement. he at last
complete a most excellent plan: and very sorry we be, that it be not
in our power to present it to our reader, since even the luxury of the
present age, I believe, would hardly match it. it have, indeed, in a
superlative degree, the two principal ingredient which serve to
recommend all great and noble design of this nature; for it require
an immoderate expense to execute, and a vast length of time to bring
it to any sort of perfection. the former of these, the immense wealth
of which the captain suppose Mr Allworthy possess, and which he
think himself sure of inheriting, promise very effectually to
supply; and the latter, the soundness of his own constitution, and his
time of life, which be only what be call middle-age, remove all
apprehension of his not live to accomplish.
nothing be want to enable he to enter upon the immediate
execution of this plan, but the death of Mr Allworthy; in calculate
which he have employ much of his own algebra, besides purchase
every book extant that treat of the value of life, reversion, &c.
from all which he satisfy himself, that as he have every day a chance
of this happening, so have he more than an even chance of its happening
within a few year.
but while the captain be one day busy in deep contemplation of
this kind, one of the most unlucky as well as unseasonable accident
happen to he. the utmost malice of Fortune could, indeed, have
contrive nothing so cruel, so mal-a-propos, so absolutely destructive
to all his scheme. in short, not to keep the reader in long suspense,
just at the very instant when his heart be exult in meditation on
the happiness which would accrue to he by Mr Allworthy's death, he
himself--die of an apoplexy.
this unfortunately befel the captain as he be take his evening walk
by himself, so that nobody be present to lend he any assistance, if
indeed, any assistance could have preserve he. he take, therefore,
measure of that proportion of soil which be now become adequate to
all his future purpose, and he lie dead on the ground, a great
(though not a living) example of the truth of that observation of
Horace:
_Tu secanda marmora
Locas sub ipsum funus; et sepulchri
Immemor, struis domos._
which sentiment I shall thus give to the english reader: "you provide
the noble material for building, when a pickaxe and a spade be
only necessary: and build house of five hundred by a hundred foot,
forget that of six by two."
Chapter ix.
a proof of the infallibility of the forego receipt, in the
lamentation of the widow; with other suitable decoration of death,
such as physician, &c., and an epitaph in the true stile.
Mr Allworthy, his sister, and another lady, be assemble at the
accustomed hour in the supper-room, where, have wait a
considerable time long than usual, Mr Allworthy first declare he
begin to grow uneasy at the captain's stay (for he be always most
punctual at his meal); and give order that the bell should be ring
without the door, and especially towards those walk which the
captain be willnot to use.
all these summon prove ineffectual (for the captain have, by
perverse accident, betake himself to a new walk that evening), Mrs
Blifil declare she be seriously frightened. upon which the other
lady, who be one of her most intimate acquaintance, and who well know
the true state of her affection, endeavour all she could to pacify
she, tell she--to be sure she could not help be uneasy; but that
she should hope the good. that, perhaps the sweetness of the evening
have intice the captain to go far than his usual walk: or he might
be detain at some neighbour's. Mrs Blifil answer, no; she be sure
some accident have befall he; for that he would never stay out
without send her word, as he must know how uneasy it would make
she. the other lady, have no other argument to use, betook herself
to the entreaty usual on such occasion, and beg she not to
frighten herself, for it might be of very ill consequence to her own
health; and, fill out a very large glass of wine, advise, and at
last prevail with she to drink it.
Mr Allworthy now return into the parlour; for he have be himself in
search after the captain. his countenance sufficiently show the
consternation he be under, which, indeed, have a good deal deprive
he of speech; but as grief operate variously on different mind, so
the same apprehension which depress his voice, elevate that of Mrs
Blifil. she now begin to bewail herself in very bitter term, and
flood of tear accompany her lamentation; which the lady, her
companion, declare she could not blame, but at the same time
dissuade she from indulge; attempt to moderate the grief of her
friend by philosophical observation on the many disappointment to
which human life be daily subject, which, she say, be a sufficient
consideration to fortify our mind against any accident, how sudden
or terrible soever. she say her brother's example ought to teach she
patience, who, though indeed he could not be suppose as much
concerned as herself, yet be, doubtless, very uneasy, though his
resignation to the Divine will have restrain his grief within due
bound.
"Mention not my brother," say Mrs Blifil; "I alone be the object of
your pity. what be the terror of friendship to what a wife feel on
these occasion? oh, he be lose! somebody hath murder he--I shall
never see he more!"--here a torrent of tear have the same consequence
with what the suppression have occasion to Mr Allworthy, and she
remain silent.
at this interval a servant come run in, out of breath, and cry
out, the captain be find; and, before he could proceed far, he
be follow by two more, bear the dead body between they.
here the curious reader may observe another diversity in the
operation of grief: for as Mr Allworthy have be before silent, from
the same cause which have make his sister vociferous; so do the
present sight, which draw tear from the gentleman, put an entire stop
to those of the lady; who first give a violent scream, and presently
after fall into a fit.
the room be soon full of servant, some of whom, with the lady
visitant, be employ in care of the wife; and other, with Mr
Allworthy, assist in carry off the captain to a warm bed; where
every method be try, in order to restore he to life.
and glad should we be, could we inform the reader that both these
body have be attend with equal success; for those who undertake
the care of the lady succeed so well, that, after the fit have
continue a decent time, she again revive, to their great
satisfaction: but as to the captain, all experiment of bleeding,
chafing, dropping, &c., prove ineffectual. death, that inexorable
judge, have pass sentence on he, and refuse to grant he a
reprieve, though two doctor who arrive, and be fee'd at one and
the same instant, be his counsel.
these two doctor, whom, to avoid any malicious application, we shall
distinguish by the name of Dr Y. and Dr Z., have feel his pulse; to
wit, Dr Y. his right arm, and Dr Z. his left; both agree that he be
absolutely dead; but as to the distemper, or cause of his death, they
differ; Dr Y. hold that he die of an apoplexy, and Dr Z. of an
epilepsy.
hence arise a dispute between the learn man, in which each deliver
the reason of their several opinion. these be of such equal force,
that they serve both to confirm either doctor in his own sentiment,
and make not the least impression on his adversary.
to say the truth, every physician almost hath his favourite disease,
to which he ascribe all the victory obtain over human nature. the
gout, the rheumatism, the stone, the gravel, and the consumption, have
all their several patron in the faculty; and none more than the
nervous fever, or the fever on the spirit. and here we may account
for those disagreement in opinion, concern the cause of a
patient's death, which sometimes occur, between the most learn of
the college; and which have greatly surprize that part of the world
who have be ignorant of the fact we have above assert.
the reader may perhaps be surprize, that, instead of endeavour to
revive the patient, the learn gentleman should fall immediately into
a dispute on the occasion of his death; but in reality all such
experiment have be make before their arrival: for the captain be
put into a warm bed, have his vein scarify, his forehead chafe, and
all sort of strong drop apply to his lip and nostril.
the physician, therefore, find themselves anticipate in
everything they order, be at a loss how to apply that portion of
time which it be usual and decent to remain for their fee, and be
therefore necessitate to find some subject or other for discourse;
and what could more naturally present itself than that before
mention?
our doctor be about to take their leave, when Mr Allworthy, have
give over the captain, and acquiesce in the Divine will, begin to
enquire after his sister, whom he desire they to visit before their
departure.
this lady be now recover of her fit, and, to use the common phrase,
as well as could be expect for one in her condition. the doctor,
therefore, all previous ceremony be comply with, as this be a
new patient, attend, accord to desire, and lay hold on each of
her hand, as they have before do on those of the corpse.
the case of the lady be in the other extreme from that of her
husband: for as he be past all the assistance of physic, so in
reality she require none.
there be nothing more unjust than the vulgar opinion, by which
physician be misrepresent, as friend to death. on the contrary, I
believe, if the number of those who recover by physic could be oppose
to that of the martyr to it, the former would rather exceed the
latter. Nay, some be so cautious on this head, that, to avoid a
possibility of kill the patient, they abstain from all method of
cure, and prescribe nothing but what can neither do good nor harm. I
have hear some of these, with great gravity, deliver it as a maxim,
"that nature should be leave to do her own work, while the physician
stand by as it be to clap she on the back, and encourage she when
she doth well."
so little then do our doctor delight in death, that they discharge
the corpse after a single fee; but they be not so disgusted with
their live patient; concern whose case they immediately agree,
and fall to prescribe with great diligence.
whether, as the lady have at first persuade her physician to believe
her ill, they have now, in return, persuade she to believe herself so,
I will not determine; but she continue a whole month with all the
decoration of sickness. during this time she be visit by
physician, attend by nurse, and receive constant message from
her acquaintance to enquire after her health.
at length the decent time for sickness and immoderate grief being
expire, the doctor be discharge, and the lady begin to see
company; be alter only from what she be before, by that colour
of sadness in which she have dress her person and countenance.
the captain be now inter, and might, perhaps, have already make a
large progress towards oblivion, have not the friendship of Mr
Allworthy take care to preserve his memory, by the follow epitaph,
which be write by a man of as great genius as integrity, and one
who perfectly well know the captain.
HERE lie,
in EXPECTATION of a JOYFUL rising,
the body of
CAPTAIN JOHN BLIFIL.
LONDON
had the honour of his BIRTH,
OXFORD
of his education.
his part
be an honour to his profession
and to his country:
his life, to his religion
and HUMAN NATURE.
he be a DUTIFUL son,
a tender husband,
an affectionate FATHER,
a MOST kind BROTHER,
a SINCERE FRIEND,
a devout christian,
and a good MAN.
his inconsolable WIDOW
HATH erect this stone,
the MONUMENT of
his virtue
and of she AFFECTION.
BOOK III.
contain the MOST MEMORABLE transaction which pass in the FAMILY
of MR ALLWORTHY, from the TIME when TOMMY JONES ARRIVED at the AGE of
FOURTEEN, till he attain the AGE of nineteen. in this BOOK the
reader may PICK up some hint concern the EDUCATION of child.
Chapter i.
contain little or nothing.
the reader will be pleased to remember, that, at the beginning of the
second book of this history, we give he a hint of our intention to
pass over several large period of time, in which nothing happen
worthy of be record in a chronicle of this kind.
in so do, we do not only consult our own dignity and ease, but the
good and advantage of the reader: for besides that by these mean we
prevent he from throw away his time, in reading without either
pleasure or emolument, we give he, at all such season, an
opportunity of employ that wonderful sagacity, of which he be
master, by fill up these vacant space of time with his own
conjecture; for which purpose we have take care to qualify he in
the precede page.
for instance, what reader but know that Mr Allworthy feel, at first,
for the loss of his friend, those emotion of grief, which on such
occasion enter into all man whose heart be not compose of flint,
or their head of as solid material? again, what reader doth not know
that philosophy and religion in time moderate, and at last
extinguish, this grief? the former of these teach the folly and
vanity of it, and the latter correct it as unlawful, and at the
same time assuage it, by raise future hope and assurance, which
enable a strong and religious mind to take leave of a friend, on his
deathbe, with little less indifference than if he be prepare for a
long journey; and, indeed, with little less hope of see he again.
nor can the judicious reader be at a great loss on account of Mrs
Bridget Blifil, who, he may be assure, conduct herself through the
whole season in which grief be to make its appearance on the outside
of the body, with the strict regard to all the rule of custom and
decency, suit the alteration of her countenance to the several
alteration of her habit: for as this change from weed to black,
from black to grey, from grey to white, so do her countenance change
from dismal to sorrowful, from sorrowful to sad, and from sad to
serious, till the day come in which she be allow to return to her
former serenity.
we have mention these two, as example only of the task which may be
impose on reader of the low class. much high and hard
exercise of judgment and penetration may reasonably be expect from
the upper graduate in criticism. many notable discovery will, I
doubt not, be make by such, of the transaction which happen in the
family of our worthy man, during all the year which we have think
proper to pass over: for though nothing worthy of a place in this
history occur within that period, yet do several incident happen
of equal importance with those report by the daily and weekly
historian of the age; in read which great number of person
consume a considerable part of their time, very little, I be afraid,
to their emolument. now, in the conjecture here propose, some of the
most excellent faculty of the mind may be employ to much
advantage, since it be a more useful capacity to be able to foretel
the action of man, in any circumstance, from their character, than
to judge of their character from their action. the former, I own,
require the great penetration; but may be accomplish by true
sagacity with no less certainty than the latter.
as we be sensible that much the great part of our reader be very
eminently possess of this quality, we have leave they a space of
twelve year to exert it in; and shall now bring forth our heroe, at
about fourteen year of age, not question that many have be long
impatient to be introduce to his acquaintance.
Chapter ii.
the heroe of this great history appear with very bad omen. a little
tale of so low a kind that some may think it not worth their notice. a
word or two concern a squire, and more relate to a gamekeeper and
a schoolmaster.
as we determine, when we first sit down to write this history, to
flatter no man, but to guide our pen throughout by the direction of
truth, we be oblige to bring our heroe on the stage in a much more
disadvantageous manner than we could wish; and to declare honestly,
even at his first appearance, that it be the universal opinion of all
Mr Allworthy's family that he be certainly bear to be hang.
indeed, I be sorry to say there be too much reason for this
conjecture; the lad have from his early year discover a
propensity to many vice, and especially to one which hath as direct a
tendency as any other to that fate which we have just now observe to
have be prophetically denounce against he: he have be already
convict of three robbery, viz., of rob an orchard, of steal
a duck out of a farmer's yard, and of pick Master Blifil's pocket
of a ball.
the vice of this young man be, moreover, heighten by the
disadvantageous light in which they appear when oppose to the
virtue of Master Blifil, his companion; a youth of so different a
cast from little Jones, that not only the family but all the
neighbourhood resound his praise. he be, indeed, a lad of a
remarkable disposition; sober, discreet, and pious beyond his age;
quality which gain he the love of every one who know he: while
Tom Jones be universally dislike; and many express their wonder
that Mr Allworthy would suffer such a lad to be educate with his
nephew, lest the moral of the latter should be corrupt by his
example.
an incident which happen about this time will set the character of
these two lad more fairly before the discerning reader than be in the
power of the long dissertation.
Tom Jones, who, bad as he be, must serve for the heroe of this
history, have only one friend among all the servant of the family; for
as to Mrs Wilkins, she have long since give he up, and be perfectly
reconcile to her mistress. this friend be the gamekeeper, a fellow
of a loose kind of disposition, and who be think not to entertain
much strict notion concern the difference of _meum_ and _tuum_
than the young gentleman himself. and hence this friendship give
occasion to many sarcastical remark among the domestic, most of
which be either proverb before, or at least be become so now; and,
indeed, the wit of they all may be comprise in that short Latin
proverb, "_Noscitur a socio;_" which, I think, be thus express in
English, "you may know he by the company he keep."
to say the truth, some of that atrocious wickedness in Jones, of which
we have just mention three example, might perhaps be derive from
the encouragement he have receive from this fellow, who, in two or
three instance, have be what the law call an accessary after the
fact: for the whole duck, and great part of the apple, be convert
to the use of the gamekeeper and his family; though, as Jones alone
be discover, the poor lad bore not only the whole smart, but the
whole blame; both which fall again to his lot on the follow
occasion.
Contiguous to Mr Allworthy's estate be the manor of one of those
gentleman who be call preserver of the game. this specie of man,
from the great severity with which they revenge the death of a hare or
partridge, might be think to cultivate the same superstition with
the Bannians in India; many of whom, we be tell, dedicate their whole
life to the preservation and protection of certain animal; be it
not that our English Bannians, while they preserve they from other
enemy, will most unmercifully slaughter whole horse-load
themselves; so that they stand clearly acquit of any such
heathenish superstition.
I have, indeed, a much well opinion of this kind of man than be
entertain by some, as I take they to answer the order of Nature, and
the good purpose for which they be ordain, in a more ample manner
than many other. now, as Horace tell we that there be a set of
human being
_fruge consumere nati,_
"bear to consume the fruit of the earth;" so I make no manner of
doubt but that there be other
_Feras consumere nati,_
"bear to consume the beast of the field;" or, as it be commonly
call, the game; and none, I believe, will deny but that those
squire fulfil this end of their creation.
Little Jones go one day a shooting with the gamekeeper; when
happen to spring a covey of partridge near the border of that
manor over which Fortune, to fulfil the wise purpose of Nature, have
plant one of the game consumer, the bird fly into it, and be
mark (as it be call) by the two sportsman, in some furze bush,
about two or three hundred pace beyond Mr Allworthy's dominion.
Mr Allworthy have give the fellow strict order, on pain of forfeit
his place, never to trespass on any of his neighbour; no more on
those who be less rigid in this matter than on the lord of this
manor. with regard to other, indeed, these order have not be always
very scrupulously keep; but as the disposition of the gentleman with
whom the partridge have take sanctuary be well know, the gamekeeper
have never yet attempt to invade his territory. nor have he do it
now, have not the young sportsman, who be excessively eager to
pursue the fly game, over-persuade he; but Jones be very
importunate, the other, who be himself keen enough after the sport,
yield to his persuasion, enter the manor, and shoot one of the
partridge.
the gentleman himself be at that time on horse-back, at a little
distance from they; and hear the gun go off, he immediately make
towards the place, and discover poor Tom; for the gamekeeper have
leapt into the thick part of the furze-brake, where he have happily
conceal himself.
the gentleman have search the lad, and find the partridge upon
he, denounce great vengeance, swear he would acquaint Mr
Allworthy. he be as good as his word: for he ride immediately to his
house, and complain of the trespass on his manor in as high term
and as bitter language as if his house have be break open, and the
most valuable furniture steal out of it. he add, that some other
person be in his company, though he could not discover he; for that
two gun have be discharge almost in the same instant. and, say he,
"we have find only this partridge, but the Lord know what mischief
they have do."
at his return home, Tom be presently convene before Mr Allworthy. he
own the fact, and alledge no other excuse but what be really true,
viz., that the covey be originally spring in Mr Allworthy's own
manor.
Tom be then interrogate who be with he, which Mr Allworthy
declare he be resolve to know, acquaint the culprit with the
circumstance of the two gun, which have be depose by the squire and
both his servant; but Tom stoutly persist in assert that he be
alone; yet, to say the truth, he hesitate a little at first, which
would have confirm Mr Allworthy's belief, have what the squire and
his servant say want any further confirmation.
the gamekeeper, be a suspect person, be now send for, and the
question put to he; but he, rely on the promise which Tom have make
he, to take all upon himself, very resolutely deny be in company
with the young gentleman, or indeed have see he the whole
afternoon.
Mr Allworthy then turn towards Tom, with more than usual anger in
his countenance, and advise he to confess who be with he;
repeat, that he be resolve to know. the lad, however, still
maintain his resolution, and be dismiss with much wrath by Mr
Allworthy, who tell he he should have to the next morning to consider
of it, when he should be question by another person, and in another
manner.
Poor Jones spend a very melancholy night; and the more so, as he be
without his usual companion; for Master Blifil be go abroad on a
visit with his mother. fear of the punishment he be to suffer be on
this occasion his least evil; his chief anxiety be, lest his
constancy should fail he, and he should be bring to betray the
gamekeeper, whose ruin he know must now be the consequence.
nor do the gamekeeper pass his time much well. he have the same
apprehension with the youth; for whose honour he have likewise a much
tenderer regard than for his skin.
in the morning, when Tom attend the reverend Mr Thwackum, the person
to whom Mr Allworthy have commit the instruction of the two boy, he
have the same question put to he by that gentleman which he have be
ask the evening before, to which he return the same answer. the
consequence of this be, so severe a whipping, that it possibly fall
little short of the torture with which confession be in some
country extort from criminal.
Tom bear his punishment with great resolution; and though his master
ask he, between every stroke, whether he would not confess, he be
content to be flead rather than betray his friend, or break the
promise he have make.
the gamekeeper be now relieve from his anxiety, and Mr Allworthy
himself begin to be concern at Tom's suffering: for besides that Mr
Thwackum, be highly enraged that he be not able to make the boy
say what he himself please, have carry his severity much beyond the
good man's intention, this latter begin now to suspect that the squire
have be mistake; which his extreme eagerness and anger seem to
make probable; and as for what the servant have say in confirmation
of their master's account, he lay no great stress upon that. now, as
cruelty and injustice be two idea of which Mr Allworthy could by no
mean support the consciousness a single moment, he send for Tom, and
after many kind and friendly exhortation, say, "I be convince, my
dear child, that my suspicion have wrong you; I be sorry that you
have be so severely punish on this account." and at last give he
a little horse to make he amend; again repeat his sorrow for what
have past.
Tom's guilt now fly in his face more than any severity could make it.
he could more easily bear the lash of Thwackum, than the generosity
of Allworthy. the tear burst from his eye, and he fall upon his
knee, cry, "oh, sir, you be too good to I. indeed you be.
indeed I donot deserve it." and at that very instant, from the fulness
of his heart, have almost betray the secret; but the good genius of
the gamekeeper suggest to he what might be the consequence to the
poor fellow, and this consideration seal his lip.
Thwackum do all he could to persuade Allworthy from show any
compassion or kindness to the boy, say, "he have persist in an
untruth;" and give some hint, that a second whipping might probably
bring the matter to light.
but Mr Allworthy absolutely refuse to consent to the experiment. he
say, the boy have suffer enough already for conceal the truth,
even if he be guilty, see that he could have no motive but a
mistaken point of honour for so do.
"Honour!" cry Thwackum, with some warmth, "mere stubbornness and
obstinacy! can honour teach any one to tell a lie, or can any honour
exist independent of religion?"
this discourse happen at table when dinner be just end; and there
be present Mr Allworthy, Mr Thwackum, and a third gentleman, who now
enter into the debate, and whom, before we proceed any far, we
shall briefly introduce to our reader's acquaintance.
Chapter iii.
the character of Mr Square the philosopher, and of Mr Thwackum the
divine; with a dispute concerning----
the name of this gentleman, who have then reside some time at Mr
Allworthy's house, be Mr Square. his natural part be not of the
first rate, but he have greatly improve they by a learn education.
he be deeply read in the antient, and a prof master of all the
work of Plato and Aristotle. upon which great model he have
principally form himself; sometimes accord with the opinion of
the one, and sometimes with that of the other. in moral he be a
prof Platonist, and in religion he incline to be an Aristotelian.
but though he have, as we have say, form his moral on the platonic
model, yet he perfectly agree with the opinion of Aristotle, in
consider that great man rather in the quality of a philosopher or a
speculatist, than as a legislator. this sentiment he carry a great
way; indeed, so far, as to regard all virtue as matter of theory only.
this, it be true, he never affirm, as I have hear, to any one; and
yet upon the least attention to his conduct, I cannot help think it
be his real opinion, as it will perfectly reconcile some
contradiction which might otherwise appear in his character.
this gentleman and Mr Thwackum scarce ever meet without a disputation;
for their tenet be indeed diametrically opposite to each other.
Square hold human nature to be the perfection of all virtue, and that
vice be a deviation from our nature, in the same manner as deformity
of body be. Thwackum, on the contrary, maintain that the human mind,
since the fall, be nothing but a sink of iniquity, till purify and
redeem by grace. in one point only they agree, which be, in all
their discourse on morality never to mention the word goodness. the
favourite phrase of the former, be the natural beauty of virtue; that
of the latter, be the divine power of grace. the former measure all
action by the unalterable rule of right, and the eternal fitness of
thing; the latter decide all matter by authority; but in do
this, he always use the scripture and their commentator, as the
lawyer doth his Coke upon Lyttleton, where the comment be of equal
authority with the text.
after this short introduction, the reader will be pleased to remember,
that the parson have conclude his speech with a triumphant question,
to which he have apprehend no answer; viz., can any honour exist
independent on religion?
to this Square answer; that it be impossible to discourse
philosophically concern word, till their meaning be first
establish: that there be scarce any two word of a more vague and
uncertain signification, than the two he have mention; for that there
be almost as many different opinion concern honour, as
concern religion. "but," say he, "if by honour you mean the true
natural beauty of virtue, I will maintain it may exist independent of
any religion whatever. Nay," add he, "you yourself will allow it may
exist independent of all but one: so will a Mahometan, a Jew, and all
the maintainer of all the different sect in the world."
Thwackum reply, this be argue with the usual malice of all the
enemy to the true Church. he say, he doubt not but that all the
infidel and heretick in the world would, if they could, confine
honour to their own absurd error and damnable deception; "but
honour," say he, "be not therefore manifold, because there be many
absurd opinion about it; nor be religion manifold, because there be
various sect and heresy in the world. when I mention religion, I
mean the christian religion; and not only the christian religion, but
the protestant religion; and not only the protestant religion, but the
Church of England. and when I mention honour, I mean that mode of
divine grace which be not only consistent with, but dependent upon,
this religion; and be consistent with and dependent upon no other. now
to say that the honour I here mean, and which be, I think, all the
honour I could be suppose to mean, will uphold, much less dictate an
untruth, be to assert an absurdity too shocking to be conceive."
"I purposely avoid," say Square, "draw a conclusion which I
think evident from what I have say; but if you perceive it, I be
sure you have not attempt to answer it. however, to drop the article
of religion, I think it be plain, from what you have say, that we
have different idea of honour; or why do we not agree in the same
term of its explanation? I have assert, that true honour and true
virtue be almost synonymous term, and they be both found on the
unalterable rule of right, and the eternal fitness of thing; to which
an untruth be absolutely repugnant and contrary, it be certain that
true honour cannot support an untruth. in this, therefore, I think we
be agree; but that this honour can be say to be found on
religion, to which it be antecedent, if by religion be mean any
positive law--"
"I agree," answer Thwackum, with great warmth, "with a man who
assert honour to be antecedent to religion! Mr Allworthy, do I
agree--?"
he be proceed when Mr Allworthy interpose, tell they very
coldly, they have both mistake his meaning; for that he have say
nothing of true honour.--it be possible, however, he would not have
easily quiet the disputant, who be grow equally warm, have not
another matter now fall out, which put a final end to the
conversation at present.
chapter iv.
contain a necessary apology for the author; and a childish
incident, which perhaps require an apology likewise.
before I proceed far, I shall beg leave to obviate some
misconstruction into which the zeal of some few reader may lead
they; for I would not willingly give offence to any, especially to man
who be warm in the cause of virtue or religion.
I hope, therefore, no man will, by the gross misunderstanding or
perversion of my meaning, misrepresent I, as endeavour to cast any
ridicule on the great perfection of human nature; and which do,
indeed, alone purify and ennoble the heart of man, and raise he above
the brute creation. this, reader, I will venture to say (and by how
much the well man you be yourself, by so much the more will you be
incline to believe I), that I would rather have bury the
sentiment of these two person in eternal oblivion, than have do
any injury to either of these glorious cause.
on the contrary, it be with a view to their service, that I have take
upon I to record the life and action of two of their false and
pretend champion. a treacherous friend be the most dangerous enemy;
and I will say boldly, that both religion and virtue have receive
more real discredit from hypocrite than the witty profligate or
infidel could ever cast upon they: nay, far, as these two, in
their purity, be rightly call the band of civil society, and be
indeed the great of blessing; so when poison and corrupt with
fraud, pretence, and affectation, they have become the bad of civil
curse, and have enable man to perpetrate the most cruel mischief to
their own specie.
indeed, I doubt not but this ridicule will in general be allow: my
chief apprehension be, as many true and just sentiment often come
from the mouth of these person, lest the whole should be take
together, and I should be conceive to ridicule all alike. now the
reader will be pleased to consider, that, as neither of these man be
fool, they could not be suppose to have holden none but wrong
principle, and to have utter nothing but absurdity; what
injustice, therefore, must I have do to their character, have I
select only what be bad! and how horribly wretched and maim must
their argument have appear!
upon the whole, it be not religion or virtue, but the want of they,
which be here expose. have not Thwackum too much neglect virtue, and
Square, religion, in the composition of their several system, and have
not both utterly discard all natural goodness of heart, they have
never be represent as the object of derision in this history; in
which we will now proceed.
this matter then, which put an end to the debate mention in the last
chapter, be no other than a quarrel between Master Blifil and Tom
Jones, the consequence of which have be a bloody nose to the former;
for though Master Blifil, notwithstanding he be the young, be in
size above the other's match, yet Tom be much his superior at the
noble art of boxing.
Tom, however, cautiously avoid all engagement with that youth; for
besides that Tommy Jones be an inoffensive lad amidst all his
roguery, and really love Blifil, Mr Thwackum be always the second
of the latter, would have be sufficient to deter he.
but well say a certain author, no man be wise at all hour; it be
therefore no wonder that a boy be not so. a difference arise at play
between the two lad, Master Blifil call Tom a beggarly bastard.
upon which the latter, who be somewhat passionate in his disposition,
immediately cause that phenomenon in the face of the former, which we
have above remember.
Master Blifil now, with his blood run from his nose, and the tear
gallop after from his eye, appear before his uncle and the
tremendous Thwackum. in which court an indictment of assault, battery,
and wounding, be instantly prefer against Tom; who in his excuse
only plead the provocation, which be indeed all the matter that
Master Blifil have omit.
it be indeed possible that this circumstance might have escape his
memory; for, in his reply, he positively insist, that he have make
use of no such appellation; add, "Heaven forbid such naughty word
should ever come out of his mouth!"
Tom, though against all form of law, rejoin in affirmance of the
word. upon which Master Blifil say, "it be no wonder. those who will
tell one fib, will hardly stick at another. if I have tell my master
such a wicked fib as you have do, I should be ashamed to show my
face."
"what fib, child?" cry Thwackum pretty eagerly.
"why, he tell you that nobody be with he a shooting when he kill
the partridge; but he know" (here he burst into a flood of tear),
"yes, he know, for he confess it to I, that Black George the
gamekeeper be there. Nay, he say--yes you do--deny it if you can,
that you would not have conf the truth, though master have cut you
to piece."
at this the fire flash from Thwackum's eye, and he cry out in
triumph--"Oh! ho! this be your mistaken notion of honour! this be the
boy who be not to be whip again!" but Mr Allworthy, with a more
gentle aspect, turn towards the lad, and say, "be this true, child?
how come you to persist so obstinately in a falsehood?"
Tom say, "he scorn a lie as much as any one: but he think his
honour engage he to act as he do; for he have promise the poor
fellow to conceal he: which," he say, "he think himself far
oblige to, as the gamekeeper have beg he not to go into the
gentleman's manor, and have at last go himself, in compliance with
his persuasion." he say, "this be the whole truth of the matter,
and he would take his oath of it;" and conclude with very
passionately beg Mr Allworthy "to have compassion on the poor
fellow's family, especially as he himself only have be guilty, and
the other have be very difficultly prevail on to do what he do.
indeed, sir," say he, "it could hardly be call a lie that I tell;
for the poor fellow be entirely innocent of the whole matter. I
should have go alone after the bird; nay, I do go at first, and he
only follow I to prevent more mischief. do, pray, sir, let I be
punish; take my little horse away again; but pray, sir, forgive poor
George."
Mr Allworthy hesitate a few moment, and then dismiss the boy,
advise they to live more friendly and peaceably together.
Chapter v.
the opinion of the divine and the philosopher concern the two
boy; with some reason for their opinion, and other matter.
it be probable, that by disclose this secret, which have be
communicate in the utmost confidence to he, young Blifil preserve
his companion from a good lashing; for the offence of the bloody nose
would have be of itself sufficient cause for Thwackum to have
proceed to correction; but now this be totally absorb in the
consideration of the other matter; and with regard to this, Mr
Allworthy declare privately, he think the boy deserve reward
rather than punishment, so that Thwackum's hand be withhold by a
general pardon.
Thwackum, whose meditation be full of birch, exclaim against this
weak, and, as he say he would venture to call it, wicked lenity. to
remit the punishment of such crime be, he say, to encourage they.
he enlarge much on the correction of child, and quote many text
from Solomon, and other; which be to be find in so many other
book, shall not be find here. he then apply himself to the vice of
lying, on which head he be altogether as learn as he have be on
the other.
Square say, he have be endeavour to reconcile the behaviour of
Tom with his idea of perfect virtue, but could not. he own there be
something which at first sight appear like fortitude in the action;
but as fortitude be a virtue, and falsehood a vice, they could by no
mean agree or unite together. he add, that as this be in some
measure to confound virtue and vice, it might be worth Mr Thwackum's
consideration, whether a large castigation might not be lay on upon
the account.
as both these learn man concur in censuring Jones, so be they
no less unanimous in applaud Master Blifil. to bring truth to
light, be by the parson assert to be the duty of every religious
man; and by the philosopher this be declare to be highly conformable
with the rule of right, and the eternal and unalterable fitness of
thing.
all this, however, weigh very little with Mr Allworthy. he could not
be prevail on to sign the warrant for the execution of Jones. there
be something within his own breast with which the invincible fidelity
which that youth have preserve, correspond much well than it have
do with the religion of Thwackum, or with the virtue of Square. he
therefore strictly order the former of these gentleman to abstain
from lay violent hand on Tom for what have past. the pedagogue be
oblige to obey those order; but not without great reluctance, and
frequent muttering that the boy would be certainly spoil.
towards the gamekeeper the good man behave with more severity. he
presently summon that poor fellow before he, and after many bitter
remonstrance, pay he his wage, and dismist he from his service;
for Mr Allworthy rightly observe, that there be a great difference
between be guilty of a falsehood to excuse yourself, and to excuse
another. he likewise urge, as the principal motive to his inflexible
severity against this man, that he have basely suffer Tom Jones to
undergo so heavy a punishment for his sake, whereas he ought to have
prevent it by make the discovery himself.
when this story become public, many people differ from Square and
Thwackum, in judge the conduct of the two lad on the occasion.
Master Blifil be generally call a sneaking rascal, a poor-spirit
wretch, with other epithet of the like kind; whilst Tom be honour
with the appellation of a brave lad, a jolly dog, and an honest
fellow. indeed, his behaviour to Black George much ingratiate he
with all the servant; for though that fellow be before universally
dislike, yet he be no soon turn away than he be as universally
pitied; and the friendship and gallantry of Tom Jones be celebrate
by they all with the high applause; and they condemn Master
Blifil as openly as they durst, without incur the danger of
offend his mother. for all this, however, poor Tom smart in the
flesh; for though Thwackum have be inhibit to exercise his arm on
the forego account, yet, as the proverb say, it be easy to find a
stick, &c. So be it easy to find a rod; and, indeed, the not be
able to find one be the only thing which could have keep Thwackum any
long time from chastise poor Jones.
have the bare delight in the sport be the only inducement to the
pedagogue, it be probable Master Blifil would likewise have have his
share; but though Mr Allworthy have give he frequent order to make
no difference between the lad, yet be Thwackum altogether as kind
and gentle to this youth, as he be harsh, nay even barbarous, to the
other. to say the truth, Blifil have greatly gain his master's
affection; partly by the profound respect he always show his
person, but much more by the decent reverence with which he receive
his doctrine; for he have get by heart, and frequently repeat, his
phrase, and maintain all his master's religious principle with a
zeal which be surprize in one so young, and which greatly endear
he to the worthy preceptor.
Tom Jones, on the other hand, be not only deficient in outward token
of respect, often forget to pull off his hat, or to bow at his
master's approach; but be altogether as unmindful both of his
master's precept and example. he be indeed a thoughtless, giddy
youth, with little sobriety in his manner, and less in his
countenance; and would often very impudently and indecently laugh at
his companion for his serious behaviour.
Mr Square have the same reason for his preference of the former lad;
for Tom Jones show no more regard to the learn discourse which
this gentleman would sometimes throw away upon he, than to those of
Thwackum. he once venture to make a jest of the rule of right; and at
another time say, he believe there be no rule in the world capable
of make such a man as his father (for so Mr Allworthy suffer
himself to be call).
Master Blifil, on the contrary, have address enough at sixteen to
recommend himself at one and the same time to both these opposite.
with one he be all religion, with the other he be all virtue. and
when both be present, he be profoundly silent, which both
interpret in his favour and in their own.
nor be Blifil content with flatter both these gentleman to their
face; he take frequent occasion of praise they behind their back
to Allworthy; before whom, when they two be alone, and his uncle
commend any religious or virtuous sentiment (for many such come
constantly from he) he seldom fail to ascribe it to the good
instruction he have receive from either Thwackum or Square; for he
know his uncle repeat all such compliment to the person for whose
use they be mean; and he find by experience the great impression
which they make on the philosopher, as well as on the divine: for, to
say the truth, there be no kind of flattery so irresistible as this,
at second hand.
the young gentleman, moreover, soon perceive how extremely grateful
all those panegyric on his instructor be to Mr Allworthy himself,
as they so loudly resound the praise of that singular plan of
education which he have lay down; for this worthy man have observe
the imperfect institution of our public school, and the many vice
which boy be there liable to learn, have resolve to educate his
nephew, as well as the other lad, whom he have in a manner adopt, in
his own house; where he think their moral would escape all that
danger of be corrupt to which they would be unavoidably expose
in any public school or university.
have, therefore, determine to commit these boy to the tuition of a
private tutor, Mr Thwackum be recommend to he for that office, by
a very particular friend, of whose understanding Mr Allworthy have a
great opinion, and in whose integrity he place much confidence. this
Thwackum be fellow of a college, where he almost entirely reside;
and have a great reputation for learning, religion, and sobriety of
manner. and these be doubtless the qualification by which Mr
Allworthy's friend have be induce to recommend he; though indeed
this friend have some obligation to Thwackum's family, who be the
most considerable person in a borough which that gentleman
represent in parliament.
Thwackum, at his first arrival, be extremely agreeable to Allworthy;
and indeed he perfectly answer the character which have be give of
he. upon long acquaintance, however, and more intimate
conversation, this worthy man see infirmity in the tutor, which he
could have wish he to have be without; though as those seem
greatly overbalance by his good quality, they do not incline Mr
Allworthy to part with he: nor would they indeed have justify such
a proceeding; for the reader be greatly mistaken, if he conceive that
Thwackum appear to Mr Allworthy in the same light as he doth to he
in this history; and he be as much deceive, if he imagine that the
most intimate acquaintance which he himself could have have with that
divine, would have inform he of those thing which we, from our
inspiration, be enable to open and discover. of reader who, from
such conceit as these, condemn the wisdom or penetration of Mr
Allworthy, I shall not scruple to say, that they make a very bad and
ungrateful use of that knowledge which we have communicate to they.
these apparent error in the doctrine of Thwackum serve greatly to
palliate the contrary error in that of Square, which our good man no
less saw and condemn. he think, indeed, that the different
exuberancie of these gentleman would correct their different
imperfection; and that from both, especially with his assistance, the
two lad would derive sufficient precept of true religion and virtue.
if the event happen contrary to his expectation, this possibly
proceed from some fault in the plan itself; which the reader hath my
leave to discover, if he can: for we do not pretend to introduce any
infallible character into this history; where we hope nothing will be
find which hath never yet be see in human nature.
to return therefore: the reader will not, I think, wonder that the
different behaviour of the two lad above commemorate, produce the
different effect of which he hath already see some instance; and
besides this, there be another reason for the conduct of the
philosopher and the pedagogue; but this be matter of great
importance, we shall reveal it in the next chapter.
Chapter vi.
contain a well reason still for the before-mention opinion.
it be to be know then, that those two learn personage, who have
lately make a considerable figure on the theatre of this history, have,
from their first arrival at Mr Allworthy's house, take so great an
affection, the one to his virtue, the other to his religion, that they
have meditate the close alliance with he.
for this purpose they have cast their eye on that fair widow, whom,
though we have not for some time make any mention of she, the reader,
we trust, hath not forget. Mrs Blifil be indeed the object to which
they both aspire.
it may seem remarkable, that, of four person whom we have
commemorate at Mr Allworthy's house, three of they should fix their
inclination on a lady who be never greatly celebrate for her
beauty, and who be, moreover, now a little descend into the vale of
year; but in reality bosom friend, and intimate acquaintance, have a
kind of natural propensity to particular female at the house of a
friend--viz., to his grandmother, mother, sister, daughter, aunt,
niece, or cousin, when they be rich; and to his wife, sister,
daughter, niece, cousin, mistress, or servant-maid, if they should be
handsome.
we would not, however, have our reader imagine, that person of such
character as be support by Thwackum and Square, would undertake a
matter of this kind, which hath be a little censure by some rigid
moralist, before they have thoroughly examine it, and consider
whether it be (as Shakespear phrase it) "stuff o' th' conscience,"
or no. Thwackum be encourage to the undertaking by reflect that
to covet your neighbour's sister be nowhere forbidden: and he know it
be a rule in the construction of all law, that "_Expressum facit
cessare tacitum._" the sense of which be, "when a lawgiver set down
plainly his whole meaning, we be prevent from make he mean what
we please ourselves." as some instance of woman, therefore, be
mention in the divine law, which forbid we to covet our neighbour's
good, and that of a sister omit, he conclude it to be lawful. and
as to Square, who be in his person what be call a jolly fellow, or
a widow's man, he easily reconcile his choice to the eternal fitness
of thing.
now, as both of these gentleman be industrious in take every
opportunity of recommend themselves to the widow, they apprehend
one certain method be, by give her son the constant preference to
the other lad; and as they conceive the kindness and affection which
Mr Allworthy show the latter, must be highly disagreeable to she,
they doubt not but the lay hold on all occasion to degrade and
vilify he, would be highly pleasing to she; who, as she hat the
boy, must love all those who do he any hurt. in this Thwackum have
the advantage; for while Square could only scarify the poor lad's
reputation, he could flea his skin; and, indeed, he consider every
lash he give he as a compliment pay to his mistress; so that he
could, with the utmost propriety, repeat this old flog line,
_"Castigo te non quod odio habeam, se quod_ AMEM. I chastise thee not
out of hatred, but out of love." and this, indeed, he often have in his
mouth, or rather, accord to the old phrase, never more properly
apply, at his finger' end.
for this reason, principally, the two gentleman concur, as we have
see above, in their opinion concern the two lad; this being,
indeed, almost the only instance of their concur on any point;
for, beside the difference of their principle, they have both long ago
strongly suspect each other's design, and hat one another with no
little degree of inveteracy.
this mutual animosity be a good deal increase by their alternate
success; for Mrs Blifil know what they would be at long before they
imagine it; or, indeed, intend she should: for they proceed with
great caution, lest she should be offend, and acquaint Mr Allworthy.
but they have no reason for any such fear; she be well enough please
with a passion, of which she intend none should have any fruit but
herself. and the only fruit she design for herself be, flattery
and courtship; for which purpose she soothe they by turn, and a long
time equally. she be, indeed, rather inclined to favour the parson's
principle; but Square's person be more agreeable to her eye, for he
be a comely man; whereas the pedagogue do in countenance very nearly
resemble that gentleman, who, in the Harlot's progress, be see
correct the lady in Bridewell.
whether Mrs Blifil have be surfeit with the sweet of marriage, or
disgust by its bitter, or from what other cause it proceed, I
will not determine; but she could never be bring to listen to any
second proposal. however, she at last converse with Square with such
a degree of intimacy that malicious tongue begin to whisper thing of
she, to which, as well for the sake of the lady, as that they be
highly disagreeable to the rule of right and the fitness of thing, we
will give no credit, and therefore shall not blot our paper with they.
the pedagogue, 'tis certain, whip on, without get a step nearer
to his journey's end.
indeed he have commit a great error, and that Square discover much
soon than himself. Mrs Blifil (as, perhaps, the reader may have
formerly guess) be not over and above pleased with the behaviour of
her husband; nay, to be honest, she absolutely hat he, till his
death at last a little reconcile he to her affection. it will not
be therefore greatly wonder at, if she have not the most violent
regard to the offspring she have by he. and, in fact, she have so
little of this regard, that in his infancy she seldom see her son, or
take any notice of he; and hence she acquiesce, after a little
reluctance, in all the favour which Mr Allworthy shower on the
foundling; whom the good man call his own boy, and in all thing put
on an entire equality with Master Blifil. this acquiescence in Mrs
Blifil be consider by the neighbour, and by the family, as a mark
of her condescension to her brother's humour, and she be imagine by
all other, as well as Thwackum and Square, to hate the foundling in
her heart; nay, the more civility she show he, the more they
conceive she detest he, and the surer scheme she be lay for
his ruin: for as they think it her interest to hate he, it be very
difficult for she to persuade they she do not.
Thwackum be the more confirmed in his opinion, as she have more than
once slily cause he to whip Tom Jones, when Mr Allworthy, who be an
enemy to this exercise, be abroad; whereas she have never give any
such order concern young Blifil. and this have likewise impose
upon Square. in reality, though she certainly hat her own son--of
which, however monstrous it appear, I be assure she be not a
singular instance--she appear, notwithstanding all her outward
compliance, to be in her heart sufficiently displease with all the
favour show by Mr Allworthy to the foundling. she frequently
complain of this behind her brother's back, and very sharply
censure he for it, both to Thwackum and Square; nay, she would throw
it in the tooth of Allworthy himself, when a little quarrel, or miff,
as it be vulgarly call, arise between they.
however, when Tom grow up, and give token of that gallantry of temper
which greatly recommend man to woman, this disinclination which she
have discover to he when a child, by degree abate, and at last she
so evidently demonstrate her affection to he to be much strong
than what she bear her own son, that it be impossible to mistake she
any long. she be so desirous of often see he, and discover
such satisfaction and delight in his company, that before he be
eighteen year old he be become a rival to both Square and Thwackum;
and what be bad, the whole country begin to talk as loudly of her
inclination to Tom, as they have before do of that which she have
show to Square: on which account the philosopher conceive the most
implacable hatred for our poor heroe.
Chapter vii.
in which the author himself make his appearance on the stage.
though Mr Allworthy be not of himself hasty to see thing in a
disadvantageous light, and be a stranger to the public voice, which
seldom reach to a brother or a husband, though it ring in the ear
of all the neighbourhood; yet be this affection of Mrs Blifil to Tom,
and the preference which she too visibly give he to her own son, of
the utmost disadvantage to that youth.
for such be the compassion which inhabit Mr Allworthy's mind, that
nothing but the steel of justice could ever subdue it. to be
unfortunate in any respect be sufficient, if there be no demerit to
counterpoise it, to turn the scale of that good man's pity, and to
engage his friendship and his benefaction.
when therefore he plainly see Master Blifil be absolutely detest
(for that he be) by his own mother, he begin, on that account only,
to look with an eye of compassion upon he; and what the effect of
compassion be, in good and benevolent mind, I need not here explain
to most of my reader.
Henceforward he see every appearance of virtue in the youth through
the magnifying end, and view all his fault with the glass invert,
so that they become scarce perceptible. and this perhaps the amiable
temper of pity may make commendable; but the next step the weakness of
human nature alone must excuse; for he no soon perceive that
preference which Mrs Blifil give to Tom, than that poor youth (however
innocent) begin to sink in his affection as he rise in her. this, it
be true, would of itself alone never have be able to eradicate Jones
from his bosom; but it be greatly injurious to he, and prepare Mr
Allworthy's mind for those impression which afterwards produce the
mighty event that will be contain hereafter in this history; and to
which, it must be confest, the unfortunate lad, by his own wantonness,
wildness, and want of caution, too much contribute.
in record some instance of these, we shall, if rightly understand,
afford a very useful lesson to those well-dispose youth who shall
hereafter be our reader; for they may here find, that goodness of
heart, and openness of temper, though these may give they great
comfort within, and administer to an honest pride in their own mind,
will by no mean, alas! do their business in the world. Prudence and
circumspection be necessary even to the good of man. they be indeed,
as it be, a guard to Virtue, without which she can never be safe. it
be not enough that your design, nay, that your action, be
intrinsically good; you must take care they shall appear so. if your
inside be never so beautiful, you must preserve a fair outside also.
this must be constantly look to, or malice and envy will take care
to blacken it so, that the sagacity and goodness of an Allworthy will
not be able to see through it, and to discern the beauty within. let
this, my young reader, be your constant maxim, that no man can be
good enough to enable he to neglect the rule of prudence; nor will
Virtue herself look beautiful, unless she be bedeck with the outward
ornament of decency and decorum. and this precept, my worthy
disciple, if you read with due attention, you will, I hope, find
sufficiently enforce by example in the follow page.
I ask pardon for this short appearance, by way of chorus, on the
stage. it be in reality for my own sake, that, while I be discover
the rock on which innocence and goodness often split, I may not be
misunderstood to recommend the very mean to my worthy reader, by
which I intend to show they they will be undo. and this, as I could
not prevail on any of my actor to speak, I myself be oblige to
declare.
Chapter viii.
a childish incident, in which, however, be see a good-natured
disposition in Tom Jones.
the reader may remember that Mr Allworthy give Tom Jones a little
horse, as a kind of smart-money for the punishment which he imagine
he have suffer innocently.
this horse Tom keep above half a year, and then ride he to a
neighbouring fair, and sell he.
at his return, be question by Thwackum what he have do with the
money for which the horse be sell, he frankly declare he would not
tell he.
"Oho!" say Thwackum, "you will not! then I will have it out of your
br--h;" that be the place to which he always apply for
information on every doubtful occasion.
Tom be now mount on the back of a footman, and everything prepare
for execution, when Mr Allworthy, enter the room, give the criminal
a reprieve, and take he with he into another apartment; where, be
alone with Tom, he put the same question to he which Thwackum have
before ask he.
Tom answer, he could in duty refuse he nothing; but as for that
tyrannical rascal, he would never make he any other answer than with
a cudgel, with which he hop soon to be able to pay he for all his
barbarity.
Mr Allworthy very severely reprimand the lad for his indecent and
disrespectful expression concern his master; but much more for his
avow an intention of revenge. he threaten he with the entire
loss of his favour, if he ever hear such another word from his mouth;
for, he say, he would never support or befriend a reprobate. by these
and the like declaration, he extort some compunction from Tom, in
which that youth be not over-sincere; for he really meditate some
return for all the smarting favour he have receive at the hand of
the pedagogue. he be, however, bring by Mr Allworthy to express a
concern for his resentment against Thwackum; and then the good man,
after some wholesome admonition, permit he to proceed, which he
do as follows:--
"indeed, my dear sir, I love and honour you more than all the world: I
know the great obligation I have to you, and should detest myself if
I think my heart be capable of ingratitude. could the little horse
you give I speak, I be sure he could tell you how fond I be of your
present; for I have more pleasure in feed he than in rid he.
indeed, sir, it go to my heart to part with he; nor would I have
sell he upon any other account in the world than what I do. you
yourself, sir, I be convince, in my case, would have do the same:
for none ever so sensibly feel the misfortune of other. what would
you feel, dear sir, if you think yourself the occasion of they?
indeed, sir, there never be any misery like theirs."
"like whose, child?" say Allworthy: "what do you mean?"
"oh, sir!" answer Tom, "your poor gamekeeper, with all his large
family, ever since your discard he, have be perish with all
the misery of cold and hunger: I could not bear to see these poor
wretch naked and starve, and at the same time know myself to have
be the occasion of all their suffering. I could not bear it, sir;
upon my soul, I could not." [here the tear run down his cheek, and
he thus proceed.] "it be to save they from absolute destruction I
part with your dear present, notwithstanding all the value I have for
it: I sell the horse for they, and they have every farthing of the
money."
Mr Allworthy now stand silent for some moment, and before he speak
the tear start from his eye. he at length dismiss Tom with a
gentle rebuke, advise he for the future to apply to he in case of
distress, rather than to use extraordinary mean of relieve they
himself.
this affair be afterwards the subject of much debate between Thwackum
and Square. Thwackum hold, that this be fly in Mr Allworthy's
face, who have intend to punish the fellow for his disobedience. he
say, in some instance, what the world call charity appear to he
to be oppose the will of the Almighty, which have mark some
particular person for destruction; and that this be in like manner
act in opposition to Mr Allworthy; concluding, as usual, with a
hearty recommendation of birch.
Square argue strongly on the other side, in opposition perhaps to
Thwackum, or in compliance with Mr Allworthy, who seem very much to
approve what Jones have do. as to what he urge on this occasion, as
I be convince most of my reader will be much abler advocate for
poor Jones, it would be impertinent to relate it. indeed it be not
difficult to reconcile to the rule of right an action which it would
have be impossible to deduce from the rule of wrong.
chapter ix.
contain an incident of a more heinous kind, with the comment of
Thwackum and Square.
it hath be observe by some man of much great reputation for
wisdom than myself, that misfortune seldom come single. an instance
of this may, I believe, be see in those gentleman who have the
misfortune to have any of their roguery detect; for here discovery
seldom stop till the whole be come out. thus it happen to poor Tom;
who be no soon pardon for sell the horse, than he be
discover to have some time before sell a fine Bible which Mr
Allworthy give he, the money arise from which sale he have dispose
of in the same manner. this Bible Master Blifil have purchase, though
he have already such another of his own, partly out of respect for the
book, and partly out of friendship to Tom, be unwilling that the
Bible should be sell out of the family at half-price. he therefore
deposit the say half-price himself; for he be a very prudent lad,
and so careful of his money, that he have lay up almost every penny
which he have receive from Mr Allworthy.
some people have be note to be able to read in no book but their
own. on the contrary, from the time when Master Blifil be first
possess of this Bible, he never use any other. Nay, he be see
read in it much oftener than he have before be in his own. now, as
he frequently ask Thwackum to explain difficult passage to he,
that gentleman unfortunately take notice of Tom's name, which be
write in many part of the book. this bring on an inquiry, which
oblige Master Blifil to discover the whole matter.
Thwackum be resolve a crime of this kind, which he call sacrilege,
should not go unpunished. he therefore proceed immediately to
castigation: and not content with that he acquaint Mr Allworthy,
at their next meeting, with this monstrous crime, as it appear to
he: inveigh against Tom in the most bitter term, and liken he
to the buyer and seller who be drive out of the temple.
Square see this matter in a very different light. he say, he could
not perceive any high crime in sell one book than in sell
another. that to sell Bibles be strictly lawful by all law both
Divine and human, and consequently there be no unfitness in it. he
tell Thwackum, that his great concern on this occasion bring to his
mind the story of a very devout woman, who, out of pure regard to
religion, steal Tillotson's sermon from a lady of her acquaintance.
this story cause a vast quantity of blood to rush into the parson's
face, which of itself be none of the pale; and he be go to
reply with great warmth and anger, have not Mrs Blifil, who be present
at this debate, interpose. that lady declare herself absolutely of
Mr Square's side. she argue, indeed, very learnedly in support of his
opinion; and conclude with say, if Tom have be guilty of any
fault, she must confess her own son appear to be equally culpable;
for that she could see no difference between the buyer and the seller;
both of whom be alike to be drive out of the temple.
Mrs Blifil have declare her opinion, put an end to the debate.
Square's triumph would almost have stopt his word, have he need
they; and Thwackum, who, for reason before-mention, durst not
venture at disoblige the lady, be almost choake with indignation.
as to Mr Allworthy, he say, since the boy have be already punish
he would not deliver his sentiment on the occasion; and whether he
be or be not angry with the lad, I must leave to the reader's own
conjecture.
soon after this, an action be bring against the gamekeeper by
Squire Western (the gentleman in whose manor the partridge be
kill), for depredation of the like kind. this be a most
unfortunate circumstance for the fellow, as it not only of itself
threaten his ruin, but actually prevent Mr Allworthy from
restore he to his favour: for as that gentleman be walk out one
evening with Master Blifil and young Jones, the latter slily draw he
to the habitation of Black George; where the family of that poor
wretch, namely, his wife and child, be find in all the misery
with which cold, hunger, and nakedness, can affect human creature:
for as to the money they have receive from Jones, former debt have
consume almost the whole.
such a scene as this could not fail of affect the heart of Mr
Allworthy. he immediately give the mother a couple of guineas, with
which he bid her cloath her child. the poor woman burst into tear
at this goodness, and while she be thank he, could not refrain
from express her gratitude to Tom; who have, she say, long
preserve both she and her from starve. "we have not," say she,
"have a morsel to eat, nor have these poor child have a rag to put
on, but what his goodness hath bestow on we." for, indeed, besides
the horse and the Bible, Tom have sacrifice a night-gown, and other
thing, to the use of this distressed family.
on their return home, Tom make use of all his eloquence to display the
wretchedness of these people, and the penitence of Black George
himself; and in this he succeed so well, that Mr Allworthy say, he
think the man have suffer enough for what be past; that he would
forgive he, and think of some mean of provide for he and his
family.
Jones be so delighted with this news, that, though it be dark when
they return home, he could not help go back a mile, in a shower
of rain, to acquaint the poor woman with the glad tiding; but, like
other hasty divulger of news, he only bring on himself the trouble
of contradict it: for the ill fortune of Black George make use of
the very opportunity of his friend's absence to overturn all again.
Chapter x.
in which Master Blifil and Jones appear in different light.
Master Blifil fall very short of his companion in the amiable quality
of mercy; but he as greatly exceed he in one of a much high kind,
namely, in justice: in which he follow both the precept and example
of Thwackum and Square; for though they would both make frequent use
of the word mercy, yet it be plain that in reality Square hold it to
be inconsistent with the rule of right; and Thwackum be for do
justice, and leave mercy to heaven. the two gentleman do indeed
somewhat differ in opinion concern the object of this sublime
virtue; by which Thwackum would probably have destroy one half of
mankind, and Square the other half.
Master Blifil then, though he have keep silence in the presence of
Jones, yet, when he have well consider the matter, could by no
mean endure the thought of suffer his uncle to confer favour on
the undeserving. he therefore resolve immediately to acquaint he
with the fact which we have above slightly hint to the reader. the
truth of which be as follow:
the gamekeeper, about a year after he be dismiss from Mr
Allworthy's service, and before Tom's sell the horse, be in want
of bread, either to fill his own mouth or those of his family, as he
pass through a field belong to Mr Western espy a hare sit
in her form. this hare he have basely and barbarously knock on the
head, against the law of the land, and no less against the law of
sportsman.
the higgler to whom the hare be sell, be unfortunately take many
month after with a quantity of game upon he, be oblige to make his
peace with the squire, by become evidence against some poacher. and
now Black George be pitch upon by he, as be a person already
obnoxious to Mr Western, and one of no good fame in the country. he
be, besides, the good sacrifice the higgler could make, as he have
supply he with no game since; and by this mean the witness have an
opportunity of screen his well customer: for the squire, be
charm with the power of punish Black George, whom a single
transgression be sufficient to ruin, make no further enquiry.
have this fact be truly lay before Mr Allworthy, it might probably
have do the gamekeeper very little mischief. but there be no zeal
blinder than that which be inspire with the love of justice against
offender. Master Blifil have forget the distance of the time. he
vary likewise in the manner of the fact: and by the hasty addition
of the single letter s he considerably alter the story; for he say
that George have wire hare. these alteration might probably have
be set right, have not Master Blifil unluckily insist on a promise
of secrecy from Mr Allworthy before he reveal the matter to he; but
by that mean the poor gamekeeper be condemn without have an
opportunity to defend himself: for as the fact of kill the hare,
and of the action bring, be certainly true, Mr Allworthy have no
doubt concern the rest.
Short-live then be the joy of these poor people; for Mr Allworthy
the next morning declare he have fresh reason, without assign it,
for his anger, and strictly forbad Tom to mention George any more:
though as for his family, he say he would endeavour to keep they from
starve; but as to the fellow himself, he would leave he to the
law, which nothing could keep he from break.
Tom could by no mean divine what have incense Mr Allworthy, for of
Master Blifil he have not the least suspicion. however, as his
friendship be to be tired out by no disappointment, he now
determine to try another method of preserve the poor gamekeeper
from ruin.
Jones be lately grow very intimate with Mr Western. he have so
greatly recommend himself to that gentleman, by leap over
five-bar gate, and by other act of sportsmanship, that the squire
have declare Tom would certainly make a great man if he have but
sufficient encouragement. he often wish he have himself a son with
such part; and one day very solemnly assert at a drinking bout,
that Tom should hunt a pack of hound for a thousand pound of his
money, with any huntsman in the whole country.
by such kind of talent he have so ingratiate himself with the squire,
that he be a most welcome guest at his table, and a favourite
companion in his sport: everything which the squire hold most dear, to
wit, his gun, dog, and horse, be now as much at the command of
Jones, as if they have be his own. he resolve therefore to make use
of this favour on behalf of his friend Black George, whom he hop to
introduce into Mr Western's family, in the same capacity in which he
have before serve Mr Allworthy.
the reader, if he consider that this fellow be already obnoxious to
Mr Western, and if he consider far the weighty business by which
that gentleman's displeasure have be incur, will perhaps condemn
this as a foolish and desperate undertaking; but if he should totally
condemn young Jones on that account, he will greatly applaud he for
strengthen himself with all imaginable interest on so arduous an
occasion.
for this purpose, then, Tom apply to Mr Western's daughter, a young
lady of about seventeen year of age, whom her father, next after
those necessary implement of sport just before mention, love and
esteem above all the world. now, as she have some influence on the
squire, so Tom have some little influence on she. but this be the
intend heroine of this work, a lady with whom we ourselves be
greatly in love, and with whom many of our reader will probably be in
love too, before we part, it be by no mean proper she should make she
appearance at the end of a book.
BOOK IV.
contain the TIME of a year.
Chapter i.
contain five page of paper.
as truth distinguish our writing from those idle romance which be
fill with monster, the production, not of nature, but of
distemper brain; and which have be therefore recommend by an
eminent critic to the sole use of the pastry-cook; so, on the other
hand, we would avoid any resemblance to that kind of history which a
celebrate poet seem to think be no less calculated for the emolument
of the brewer, as the reading it should be always attend with a
tankard of good ale--
While--history with her comrade ale,
soothe the sad series of her serious tale
for as this be the liquor of modern historian, nay, perhaps their
muse, if we may believe the opinion of Butler, who attribute
inspiration to ale, it ought likewise to be the potation of their
reader, since every book ought to be read with the same spirit and in
the same manner as it be writ. thus the famous author of Hurlothrumbo
tell a learn bishop, that the reason his lordship could not taste
the excellence of his piece be, that he do not read it with a fiddle
in his hand; which instrument he himself have always have in his own,
when he compose it.
that our work, therefore, might be in no danger of be liken to
the labour of these historian, we have take every occasion of
intersperse through the whole sundry simile, description, and
other kind of poetical embellishment. these be, indeed, design to
supply the place of the said ale, and to refresh the mind, whenever
those slumber, which in a long work be apt to invade the reader as
well as the writer, shall begin to creep upon he. without
interruption of this kind, the good narrative of plain matter of fact
must overpower every reader; for nothing but the ever last
watchfulness, which Homer have ascribe only to Jove himself, can be
proof against a newspaper of many volume.
we shall leave to the reader to determine with what judgment we have
choose the several occasion for insert those ornamental part of
our work. surely it will be allow that none could be more proper
than the present, where we be about to introduce a considerable
character on the scene; no less, indeed, than the heroine of this
heroic, historical, prosaic poem. here, therefore, we have think
proper to prepare the mind of the reader for her reception, by fill
it with every pleasing image which we can draw from the face of
nature. and for this method we plead many precedent. first, this be
an art well know to, and much practise by, our tragick poet, who
seldom fail to prepare their audience for the reception of their
principal character.
thus the heroe be always introduce with a flourish of drum and
trumpet, in order to rouse a martial spirit in the audience, and to
accommodate their ear to bombast and fustian, which Mr Locke's blind
man would not have grossly err in liken to the sound of a
trumpet. again, when lover be come forth, soft music often
conduct they on the stage, either to soothe the audience with the
softness of the tender passion, or to lull and prepare they for that
gentle slumber in which they will most probably be compose by the
ensue scene.
and not only the poet, but the master of these poet, the manager
of playhouse, seem to be in this secret; for, besides the aforesaid
kettle-drum, &c., which denote the heroe's approach, he be generally
usher on the stage by a large troop of half a dozen scene-shifter;
and how necessary these be imagine to his appearance, may be
conclude from the follow theatrical story:--
King Pyrrhus be at dinner at an ale-house border on the theatre,
when he be summon to go on the stage. the heroe, be unwilling to
quit his shoulder of mutton, and as unwilling to draw on himself the
indignation of Mr Wilks (his brother-manager) for make the audience
wait, have bribe these his harbinger to be out of the way. while Mr
Wilks, therefore, be thunder out, "where be the carpenter to
walk on before King Pyrrhus?" that monarch very quietly eat his
mutton, and the audience, however impatient, be oblige to entertain
themselves with music in his absence.
to be plain, I much question whether the politician, who hath
generally a good nose, hath not scent out somewhat of the utility of
this practice. I be convinced that awful magistrate my lord-mayor
contract a good deal of that reverence which attend he through the
year, by the several pageant which precede his pomp. Nay, I must
confess, that even I myself, who be not remarkably liable to be
captivate with show, have yield not a little to the impression of
much precede state. when I have see a man strut in a
procession, after other whose business be only to walk before he, I
have conceive a high notion of his dignity than I have feel on
see he in a common situation. but there be one instance, which
come exactly up to my purpose. this be the custom of send on a
basket-woman, who be to precede the pomp at a coronation, and to strew
the stage with flower, before the great personage begin their
procession. the antient would certainly have invoke the goddess
Flora for this purpose, and it would have be no difficulty for their
priest, or politician to have persuade the people of the real
presence of the deity, though a plain mortal have personate she and
perform her office. but we have no such design of impose on our
reader; and therefore those who object to the heathen theology, may,
if they please, change our goddess into the above-mention
basket-woman. our intention, in short, be to introduce our heroine
with the utmost solemnity in our power, with an elevation of stile,
and all other circumstance proper to raise the veneration of our
reader.--indeed we would, for certain cause, advise those of our male
reader who have any heart, to read no far, be we not well
assure, that how amiable soever the picture of our heroine will
appear, as it be really a copy from nature, many of our fair
countrywoman will be find worthy to satisfy any passion, and to
answer any idea of female perfection which our pencil will be able to
raise.
and now, without any further preface, we proceed to our next chapter.
Chapter ii.
a short hint of what we can do in the sublime, and a description of
Miss Sophia Western.
hush be every ruder breath. may the heathen ruler of the wind
confine in iron chain the boisterous limb of noisy Boreas, and the
sharp-pointed nose of bitter-biting Eurus. do thou, sweet Zephyrus,
rise from thy fragrant bed, mount the western sky, and lead on those
delicious gale, the charm of which call forth the lovely Flora from
her chamber, perfume with pearly dew, when on the 1st of June, her
birth-day, the bloom maid, in loose attire, gently trip it over
the verdant mead, where every flower rise to do her homage, till the
whole field become enamel, and colour contend with sweet which
shall ravish she most.
so charming may she now appear! and you the feather chorister of
nature, whose sweetest note not even Handel can excell, tune your
melodious throat to celebrate her appearance. from love proceed your
music, and to love it return. Awaken therefore that gentle passion in
every swain: for lo! adorn with all the charm in which nature can
array she; bedeck with beauty, youth, sprightliness, innocence,
modesty, and tenderness, breathe sweetness from her rosy lip, and
dart brightness from her sparkling eye, the lovely Sophia come!
Reader, perhaps thou hast see the statue of the _Venus de Medicis_.
perhaps, too, thou hast see the gallery of beauty at Hampton Court.
Thou may'st remember each bright Churchill of the galaxy, and all the
toast of the Kit-cat. or, if their reign be before thy time, at
least thou hast see their daughter, the no less dazzling beauty of
the present age; whose name, should we here insert, we apprehend they
would fill the whole volume.
now if thou hast see all these, be not afraid of the rude answer
which Lord Rochester once give to a man who have see many thing. no.
if thou hast see all these without know what beauty be, thou hast
no eye; if without feel its power, thou hast no heart.
yet be it possible, my friend, that thou mayest have see all these
without be able to form an exact idea of Sophia; for she do not
exactly resemble any of they. she be most like the picture of Lady
Ranelagh: and, I have hear, more still to the famous dutchess of
Mazarine; but most of all she resemble one whose image never can
depart from my breast, and whom, if thou dost remember, thou hast
then, my friend, an adequate idea of Sophia.
but lest this should not have be thy fortune, we will endeavour with
our utmost skill to describe this paragon, though we be sensible that
our high ability be very inadequate to the task.
Sophia, then, the only daughter of Mr Western, be a middle-sized
woman; but rather incline to tall. her shape be not only exact, but
extremely delicate: and the nice proportion of her arm promise the
true symmetry in her limb. her hair, which be black, be so
luxuriant, that it reach she middle, before she cut it to comply
with the modern fashion; and it be now curl so gracefully in her
neck, that few could believe it to be her own. if envy could find any
part of the face which demand less commendation than the rest, it
might possibly think her forehead might have be high without
prejudice to she. her eyebrow be full, even, and arch beyond the
power of art to imitate. her black eye have a lustre in they, which
all her softness could not extinguish. her nose be exactly regular,
and her mouth, in which be two row of ivory, exactly answer Sir
John Suckling's description in those lines:--
her lip be red, and one be thin,
Compar'd to that be next her chin.
some bee have sting it newly.
her cheek be of the oval kind; and in her right she have a dimple,
which the least smile discover. her chin have certainly its share in
form the beauty of her face; but it be difficult to say it be
either large or small, though perhaps it be rather of the former
kind. her complexion have rather more of the lily than of the rose; but
when exercise or modesty increase her natural colour, no vermilion
could equal it. then one might indeed cry out with the celebrated Dr
Donne:
--her pure and eloquent blood
Spoke in her cheek, and so distinctly work
that one might almost say her body think.
her neck be long and finely turn: and here, if I be not afraid of
offend her delicacy, I might justly say, the high beauty of
the famous _Venus de Medicis_ be outdo. here be whiteness which
no lily, ivory, nor alabaster could match. the fine cambric might
indeed be suppose from envy to cover that bosom which be much whiter
than itself.--It be indeed,
_nitor splenden Pario marmore purius_.
a gloss shin beyond the pure brightness of parian marble.
such be the outside of Sophia; nor be this beautiful frame disgrace
by an inhabitant unworthy of it. her mind be every way equal to her
person; nay, the latter borrow some charm from the former; for when
she smile, the sweetness of her temper diffuse that glory over her
countenance which no regularity of feature can give. but as there be
no perfection of the mind which do not discover themselves in that
perfect intimacy to which we intend to introduce our reader with this
charming young creature, so it be needless to mention they here: nay,
it be a kind of tacit affront to our reader's understanding, and may
also rob he of that pleasure which he will receive in form his own
judgment of her character.
it may, however, be proper to say, that whatever mental
accomplishment she have derive from nature, they be somewhat
improve and cultivate by art: for she have be educate under the
care of an aunt, who be a lady of great discretion, and be
thoroughly acquaint with the world, have live in her youth about
the court, whence she have retire some year since into the country.
by her conversation and instruction, Sophia be perfectly well breed,
though perhaps she want a little of that ease in her behaviour which
be to be acquire only by habit, and live within what be call the
polite circle. but this, to say the truth, be often too dearly
purchase; and though it hath charm so inexpressible, that the
French, perhaps, among other quality, mean to express this, when
they declare they know not what it be; yet its absence be well
compensate by innocence; nor can good sense and a natural gentility
ever stand in need of it.
Chapter iii.
wherein the history go back to commemorate a trifling incident that
happen some year since; but which, trifle as it be, have some
future consequence.
the amiable Sophia be now in her eighteenth year, when she be
introduce into this history. her father, as hath be say, be
fonder of she than of any other human creature. to she, therefore, Tom
Jones apply, in order to engage her interest on the behalf of his
friend the gamekeeper.
but before we proceed to this business, a short recapitulation of some
previous matter may be necessary.
though the different temper of Mr Allworthy and of Mr Western do not
admit of a very intimate correspondence, yet they live upon what be
call a decent footing together; by which mean the young people of
both family have be acquaint from their infancy; and as they be
all near of the same age, have be frequent playmate together.
the gaiety of Tom's temper suit well with Sophia, than the grave
and sober disposition of Master Blifil. and the preference which she
give the former of these, would often appear so plainly, that a lad of
a more passionate turn than Master Blifil be, might have show some
displeasure at it.
as he do not, however, outwardly express any such disgust, it would
be an ill office in we to pay a visit to the inmost recess of his
mind, as some scandalous people search into the most secret affair of
their friend, and often pry into their closet and cupboard, only to
discover their poverty and meanness to the world.
however, as person who suspect they have give other cause of
offence, be apt to conclude they be offend; so Sophia impute an
action of Master Blifil to his anger, which the superior sagacity of
Thwackum and Square discern to have arise from a much well
principle.
Tom Jones, when very young, have present Sophia with a little bird,
which he have take from the nest, have nurse up, and teach to sing.
of this bird, Sophia, then about thirteen year old, be so extremely
fond, that her chief business be to feed and tend it, and her chief
pleasure to play with it. by these mean little Tommy, for so the bird
be call, be become so tame, that it would feed out of the hand of
its mistress, would perch upon the finger, and lie content in her
bosom, where it seem almost sensible of its own happiness; though
she always keep a small string about its leg, nor would ever trust it
with the liberty of fly away.
one day, when Mr Allworthy and his whole family din at Mr Western's,
Master Blifil, be in the garden with little Sophia, and observe
the extreme fondness that she show for her little bird, desire she
to trust it for a moment in his hand. Sophia presently comply with
the young gentleman's request, and after some previous caution,
deliver he her bird; of which he be no soon in possession, than
he slipt the string from its leg and toss it into the air.
the foolish animal no soon perceive itself at liberty, than
forget all the favour it have receive from Sophia, it fly
directly from she, and perch on a bough at some distance.
Sophia, see her bird go, scream out so loud, that Tom Jones,
who be at a little distance, immediately run to her assistance.
he be no soon informed of what have happen, than he curse Blifil
for a pitiful malicious rascal; and then immediately strip off his
coat he apply himself to climb the tree to which the bird
escape.
Tom have almost recover his little namesake, when the branch on which
it be perch, and that hang over a canal, break, and the poor lad
plump over head and ear into the water.
Sophia's concern now change its object. and as she apprehend the
boy's life be in danger, she scream ten time loud than before;
and indeed Master Blifil himself now second she with all the
vociferation in his power.
the company, who be sit in a room next the garden, be
instantly alarm, and come all forth; but just as they reach the
canal, Tom (for the water be luckily pretty shallow in that part)
arrive safely on shore.
Thwackum fall violently on poor Tom, who stand drop and shiver
before he, when Mr Allworthy desire he to have patience; and
turn to Master Blifil, say, "pray, child, what be the reason of
all this disturbance?"
Master Blifil answer, "indeed, uncle, I be very sorry for what I
have do; I have be unhappily the occasion of it all. I have Miss
Sophia's bird in my hand, and think the poor creature languish
for liberty, I own I could not forbear give it what it desire; for
I always think there be something very cruel in confine anything.
it seem to be against the law of nature, by which everything hath a
right to liberty; nay, it be even unchristian, for it be not do
what we would be do by; but if I have imagine Miss Sophia would have
be so much concerned at it, I be sure I never would have do it;
nay, if I have know what would have happen to the bird itself: for
when Master Jones, who climb up that tree after it, fall into the
water, the bird take a second flight, and presently a nasty hawk
carry it away."
Poor Sophia, who now first hear of her little Tommy's fate (for her
concern for Jones have prevent her perceive it when it happen),
shed a shower of tear. these Mr Allworthy endeavour to assuage,
promise she a much fine bird: but she declare she would never have
another. her father chide she for cry so for a foolish bird; but
could not help tell young Blifil, if he be a son of his, his
backside should be well flead.
Sophia now return to her chamber, the two young gentleman be send
home, and the rest of the company return to their bottle; where a
conversation ensue on the subject of the bird, so curious, that we
think it deserve a chapter by itself.
chapter iv.
contain such very deep and grave matter, that some reader,
perhaps, may not relish it.
Square have no soon light his pipe, than, address himself to
allworthy, he thus begin: "Sir, I cannot help congratulate you on
your nephew; who, at an age when few lad have any idea but of
sensible object, be arrive at a capacity of distinguish right
from wrong. to confine anything, seem to I against the law of
nature, by which everything hath a right to liberty. these be his
word; and the impression they have make on I be never to be
eradicate. can any man have a high notion of the rule of right, and
the eternal fitness of thing? I cannot help promise myself, from
such a dawn, that the meridian of this youth will be equal to that of
either the elder or the young Brutus."
here Thwackum hastily interrupt, and spill some of his wine, and
swallow the rest with great eagerness, answer, "from another
expression he make use of, I hope he will resemble much well man.
the law of nature be a jargon of word, which mean nothing. I know
not of any such law, nor of any right which can be derive from it. to
do as we would be do by, be indeed a christian motive, as the boy
well express himself; and I be glad to find my instruction have
bear such good fruit."
"if vanity be a thing fit," say Square, "I might indulge some on the
same occasion; for whence only he can have learn his notion of right
or wrong, I think be pretty apparent. if there be no law of nature,
there be no right nor wrong."
"how!" say the parson, "do you then banish revelation? be I talk
with a deist or an atheist?"
"drink about," say western. "pox of your law of nature! I donot know
what you mean, either of you, by right and wrong. to take away my
girl's bird be wrong, in my opinion; and my neighbour Allworthy may
do as he please; but to encourage boy in such practice, be to breed
they up to the gallow."
Allworthy answer, "that he be sorry for what his nephew have do,
but could not consent to punish he, as he act rather from a
generous than unworthy motive." he say, "if the boy have steal the
bird, none would have be more ready to vote for a severe
chastisement than himself; but it be plain that be not his design:"
and, indeed, it be as apparent to he, that he could have no other
view but what he have himself avow. (for as to that malicious purpose
which Sophia suspect, it never once enter into the head of Mr
Allworthy.) he at length conclude with again blame the action as
inconsiderate, and which, he say, be pardonable only in a child.
Square have deliver his opinion so openly, that if he be now silent,
he must submit to have his judgment censure. he say, therefore, with
some warmth, "that Mr Allworthy have too much respect to the dirty
consideration of property. that in pass our judgment on great and
mighty action, all private regard should be lay aside; for by
adhere to those narrow rule, the young Brutus have be condemn
of ingratitude, and the elder of parricide."
"and if they have be hang too for those crime," cry Thwackum,
"they would have have no more than their desert. a couple of
heathenish villain! Heaven be praise we have no brutus now-a-day!
I wish, Mr Square, you would desist from fill the mind of my
pupil with such antichristian stuff; for the consequence must be,
while they be under my care, its being well scourge out of they
again. there be your disciple Tom almost spoil already. I overhear
he the other day dispute with Master Blifil that there be no merit
in faith without work. I know that be one of your tenet, and I
suppose he have it from you."
"donot accuse I of spoil he," say Square. "who teach he to
laugh at whatever be virtuous and decent, and fit and right in the
nature of thing? he be your own scholar, and I disclaim he. no, no,
Master Blifil be my boy. young as he be, that lad's notion of moral
rectitude I defy you ever to eradicate."
Thwackum put on a contemptuous sneer at this, and reply, "ay, ay, I
will venture he with you. he be too well ground for all your
philosophical cannot to hurt. no, no, I have take care to instil such
principle into him--"
"and I have instill principle into he too," cry Square. "what
but the sublime idea of virtue could inspire a human mind with the
generous thought of give liberty? and I repeat to you again, if it
be a fit thing to be proud, I might claim the honour of have
infuse that idea."--
"and if pride be not forbid," say Thwackum, "I might boast of
have teach he that duty which he himself assign as his motive."
"so between you both," say the squire, "the young gentleman hath be
teach to rob my daughter of her bird. I find I must take care of my
partridge-mew. I shall have some virtuous religious man or other set
all my partridge at liberty." then slap a gentleman of the law,
who be present, on the back, he cry out, "what say you to this, Mr
Counsellor? be not this against law?"
the lawyer with great gravity deliver himself as follows:--
"if the case be put of a partridge, there can be no doubt but an
action would lie; for though this be _ferae naturae_, yet be
reclaim, property vest: but be the case of a singing bird,
though reclaim, as it be a thing of base nature, it must be
consider as _nullius in bonis_. in this case, therefore, I conceive
the plaintiff must be non-suited; and I should disadvise the bringing
any such action."
"well," say the squire, "if it be _nullus bonus_, let we drink about,
and talk a little of the state of the nation, or some such discourse
that we all understand; for I be sure I donot understand a word of
this. it may be learn and sense for aught I know: but you shall
never persuade I into it. pox! you have neither of you mention a
word of that poor lad who deserve to be commend: to venture
break his neck to oblige my girl be a generous-spirited action: I
have learn enough to see that. D--n I, herebe Tom's health! I
shall love the boy for it the long day I have to live."
thus be the debate interrupt; but it would probably have be soon
resume, have not Mr Allworthy presently call for his coach, and
carry off the two combatant.
such be the conclusion of this adventure of the bird, and of the
dialogue occasion by it; which we could not help recount to our
reader, though it happen some year before that stage or period of
time at which our history be now arrive.
Chapter v.
contain matter accommodate to every taste.
"Parva leve capiunt animos--small thing affect light mind," be the
sentiment of a great master of the passion of love. and certain it be,
that from this day Sophia begin to have some little kindness for Tom
Jones, and no little aversion for his companion.
many accident from time to time improve both these passion in her
breast; which, without our recounting, the reader may well conclude,
from what we have before hint of the different temper of these
lad, and how much the one suit with her own inclination more than
the other. to say the truth, Sophia, when very young, discern that
Tom, though an idle, thoughtless, rattle rascal, be nobody's enemy
but his own; and that Master Blifil, though a prudent, discreet, sober
young gentleman, be at the same time strongly attach to the
interest only of one single person; and who that single person be the
reader will be able to divine without any assistance of our.
these two character be not always receive in the world with the
different regard which seem severally due to either; and which one
would imagine mankind, from self-interest, should show towards they.
but perhaps there may be a political reason for it: in find one of
a truly benevolent disposition, man may very reasonably suppose they
have find a treasure, and be desirous of keep it, like all other
good thing, to themselves. hence they may imagine, that to trumpet
forth the praise of such a person, would, in the vulgar phrase, be
cry roast-meat, and call in partaker of what they intend to
apply solely to their own use. if this reason do not satisfy the
reader, I know no other mean of account for the little respect
which I have commonly see pay to a character which really do great
honour to human nature, and be productive of the high good to
society. but it be otherwise with Sophia. she honour Tom Jones, and
scorn Master Blifil, almost as soon as she know the meaning of those
two word.
Sophia have be absent upwards of three year with her aunt; during
all which time she have seldom see either of these young gentleman.
she din, however, once, together with her aunt, at Mr Allworthy's.
this be a few day after the adventure of the partridge, before
commemorate. Sophia hear the whole story at table, where she say
nothing: nor indeed could her aunt get many word from she as she
return home; but her maid, when undress she, happen to say,
"well, miss, I suppose you have see young Master Blifil to-day?" she
answer with much passion, "I hate the name of Master Blifil, as I do
whatever be base and treacherous: and I wonder Mr Allworthy would
suffer that old barbarous schoolmaster to punish a poor boy so cruelly
for what be only the effect of his good-nature." she then recount
the story to she maid, and conclude with say, "donot you think he
be a boy of noble spirit?"
this young lady be now return to her father; who give she the
command of his house, and place she at the upper end of his table,
where Tom (who for his great love of hunting be become a great
favourite of the squire) often din. young man of open, generous
disposition be naturally inclined to gallantry, which, if they have
good understanding, as be in reality Tom's case, exert itself in an
oblige complacent behaviour to all woman in general. this greatly
distinguish Tom from the boisterous brutality of mere country
squire on the one hand, and from the solemn and somewhat sullen
deportment of Master Blifil on the other; and he begin now, at twenty,
to have the name of a pretty fellow among all the woman in the
neighbourhood.
Tom behave to Sophia with no particularity, unless perhaps by show
she a high respect than he pay to any other. this distinction her
beauty, fortune, sense, and amiable carriage, seem to demand; but as
to design upon her person he have none; for which we shall at present
suffer the reader to condemn he of stupidity; but perhaps we shall be
able indifferently well to account for it hereafter.
Sophia, with the high degree of innocence and modesty, have a
remarkable sprightliness in her temper. this be so greatly increase
whenever she be in company with Tom, that have he not be very young
and thoughtless, he must have observe it: or have not Mr Western's
thought be generally either in the field, the stable, or the
dog-kennel, it might have perhaps create some jealousy in he: but so
far be the good gentleman from entertain any such suspicion, that
he give Tom every opportunity with his daughter which any lover could
have wish; and this Tom innocently improve to well advantage, by
follow only the dictate of his natural gallantry and good-nature,
than he might perhaps have do have he have the deep design on the
young lady.
but indeed it can occasion little wonder that this matter escape the
observation of other, since poor Sophia herself never remark it;
and her heart be irretrievably lose before she suspect it be in
danger.
matter be in this situation, when Tom, one afternoon, find
Sophia alone, begin, after a short apology, with a very serious face,
to acquaint she that he have a favour to ask of she which he hop she
goodness would comply with.
though neither the young man's behaviour, nor indeed his manner of
open this business, be such as could give she any just cause of
suspecting he intend to make love to she; yet whether Nature
whisper something into her ear, or from what cause it arise I will
not determine; certain it be, some idea of that kind must have
intrude itself; for her colour forsook her cheek, her limb
tremble, and her tongue would have falter, have Tom stop for an
answer; but he soon relieve she from her perplexity, by proceed to
inform she of his request; which be to solicit her interest on behalf
of the gamekeeper, whose own ruin, and that of a large family, must
be, he say, the consequence of Mr Western's pursue his action
against he.
Sophia presently recover her confusion, and, with a smile full of
sweetness, say, "be this the mighty favour you ask with so much
gravity? I will do it with all my heart. I really pity the poor
fellow, and no long ago than yesterday send a small matter to his
wife." this small matter be one of her gown, some linen, and ten
shilling in money, of which Tom have hear, and it have, in reality,
put this solicitation into his head.
our youth, now, embolden with his success, resolve to push the
matter far, and venture even to beg her recommendation of he to
her father's service; protest that he think he one of the
honest fellow in the country, and extremely well qualified for the
place of a gamekeeper, which luckily then happen to be vacant.
Sophia answer, "well, I will undertake this too; but I cannot
promise you as much success as in the former part, which I assure you
I will not quit my father without obtain. however, I will do what I
can for the poor fellow; for I sincerely look upon he and his family
as object of great compassion. and now, Mr Jones, I must ask you a
favour."
"a favour, madam!" cry Tom: "if you know the pleasure you have give
I in the hope of receive a command from you, you would think by
mention it you do confer the great favour on I; for by this
dear hand I would sacrifice my life to oblige you."
he then snatch her hand, and eagerly kiss it, which be the first
time his lip have ever touch she. the blood, which before have
forsake her cheek, now make her sufficient amend, by rush all
over her face and neck with such violence, that they become all of a
scarlet colour. she now first feel a sensation to which she have be
before a stranger, and which, when she have leisure to reflect on it,
begin to acquaint she with some secret, which the reader, if he doth
not already guess they, will know in due time.
Sophia, as soon as she could speak (which be not instantly), inform
he that the favour she have to desire of he be, not to lead she
father through so many danger in hunting; for that, from what she have
hear, she be terribly frighten every time they go out together,
and expect some day or other to see her father bring home with
break limb. she therefore beg he, for her sake, to be more
cautious; and as he well know Mr Western would follow he, not to ride
so madly, nor to take those dangerous leap for the future.
Tom promise faithfully to obey her command; and after thank she
for her kind compliance with his request, take his leave, and depart
highly charm with his success.
Poor Sophia be charm too, but in a very different way. her
sensation, however, the reader's heart (if he or she have any) will
well represent than I can, if I have as many mouth as ever poet
wish for, to eat, I suppose, those many dainty with which he be
so plentifully provide.
it be Mr Western's custom every afternoon, as soon as he be drunk,
to hear his daughter play on the harpsichord; for he be a great lover
of music, and perhaps, have he live in town, might have pass for a
connoisseur; for he always except against the fine composition of
Mr Handel. he never relish any music but what be light and airy;
and indeed his most favourite tune be Old Sir Simon the King, St
George he be for England, Bobbing Joan, and some other.
his daughter, though she be a perfect mistress of music, and would
never willingly have play any but Handel's, be so devoted to her
father's pleasure, that she learn all those tune to oblige he.
however, she would now and then endeavour to lead he into her own
taste; and when he require the repetition of his ballad, would
answer with a "Nay, dear sir;" and would often beg he to suffer she
to play something else.
this evening, however, when the gentleman be retire from his bottle,
she play all his favourite three time over without any
solicitation. this so please the good squire, that he start from
his couch, give his daughter a kiss, and swear her hand be greatly
improve. she take this opportunity to execute her promise to Tom; in
which she succeed so well, that the squire declare, if she would
give he t'other bout of Old Sir Simon, he would give the gamekeeper
his deputation the next morning. Sir Simon be play again and again,
till the charm of the music soothe Mr Western to sleep. in the
morning Sophia do not fail to remind he of his engagement; and his
attorney be immediately send for, order to stop any further
proceeding in the action, and to make out the deputation.
Tom's success in this affair soon begin to ring over the country, and
various be the censure pass upon it; some greatly applaud it
as an act of good nature; other sneer, and say, "no wonder that
one idle fellow should love another." Young Blifil be greatly enrage
at it. he have long hat Black George in the same proportion as Jones
delight in he; not from any offence which he have ever receive, but
from his great love to religion and virtue;--for Black George have the
reputation of a loose kind of a fellow. Blifil therefore represent
this as fly in Mr Allworthy's face; and declare, with great
concern, that it be impossible to find any other motive for do
good to such a wretch.
Thwackum and Square likewise sing to the same tune. they be now
(especially the latter) become greatly jealous of young Jones with the
widow; for he now approach the age of twenty, be really a fine
young fellow, and that lady, by her encouragement to he, seem
daily more and more to think he so.
Allworthy be not, however, move with their malice. he declare
himself very well satisfied with what Jones have do. he say the
perseverance and integrity of his friendship be highly commendable,
and he wish he could see more frequent instance of that virtue.
but Fortune, who seldom greatly relish such spark as my friend Tom,
perhaps because they do not pay more ardent address to she, give now
a very different turn to all his action, and show they to Mr
Allworthy in a light far less agreeable than that gentleman's goodness
have hitherto see they in.
Chapter vi.
an apology for the insensibility of Mr Jones to all the charm of the
lovely Sophia; in which possibly we may, in a considerable degree,
lower his character in the estimation of those man of wit and
gallantry who approve the hero in most of our modern comedy.
there be two sort of people, who, I be afraid, have already
conceive some contempt for my heroe, on account of his behaviour to
Sophia. the former of these will blame his prudence in neglect an
opportunity to possess himself of Mr Western's fortune; and the latter
will no less despise he for his backwardness to so fine a girl, who
seem ready to fly into his arm, if he would open they to receive
she.
now, though I shall not perhaps be able absolutely to acquit he of
either of these charge (for want of prudence admit of no excuse; and
what I shall produce against the latter charge will, I apprehend, be
scarce satisfactory); yet, as evidence may sometimes be offer in
mitigation, I shall set forth the plain matter of fact, and leave the
whole to the reader's determination.
Mr Jones have somewhat about he, which, though I think writer be not
thoroughly agree in its name, doth certainly inhabit some human
breast; whose use be not so properly to distinguish right from wrong,
as to prompt and incite they to the former, and to restrain and
withhold they from the latter.
this somewhat may be indeed resemble to the famous trunk-maker in the
playhouse; for, whenever the person who be possess of it doth what
be right, no ravished or friendly spectator be so eager or so loud in
his applause: on the contrary, when he doth wrong, no critic be so apt
to hiss and explode he.
to give a high idea of the principle I mean, as well as one more
familiar to the present age; it may be consider as sit on its
throne in the mind, like the Lord High Chancellor of this kingdom in
his court; where it preside, govern, direct, judge, acquit, and
condemn accord to merit and justice, with a knowledge which
nothing escape, a penetration which nothing can deceive, and an
integrity which nothing can corrupt.
this active principle may perhaps be say to constitute the most
essential barrier between we and our neighbour the brute; for if
there be some in the human shape who be not under any such dominion,
I choose rather to consider they as deserter from we to our
neighbour; among whom they will have the fate of deserter, and not
be place in the first rank.
our heroe, whether he derive it from Thwackum or Square I will not
determine, be very strongly under the guidance of this principle; for
though he do not always act rightly, yet he never do otherwise
without feel and suffer for it. it be this which teach he,
that to repay the civility and little friendship of hospitality by
rob the house where you have receive they, be to be the basest
and mean of thief. he do not think the baseness of this offence
lessen by the height of the injury commit; on the contrary, if to
steal another's plate deserve death and infamy, it seem to he
difficult to assign a punishment adequate to the rob a man of his
whole fortune, and of his child into the bargain.
this principle, therefore, prevent he from any thought of make
his fortune by such mean (for this, as I have say, be an active
principle, and doth not content itself with knowledge or belief only).
have he be greatly enamoured of Sophia, he possibly might have
think otherwise; but give I leave to say, there be great difference
between run away with a man's daughter from the motive of love,
and do the same thing from the motive of theft.
now, though this young gentleman be not insensible of the charm of
Sophia; though he greatly like her beauty, and esteem all her other
qualification, she have make, however, no deep impression on his
heart; for which, as it render he liable to the charge of stupidity,
or at least of want of taste, we shall now proceed to account.
the truth then be, his heart be in the possession of another woman.
here I question not but the reader will be surprize at our long
taciturnity as to this matter; and quite at a loss to divine who this
woman be, since we have hitherto not dropt a hint of any one likely
to be a rival to Sophia; for as to Mrs Blifil, though we have be
oblige to mention some suspicion of her affection for Tom, we have
not hitherto give the least latitude for imagine that he have any
for she; and, indeed, I be sorry to say it, but the youth of both
sex be too apt to be deficient in their gratitude for that regard
with which person more advanced in year be sometimes so kind to
honour they.
that the reader may be no long in suspense, he will be pleased to
remember, that we have often mention the family of George Seagrim
(commonly call Black George, the gamekeeper), which consist at
present of a wife and five child.
the second of these child be a daughter, whose name be Molly, and
who be esteem one of the handsome girl in the whole country.
Congreve well say there be in true beauty something which vulgar
soul cannot admire; so can no dirt or rag hide this something from
those soul which be not of the vulgar stamp.
the beauty of this girl make, however, no impression on Tom, till she
grow towards the age of sixteen, when Tom, who be near three year
old, begin first to cast the eye of affection upon she. and this
affection he have fix on the girl long before he could bring himself
to attempt the possession of her person: for though his constitution
urge he greatly to this, his principle no less forcibly restrain
he. to debauch a young woman, however low her condition be, appear
to he a very heinous crime; and the good-will he bore the father,
with the compassion he have for his family, very strongly corroborate
all such sober reflection; so that he once resolve to get the well
of his inclination, and he actually abstain three whole month
without ever go to Seagrim's house, or see his daughter.
now, though molly be, as we have say, generally think a very fine
girl, and in reality she be so, yet her beauty be not of the most
amiable kind. it have, indeed, very little of feminine in it, and would
have become a man at least as well as a woman; for, to say the truth,
youth and florid health have a very considerable share in the
composition.
nor be her mind more effeminate than her person. as this be tall and
robust, so be that bold and forward. so little have she of modesty,
that Jones have more regard for her virtue than she herself. and as
most probably she like Tom as well as he like she, so when she
perceive his backwardness she herself grow proportionably forward;
and when she see he have entirely desert the house, she find mean
of throw herself in his way, and behave in such a manner that the
youth must have have very much or very little of the heroe if her
endeavour have prove unsuccessful. in a word, she soon triumph over
all the virtuous resolution of Jones; for though she behave at last
with all decent reluctance, yet I rather chuse to attribute the
triumph to she, since, in fact, it be her design which succeed.
in the conduct of this matter, I say, molly so well play her part,
that Jones attribute the conquest entirely to himself, and consider
the young woman as one who have yield to the violent attack of his
passion. he likewise impute she yield to the ungovernable force of
her love towards he; and this the reader will allow to have be a
very natural and probable supposition, as we have more than once
mention the uncommon comeliness of his person: and, indeed, he be
one of the handsome young fellow in the world.
as there be some mind whose affection, like Master Blifil's, be
solely place on one single person, whose interest and indulgence
alone they consider on every occasion; regard the good and ill of
all other as merely indifferent, any far than as they contribute
to the pleasure or advantage of that person: so there be a different
temper of mind which borrow a degree of virtue even from self-love.
such can never receive any kind of satisfaction from another, without
love the creature to whom that satisfaction be owing, and without
make its well-being in some sort necessary to their own ease.
of this latter specie be our heroe. he consider this poor girl as
one whose happiness or misery he have cause to be dependent on
himself. her beauty be still the object of desire, though great
beauty, or a fresher object, might have be more so; but the little
abatement which fruition have occasion to this be highly
overbalance by the consideration of the affection which she visibly
bear he, and of the situation into which he have bring she. the
former of these create gratitude, the latter compassion; and both,
together with his desire for her person, raise in he a passion which
might, without any great violence to the word, be call love; though,
perhaps, it be at first not very judiciously place.
this, then, be the true reason of that insensibility which he have
show to the charm of Sophia, and that behaviour in she which might
have be reasonably enough interpret as an encouragement to his
address; for as he could not think of abandon his Molly, poor and
destitute as she be, so no more could he entertain a notion of
betray such a creature as Sophia. and surely, have he give the
least encouragement to any passion for that young lady, he must have
be absolutely guilty of one or other of those crime; either of
which would, in my opinion, have very justly subject he to that
fate, which, at his first introduction into this history, I mention
to have be generally predict as his certain destiny.
Chapter vii.
be the short chapter in this book.
her mother first perceive the alteration in the shape of Molly; and
in order to hide it from her neighbour, she foolishly clothe she in
that sack which Sophia have send she; though, indeed, that young lady
have little apprehension that the poor woman would have be weak
enough to let any of her daughter wear it in that form.
Molly be charm with the first opportunity she ever have of show
her beauty to advantage; for though she could very well bear to
contemplate herself in the glass, even when dress in rag; and
though she have in that dress conquer the heart of Jones, and perhaps
of some other; yet she think the addition of finery would much
improve her charm, and extend her conquest.
molly, therefore, have dress herself out in this sack, with a new
laced cap, and some other ornament which Tom have give she, repair
to church with her fan in her hand the very next Sunday. the great be
deceive if they imagine they have appropriate ambition and vanity to
themselves. these noble quality flourish as notably in a country
church and churchyard as in the drawing-room, or in the closet.
scheme have indeed be lay in the vestry which would hardly
disgrace the conclave. here be a ministry, and here be an opposition.
here be plot and circumvention, party and faction, equal to
those which be to be find in court.
nor be the woman here less practise in the high feminine art
than their fair superior in quality and fortune. here be prude and
coquette. here be dress and ogle, falsehood, envy, malice,
scandal; in short, everything which be common to the most splendid
assembly, or politest circle. let those of high life, therefore, no
long despise the ignorance of their inferior; nor the vulgar any
long rail at the vice of their better.
Molly have seat herself some time before she be know by her
neighbour. and then a whisper run through the whole congregation,
"who be she?" but when she be discover, such sneer, gigling,
tittering, and laugh ensue among the woman, that Mr Allworthy be
oblige to exert his authority to preserve any decency among they.
Chapter viii.
a battle sing by the muse in the homerican style, and which none but
the classical reader can taste.
Mr Western have an estate in this parish; and as his house stand at
little great distance from this church than from his own, he very
often come to Divine Service here; and both he and the charming Sophia
happen to be present at this time.
Sophia be much pleased with the beauty of the girl, whom she pity
for her simplicity in have dress herself in that manner, as she
see the envy which it have occasion among her equal. she no soon
come home than she send for the gamekeeper, and order he to bring
his daughter to she; say she would provide for she in the family,
and might possibly place the girl about her own person, when her own
maid, who be now go away, have leave she.
Poor Seagrim be thunderstruck at this; for he be no stranger to the
fault in the shape of his daughter. he answer, in a stammering
voice, "that he be afraid Molly would be too awkward to wait on her
ladyship, as she have never be at service." "no matter for that,"
say Sophia; "she will soon improve. I be pleased with the girl, and
be resolve to try she."
Black George now repair to his wife, on whose prudent counsel he
depend to extricate he out of this dilemma; but when he come
thither he find his house in some confusion. so great envy have this
sack occasion, that when Mr Allworthy and the other gentry be go
from church, the rage, which have hitherto be confine, burst into an
uproar; and, have vent itself at first in opprobrious word,
laugh, hiss, and gesture, betook itself at last to certain missile
weapon; which, though from their plastic nature they threaten
neither the loss of life or of limb, be however sufficiently
dreadful to a well-dress lady. molly have too much spirit to bear
this treatment tamely. have therefore--but hold, as we be diffident
of our own ability, let we here invite a superior power to our
assistance.
Ye Muses, then, whoever ye be, who love to sing battle, and
principally thou who whilom didst recount the slaughter in those
field where Hudibras and Trulla fight, if thou wert not starve with
thy friend Butler, assist I on this great occasion. all thing be
not in the power of all.
as a vast herd of cow in a rich farmer's yard, if, while they be
milk, they hear their calf at a distance, lament the robbery
which be then commit, roar and bellow; so roar forth the
Somersetshire mob an hallaloo, make up of almost as many squall,
scream, and other different sound as there be person, or indeed
passion among they: some be inspire by rage, other alarm by
fear, and other have nothing in their head but the love of fun; but
chiefly Envy, the sister of Satan, and his constant companion, rush
among the crowd, and blow up the fury of the woman; who no soon come
up to Molly than they pelt she with dirt and rubbish.
molly, have endeavour in vain to make a handsome retreat, face
about; and lay hold of ragged Bess, who advance in the front of
the enemy, she at one blow fell she to the ground. the whole army of
the enemy (though near a hundred in number), see the fate of their
general, give back many pace, and retire behind a new-dug grave; for
the churchyard be the field of battle, where there be to be a
funeral that very evening. molly pursue her victory, and catch up
a skull which lie on the side of the grave, discharge it with such
fury, that have hit a taylor on the head, the two skull send
equally forth a hollow sound at their meeting, and the taylor take
presently measure of his length on the ground, where the skull lay
side by side, and it be doubtful which be the more valuable of the
two. molly then take a thigh-bone in her hand, fall in among the
flying rank, and deal her blow with great liberality on either
side, overthrow the carcass of many a mighty heroe and heroine.
recount, o Muse, the name of those who fall on this fatal day. first,
Jemmy Tweedle feel on his hinder head the direful bone. he the
pleasant bank of sweetly-wind Stour have nourish, where he first
learn the vocal art, with which, wander up and down at wakes and
fair, he cheer the rural nymph and swain, when upon the green
they interweave the sprightly dance; while he himself stand fiddle
and jump to his own music. how little now avail his fiddle! he
thump the verdant floor with his carcass. next, old Echepole, the
sowgelder, receive a blow in his forehead from our amazonian heroine,
and immediately fall to the ground. he be a swing fat fellow, and
fall with almost as much noise as a house. his tobacco-box drop at
the same time from his pocket, which molly take up as lawful spoil.
then Kate of the Mill tumble unfortunately over a tombstone, which
catch hold of her ungartered stocking invert the order of nature,
and give her heel the superiority to her head. Betty Pippin, with
young Roger her lover, fall both to the ground; where, oh perverse
fate! she salute the earth, and he the sky. Tom Freckle, the smith's
son, be the next victim to her rage. he be an ingenious workman, and
make excellent patten; nay, the very patten with which he be knock
down be his own workmanship. have he be at that time sing psalm
in the church, he would have avoid a broken head. Miss Crow, the
daughter of a farmer; John Giddish, himself a farmer; Nan Slouch,
Esther Codling, Will Spray, Tom Bennet; the three Misses Potter, whose
father keep the sign of the Red Lion; Betty Chambermaid, Jack Ostler,
and many other of inferior note, lie roll among the graf.
not that the strenuous arm of Molly reach all these; for many of
they in their flight overthrew each other.
but now Fortune, fear she have act out of character, and have
incline too long to the same side, especially as it be the right
side, hastily turn about: for now Goody Brown--whom Zekiel Brown
caress in his arm; nor he alone, but half the parish besides; so
famous be she in the field of Venus, nor indeed less in those of
Mars. the trophy of both these her husband always bear about on his
head and face; for if ever human head do by its horn display the
amorous glory of a wife, Zekiel's do; nor do his well-scratch
face less denote her talent (or rather talon) of a different kind.
no long bear this Amazon the shameful flight of her party. she stopt
short, and, call aloud to all who flee, speak as follow: "Ye
Somersetshire man, or rather ye Somersetshire woman, be ye not
ashamed thus to fly from a single woman? but if no other will oppose
she, I myself and Joan Top here will have the honour of the victory."
have thus say, she fly at Molly Seagrim, and easily wrench the
thigh-bone from her hand, at the same time claw off her cap from
her head. then lay hold of the hair of Molly with her left hand,
she attack she so furiously in the face with the right, that the
blood soon begin to trickle from her nose. molly be not idle this
while. she soon remove the clout from the head of Goody Brown, and
then fasten on her hair with one hand, with the other she cause
another bloody stream to issue forth from the nostril of the enemy.
when each of the combatant have bear off sufficient spoil of hair
from the head of her antagonist, the next rage be against the
garment. in this attack they exert so much violence, that in a very
few minute they be both naked to the middle.
it be lucky for the woman that the seat of fistycuff war be not the
same with they as among man; but though they may seem a little to
deviate from their sex, when they go forth to battle, yet I have
observe, they never so far forget, as to assail the bosom of each
other; where a few blow would be fatal to most of they. this, I know,
some derive from their being of a more bloody inclination than the
male. on which account they apply to the nose, as to the part whence
blood may most easily be draw; but this seem a far-fetched as well
as ill-natured supposition.
Goody Brown have great advantage of Molly in this particular; for the
former have indeed no breast, her bosom (if it may be so call), as
well in colour as in many other property, exactly resemble an
antient piece of parchment, upon which any one might have drum a
considerable while without do she any great damage.
molly, beside her present unhappy condition, be differently form in
those part, and might, perhaps, have tempt the envy of Brown to
give she a fatal blow, have not the lucky arrival of Tom Jones at this
instant put an immediate end to the bloody scene.
this accident be luckily owe to Mr Square; for he, Master Blifil,
and Jones, have mount their horse, after church, to take the air,
and have ride about a quarter of a mile, when Square, change his
mind (not idly, but for a reason which we shall unfold as soon as we
have leisure), desire the young gentleman to ride with he another
way than they have at first purpose. this motion be comply with,
bring they of necessity back again to the churchyard.
Master Blifil, who ride first, see such a mob assemble, and two
woman in the posture in which we leave the combatant, stopt his horse
to enquire what be the matter. a country fellow, scratch his head,
answer he: "I donot know, measter, un't I; an't please your honour,
here hath be a vight, I think, between Goody Brown and Moll
Seagrim."
"who, who?" cry Tom; but without wait for an answer, have
discover the feature of his Molly through all the discomposure in
which they now be, he hastily alight, turn his horse loose, and,
leap over the wall, run to she. she now first burst into tear,
tell he how barbarously she have be treat. upon which, forget
the sex of Goody Brown, or perhaps not know it in his rage--for, in
reality, she have no feminine appearance but a petticoat, which he
might not observe--he give she a lash or two with his horsewhip; and
then fly at the mob, who be all accuse by Moll, he deal his
blow so profusely on all side, that unless I would again invoke the
muse (which the good-natured reader may think a little too hard upon
she, as she hath so lately be violently sweat), it would be
impossible for I to recount the horse-whipping of that day.
have scour the whole coast of the enemy, as well as any of Homer's
hero ever do, or as Don Quixote or any knight-errant in the world
could have do, he return to Molly, whom he find in a condition
which must give both I and my reader pain, be it to be describe
here. Tom rave like a madman, beat his breast, tear his hair, stamp
on the ground, and vow the utmost vengeance on all who have be
concern. he then pull off his coat, and button it round she, put
his hat upon her head, wipe the blood from her face as well as he
could with his handkerchief, and call out to the servant to ride as
fast as possible for a side-saddle, or a pillion, that he might carry
her safe home.
Master Blifil object to the send away the servant, as they have
only one with they; but as Square second the order of Jones, he be
oblige to comply.
the servant return in a very short time with the pillion, and Molly,
have collect her rag as well as she could, be place behind he.
in which manner she be carry home, Square, Blifil, and Jones
attend.
here Jones have receive his coat, give she a sly kiss, and
whisper she, that he would return in the evening, quit his Molly,
and ride on after his companion.
Chapter ix.
contain matter of no very peaceable colour.
Molly have no soon apparelle herself in her accustomed rag, than
her sister begin to fall violently upon she, particularly her eld
sister, who tell she she be well enough serve. "how have she the
assurance to wear a gown which young Madam Western have give to
mother! if one of we be to wear it, I think," say she, "I myself
have the good right; but I warrant you think it belong to your
beauty. I suppose you think yourself more handsomer than any of
we."--"hand she down the bit of glass from over the cupboard," cry
another; "Iwould wash the blood from my face before I talk of my
beauty."--"You'd well have mind what the parson say," cry the
eld, "and not a harken after man voke."--"Indeed, child, and so
she have," say the mother, sob: "she hath bring a disgrace upon
we all. shebe the vurst of the vamily that ever be a whore."
"you need not upbraid I with that, mother," cry molly; "you
yourself be bring-to-bed of sister there, within a week after you
be marry."
"yes, hussy," answer the enraged mother, "so I be, and what be the
mighty matter of that? I be make an honest woman then; and if you be
to be make an honest woman, I should not be angry; but you must have
to do with a gentleman, you nasty slut; you will have a bastard,
hussy, you will; and that I defy any one to say of I."
in this situation Black George find his family, when he come home for
the purpose before mention. as his wife and three daughter be all
of they talk together, and most of they cry, it be some time
before he could get an opportunity of be hear; but as soon as such
an interval occur, he acquaint the company with what Sophia have
say to he.
Goody Seagrim then begin to revile her daughter afresh. "here," say
she, "you have bring we into a fine quandary indeed. what will madam
say to that big belly? oh that ever I should live to see this day!"
molly answer with great spirit, "and what be this mighty place which
you have get for I, father?" (for he have not well understand the
phrase use by Sophia of be about her person). "I suppose it be to
be under the cook; but I shallnot wash dish for anybody. my gentleman
will provide well for I. see what he hath give I this afternoon.
he hath promise I shall never want money; and you shallnot want money
neither, mother, if you will hold your tongue, and know when you be
well." and so say, she pull out several guineas, and give she
mother one of they.
the good woman no soon feel the gold within her palm, than her
temper begin (such be the efficacy of that panacea) to be mollify.
"why, husband," say she, "would any but such a blockhead as you not
have enquire what place this be before he have accept it? perhaps,
as Molly say, it may be in the kitchen; and truly I donot care my
daughter should be a scullion wench; for, poor as I be, I be a
gentlewoman. and thof I be oblige, as my father, who be a
clergyman, die bad than nothing, and so could not give I a
shilling of _potion_, to undervalue myself by marry a poor man; yet
I would have you to know, I have a spirit above all they thing. Marry
come up! it would well become Madam Western to look at home, and
remember who her own grandfather be. some of my family, for aught I
know, might ride in their coach, when the grandfather of some voke
walk a-voot. I warrant she fancy she do a mighty matter, when she
send we that old gownd; some of my family would not have pick up
such rag in the street; but poor people be always trample
upon.--The parish need not have be in such a fluster with Molly. you
might have tell they, child, your grandmother wear well thing new
out of the shop."
"well, but consider," cry George, "what answer shall I make to
madam?"
"I donot know what answer," say she; "you be always bring your
family into one quandary or other. do you remember when you shoot the
partridge, the occasion of all our misfortune? do not I advise you
never to go into Squire Western's manor? do not I tell you many a
good year ago what would come of it? but you would have your own
headstrong way; yes, you would, you villain."
Black George be, in the main, a peaceable kind of fellow, and nothing
choleric nor rash; yet do he bear about he something of what the
antient call the irascible, and which his wife, if she have be
endow with much wisdom, would have fear. he have long experience,
that when the storm grow very high, argument be but wind, which
serve rather to increase, than to abate it. he be therefore seldom
unprovide with a small switch, a remedy of wonderful force, as he have
often essay, and which the word villain serve as a hint for his
applying.
no soon, therefore, have this symptom appear, than he have immediate
recourse to the say remedy, which though, as it be usual in all very
efficacious medicine, it at first seem to heighten and inflame the
disease, soon produce a total calm, and restore the patient to
perfect ease and tranquillity.
this be, however, a kind of horse-medicine, which require a very
robust constitution to digest, and be therefore proper only for the
vulgar, unless in one single instance, viz., where superiority of
birth break out; in which case, we should not think it very
improperly apply by any husband whatever, if the application be not
in itself so base, that, like certain application of the physical
kind which need not be mention, it so much degrade and contaminate
the hand employ in it, that no gentleman should endure the thought
of anything so low and detestable.
the whole family be soon reduce to a state of perfect quiet; for
the virtue of this medicine, like that of electricity, be often
communicate through one person to many other, who be not touch by
the instrument. to say the truth, as they both operate by friction, it
may be doubt whether there be not something analogous between they,
of which Mr Freke would do well to enquire, before he publish the
next edition of his book.
a council be now call, in which, after many debate, molly still
persist that she would not go to service, it be at length
resolve, that Goody Seagrim herself should wait on Miss Western, and
endeavour to procure the place for her eld daughter, who declare
great readiness to accept it: but Fortune, who seem to have be an
enemy of this little family, afterwards put a stop to her promotion.
Chapter x.
a story tell by Mr Supple, the curate. the penetration of squire
Western. his great love for his daughter, and the return to it make by
she.
the next morning Tom Jones hunt with Mr Western, and be at his
return invite by that gentleman to dinner.
the lovely Sophia shine forth that day with more gaiety and
sprightliness than usual. her battery be certainly level at our
heroe; though, I believe, she herself scarce yet know her own
intention; but if she have any design of charm he, she now
succeed.
Mr Supple, the curate of Mr Allworthy's parish, make one of the
company. he be a good-natured worthy man; but chiefly remarkable for
his great taciturnity at table, though his mouth be never shut at it.
in short, he have one of the good appetite in the world. however, the
cloth be no soon take away, than he always make sufficient amend
for his silence: for he be a very hearty fellow; and his conversation
be often entertaining, never offensive.
at his first arrival, which be immediately before the entrance of the
roast-beef, he have give an intimation that he have bring some news
with he, and be begin to tell, that he come that moment from Mr
Allworthy's, when the sight of the roast-beef strike he dumb,
permit he only to say grace, and to declare he must pay his
respect to the baronet, for so he call the sirloin.
when dinner be over, be remind by Sophia of his news, he begin
as follow: "I believe, lady, your ladyship observe a young woman at
church yesterday at even-song, who be drest in one of your outlandish
garment; I think I have see your ladyship in such a one. however, in
the country, such dress be
_rara avis in terris, nigroque simillima cygno._
that be, madam, as much as to say, `a rare bird upon the earth, and
very like a black swan.' the verse be in Juvenal. but to return to
what I be relate. I be say such garment be rare sight in the
country; and perchance, too, it be think the more rare, respect
be have to the person who wear it, who, they tell I, be the
daughter of Black George, your worship's gamekeeper, whose suffering,
I should have opine, might have teach he more wit, than to dress
forth his wench in such gaudy apparel. she create so much confusion
in the congregation, that if Squire Allworthy have not silence it, it
would have interrupt the service: for I be once about to stop in
the middle of the first lesson. Howbeit, nevertheless, after prayer
be over, and I be depart home, this occasion a battle in the
churchyard, where, amongst other mischief, the head of a travel
fidler be very much break. this morning the fidler come to Squire
Allworthy for a warrant, and the wench be bring before he. the
squire be inclined to have compound matter; when, lo! on a sudden
the wench appear (I ask your ladyship's pardon) to be, as it be,
at the eve of bring forth a bastard. the squire demand of she who
be the father? but she pertinaciously refuse to make any response.
so that he be about to make her mittimus to Bridewell when I
depart."
"and be a wench have a bastard all your news, doctor?" cry
western; "I think it might have be some public matter, something
about the nation."
"I be afraid it be too common, indeed," answer the parson; "but I
think the whole story altogether deserve commemorate. as to
national matter, your worship know they well. my concern extend no
far than my own parish."
"why, ay," say the squire, "I believe I do know a little of that
matter, as you say. but, come, Tommy, drink about; the bottle stand
with you."
Tom beg to be excuse, for that he have particular business; and
get up from table, escape the clutch of the squire, who be
rise to stop he, and go off with very little ceremony.
the squire give he a good curse at his departure; and then turn to
the parson, he cry out, "I smoke it: I smoke it. Tom be certainly
the father of this bastard. Zooks, parson, you remember how he
recommend the veather o' she to I. D--n un, what a sly b--ch 'tis.
ay, ay, as sure as two-pence, Tom be the veather of the bastard."
"I should be very sorry for that," say the parson.
"why sorry," cry the squire: "where be the mighty matter o't? what,
I suppose dost pretend that thee hast never get a bastard? Pox! more
good luck's thine? for I warrant hast a do a _therefore_ manybe the
good time and often."
"your worship be pleased to be jocular," answer the parson; "but I
do not only animadvert on the sinfulness of the action--though that
surely be to be greatly deprecate--but I fear his unrighteousness may
injure he with Mr Allworthy. and truly I must say, though he hath the
character of be a little wild, I never see any harm in the young
man; nor can I say I have hear any, save what your worship now
mention. I wish, indeed, he be a little more regular in his
response at church; but altogether he seem
_ingenui vultus puer ingenuique pudoris._
that be a classical line, young lady; and, be render into
English, be, `a lad of an ingenuous countenance, and of an ingenuous
modesty;' for this be a virtue in great repute both among the Latins
and Greeks. I must say, the young gentleman (for so I think I may call
he, notwithstanding his birth) appear to I a very modest, civil
lad, and I should be sorry that he should do himself any injury in
Squire Allworthy's opinion."
"Poogh!" say the squire: "Injury, with Allworthy! why, Allworthy
love a wench himself. Doth not all the country know whose son Tom be?
you must talk to another person in that manner. I remember Allworthy
at college."
"I think," say the parson, "he have never be at the university."
"yes, yes, he be," say the squire: "and many a wench have we two have
together. as arrant a whore-master as any within five mile o'un. no,
no. it will do'n no harm with he, assure yourself; nor with anybody
else. ask Sophy there--you have not the bad opinion of a young
fellow for get a bastard, have you, girl? no, no, the woman will
like un the well for't."
this be a cruel question to poor Sophia. she have observe Tom's
colour change at the parson's story; and that, with his hasty and
abrupt departure, give her sufficient reason to think her father's
suspicion not groundless. her heart now at once discover the great
secret to she which it have be so long disclosing by little and
little; and she find herself highly interested in this matter. in
such a situation, her father's malapert question rush suddenly upon
she, produce some symptom which might have alarm a suspicious
heart; but, to do the squire justice, that be not his fault. when she
rise therefore from her chair, and tell he a hint from he be always
sufficient to make she withdraw, he suffer she to leave the room,
and then with great gravity of countenance remark, "that it be
well to see a daughter over-modest than over-forward;"--a sentiment
which be highly applaud by the parson.
there now ensue between the squire and the parson a most excellent
political discourse, frame out of newspaper and political pamphlet;
in which they make a libation of four bottle of wine to the good of
their country: and then, the squire be fast asleep, the parson
light his pipe, mount his horse, and ride home.
when the squire have finish his half-hour's nap, he summon his
daughter to her harpsichord; but she beg to be excuse that
evening, on account of a violent head-ache. this remission be
presently grant; for indeed she seldom have occasion to ask he
twice, as he love she with such ardent affection, that, by gratify
she, he commonly convey the high gratification to himself. she
be really, what he frequently call she, his little darling, and she
well deserve to be so; for she return all his affection in the most
ample manner. she have preserve the most inviolable duty to he in all
thing; and this her love make not only easy, but so delightful, that
when one of her companion laugh at she for place so much merit in
such scrupulous obedience, as that young lady call it, Sophia
answer, "you mistake I, madam, if you think I value myself upon
this account; for besides that I be barely discharge my duty, I be
likewise please myself. I can truly say I have no delight equal to
that of contribute to my father's happiness; and if I value myself,
my dear, it be on have this power, and not on execute it."
this be a satisfaction, however, which poor Sophia be incapable of
taste this evening. she therefore not only desire to be excuse
from her attendance at the harpsichord, but likewise beg that he
would suffer she to absent herself from supper. to this request
likewise the squire agree, though not without some reluctance; for he
scarce ever permit she to be out of his sight, unless when he be
engage with his horse, dog, or bottle. nevertheless he yield to
the desire of his daughter, though the poor man be at the same time
oblige to avoid his own company (if I may so express myself), by
send for a neighbouring farmer to sit with he.
Chapter xi.
the narrow escape of Molly Seagrim, with some observation for which
we have be force to dive pretty deep into nature.
Tom Jones have ride one of Mr Western's horse that morning in the
chase; so that have no horse of his own in the squire's stable, he
be oblige to go home on foot: this he do so expeditiously that he
run upwards of three mile within the half-hour.
just as he arrive at Mr Allworthy's outward gate, he meet the
constable and company with Molly in their possession, whom they be
conduct to that house where the inferior sort of people may learn
one good lesson, viz., respect and deference to their superior; since
it must show they the wide distinction Fortune intend between those
person who be to be correct for their fault, and those who be
not; which lesson if they do not learn, I be afraid they very rarely
learn any other good lesson, or improve their moral, at the house of
correction.
a lawyer may perhaps think Mr Allworthy exceed his authority a
little in this instance. and, to say the truth, I question, as here
be no regular information before he, whether his conduct be
strictly regular. however, as his intention be truly upright, he
ought to be excuse in _foro conscientiae_; since so many arbitrary
act be daily commit by magistrate who have not this excuse to
plead for themselves.
Tom be no soon inform by the constable whither they be
proceed (indeed he pretty well guess it of himself), than he
catch molly in his arm, and embrace she tenderly before they all,
swear he would murder the first man who offer to lay hold of she. he
bid she dry her eye and be comfort; for, wherever she go, he
would accompany she. then turn to the constable, who stand
tremble with his hat off, he desire he, in a very mild voice, to
return with he for a moment only to his father (for so he now call
Allworthy); for he durst, he say, be assure, that, when he have
alledge what he have to say in her favour, the girl would be
discharge.
the constable, who, I make no doubt, would have surrender his
prisoner have Tom demand she, very readily consent to this request.
so back they all go into Mr Allworthy's hall; where Tom desire they
to stay till his return, and then go himself in pursuit of the good
man. as soon as he be find, Tom throw himself at his foot, and
have beg a patient hearing, confess himself to be the father of
the child of which Molly be then big. he entreat he to have
compassion on the poor girl, and to consider, if there be any guilt
in the case, it lie principally at his door.
"if there be any guilt in the case!" answer Allworthy warmly: "be
you then so profligate and abandon a libertine to doubt whether the
break the law of God and man, the corrupting and ruin a poor
girl be guilt? I own, indeed, it doth lie principally upon you; and so
heavy it be, that you ought to expect it should crush you."
"whatever may be my fate," say Tom, "let I succeed in my
intercession for the poor girl. I confess I have corrupt she! but
whether she shall be ruin, depend on you. for Heaven's sake, sir,
revoke your warrant, and do not send she to a place which must
unavoidably prove her destruction."
Allworthy bid he immediately call a servant. Tom answer there be
no occasion; for he have luckily meet they at the gate, and rely upon
his goodness, have bring they all back into his hall, where they now
wait his final resolution, which upon his knee he besought he
might be in favour of the girl; that she might be permit to go home
to her parent, and not be expose to a great degree of shame and
scorn than must necessarily fall upon she. "I know," say he, "that be
too much. I know I be the wicked occasion of it. I will endeavour to
make amend, if possible; and if you shall have hereaft the goodness
to forgive I, I hope I shall deserve it."
Allworthy hesitate some time, and at last say, "well, I will
discharge my mittimus.--You may send the constable to I." he be
instantly call, discharge, and so be the girl.
it will be believe that Mr Allworthy fail not to read Tom a very
severe lecture on this occasion; but it be unnecessary to insert it
here, as we have faithfully transcribe what he say to Jenny Jones in
the first book, most of which may be apply to the man, equally with
the woman. so sensible an effect have these reproof on the young man,
who be no hardened sinner, that he retire to his own room, where he
pass the evening alone, in much melancholy contemplation.
Allworthy be sufficiently offend by this transgression of Jones;
for notwithstanding the assertion of Mr Western, it be certain this
worthy man have never indulge himself in any loose pleasure with
woman, and greatly condemn the vice of incontinence in other.
indeed, there be much reason to imagine that there be not the least
truth in what Mr Western affirm, especially as he lay the scene of
those impurity at the university, where Mr Allworthy have never be.
in fact, the good squire be a little too apt to indulge that kind of
pleasantry which be generally call rhodomontade: but which may, with
as much propriety, be express by a much short word; and perhaps we
too often supply the use of this little monosyllable by other; since
very much of what frequently pass in the world for wit and humour,
should, in the strict purity of language, receive that short
appellation, which, in conformity to the well-breed law of custom, I
here suppress.
but whatever detestation Mr Allworthy have to this or to any other
vice, he be not so blinded by it but that he could discern any virtue
in the guilty person, as clearly indeed as if there have be no
mixture of vice in the same character. while he be angry therefore
with the incontinence of Jones, he be no less pleased with the honour
and honesty of his self-accusation. he begin now to form in his mind
the same opinion of this young fellow, which, we hope, our reader may
have conceive. and in balance his fault with his perfection, the
latter seem rather to preponderate.
it be to no purpose, therefore, that Thwackum, who be immediately
charge by Mr Blifil with the story, unbend all his rancour against
poor Tom. Allworthy give a patient hearing to their invective, and
then answer coldly: "that young man of Tom's complexion be too
generally addicted to this vice; but he believe that youth be
sincerely affect with what he have say to he on the occasion, and
he hop he would not transgress again." so that, as the day of
whipping be at an end, the tutor have no other vent but his own mouth
for his gall, the usual poor resource of impotent revenge.
but Square, who be a less violent, be a much more artful man; and as
he hat Jones more perhaps than Thwackum himself do, so he contrive
to do he more mischief in the mind of Mr Allworthy.
the reader must remember the several little incident of the
partridge, the horse, and the Bible, which be recount in the
second book. by all which Jones have rather improve than injure the
affection which Mr Allworthy be incline to entertain for he. the
same, I believe, must have happen to he with every other person who
hath any idea of friendship, generosity, and greatness of spirit, that
be to say, who hath any trace of goodness in his mind.
Square himself be not unacquainted with the true impression which
those several instance of goodness have make on the excellent heart of
Allworthy; for the philosopher very well know what virtue be, though
he be not always perhaps steady in its pursuit; but as for Thwackum,
from what reason I will not determine, no such thought ever enter
into his head: he see Jones in a bad light, and he imagine Allworthy
see he in the same, but that he be resolve, from pride and
stubbornness of spirit, not to give up the boy whom he have once
cherish; since by so do, he must tacitly acknowledge that his
former opinion of he have be wrong.
Square therefore embrace this opportunity of injure Jones
in the tender part, by give a very bad turn to all these
before-mention occurrence. "I be sorry, sir," say he, "to own I
have be deceive as well as yourself. I could not, I confess, help
be pleased with what I ascribe to the motive of friendship, though
it be carry to an excess, and all excess be faulty and vicious: but
in this I make allowance for youth. little do I suspect that the
sacrifice of truth, which we both imagine to have be make to
friendship, be in reality a prostitution of it to a depraved and
debauch appetite. you now plainly see whence all the seem
generosity of this young man to the family of the gamekeeper
proceed. he support the father in order to corrupt the daughter,
and preserve the family from starve, to bring one of they to shame
and ruin. this be friendship! this be generosity! as Sir Richard
Steele say, `glutton who give high price for delicacy, be very
worthy to be call generous.' in short I be resolve, from this
instance, never to give way to the weakness of human nature more, nor
to think anything virtue which doth not exactly quadrate with the
unerring rule of right."
the goodness of Allworthy have prevent those consideration from
occur to himself; yet be they too plausible to be absolutely and
hastily reject, when lay before his eye by another. indeed what
Square have say sink very deeply into his mind, and the uneasiness
which it there create be very visible to the other; though the good
man would not acknowledge this, but make a very slight answer, and
forcibly drive off the discourse to some other subject. it be well
perhaps for poor Tom, that no such suggestion have be make before he
be pardon; for they certainly stamp in the mind of Allworthy the
first bad impression concern Jones.
Chapter xii.
contain much clear matter; but which flow from the same
fountain with those in the precede chapter.
the reader will be please, I believe, to return with I to Sophia.
she pass the night, after we see she last, in no very agreeable
manner. sleep befriend she but little, and dream less. in the
morning, when Mrs Honour, her maid, attend she at the usual hour,
she be find already up and drest.
person who live two or three mile' distance in the country be
consider as next-door neighbour, and transaction at the one house
fly with incredible celerity to the other. Mrs Honour, therefore, have
hear the whole story of Molly's shame; which she, be of a very
communicative temper, have no soon enter the apartment of her
mistress, than she begin to relate in the follow manner:--
"La, ma'am, what doth your la'ship think? the girl that your la'ship
see at church on Sunday, whom you think so handsome; though you
would not have think she so handsome neither, if you have see she
nearer, but to be sure she hath be carry before the justice for
be big with child. she seem to I to look like a confident slut:
and to be sure she hath lay the child to young Mr Jones. and all the
parish say Mr Allworthy be so angry with young Mr Jones, that he
willnot see he. to be sure, one cannot help pity the poor young man,
and yet he doth not deserve much pity neither, for demean himself
with such kind of trumpery. yet he be so pretty a gentleman, I should
be sorry to have he turn out of door. I dare to swear the wench
be as willing as he; for she be always a forward kind of body. and
when wench be so come, young man be not so much to be blame
neither; for to be sure they do no more than what be natural. indeed
it be beneath they to meddle with such dirty draggle-tail; and
whatever happen to they, it be good enough for they. and yet, to be
sure, the vile baggage be most in fault. I wish, with all my
heart, they be well to be whip at the cart's tail; for it be pity
they should be the ruin of a pretty young gentleman; and nobody can
deny but that Mr Jones be one of the most handsome young man that
ever----"
she be run on thus, when Sophia, with a more peevish voice than
she have ever speak to she in before, cry, "Prithee, why dost thou
trouble I with all this stuff? what concern have I in what Mr Jones
doth? I suppose you be all alike. and you seem to I to be angry it
be not your own case."
"I, ma'am!" answer Mrs Honour, "I be sorry your ladyship should have
such an opinion of I. I be sure nobody can say any such thing of I.
all the young fellow in the world may go to the divil for I. because
I say he be a handsome man? everybody say it as well as i. to be
sure, I never think as it be any harm to say a young man be
handsome; but to be sure I shall never think he so any more now; for
handsome be that handsome doe. a beggar wench!--"
"stop thy torrent of impertinence," cry Sophia, "and see whether my
father want I at breakfast."
Mrs Honour then fling out of the room, mutter much to herself, of
which "Marry come up, I assure you," be all that could be plainly
distinguish.
whether Mrs Honour really deserve that suspicion, of which her
mistress give she a hint, be a matter which we cannot indulge our
reader's curiosity by resolve. we will, however, make he amend in
disclose what pass in the mind of Sophia.
the reader will be pleased to recollect, that a secret affection for
Mr Jones have insensibly steal into the bosom of this young lady. that
it have there grow to a pretty great height before she herself have
discover it. when she first begin to perceive its symptom, the
sensation be so sweet and pleasing, that she have not resolution
sufficient to check or repel they; and thus she go on cherish a
passion of which she never once consider the consequence.
this incident relate to Molly first open her eye. she now first
perceive the weakness of which she have be guilty; and though it
cause the utmost perturbation in her mind, yet it have the effect of
other nauseous physic, and for the time expel her distemper. its
operation indeed be most wonderfully quick; and in the short
interval, while her maid be absent, so entirely remove all symptom,
that when Mrs Honour return with a summon from her father, she be
become perfectly easy, and have bring herself to a thorough
indifference for Mr Jones.
the disease of the mind do in almost every particular imitate those
of the body. for which reason, we hope, that learn faculty, for whom
we have so profound a respect, will pardon we the violent hand we
have be necessitate to lay on several word and phrase, which of
right belong to they, and without which our description must have
be often unintelligible.
now there be no one circumstance in which the distemper of the mind
bear a more exact analogy to those which be call bodily, than that
aptness which both have to a relapse. this be plain in the violent
disease of ambition and avarice. I have know ambition, when cure at
court by frequent disappointment (which be the only physic for it),
to break out again in a contest for foreman of the grand jury at an
assize; and have hear of a man who have so far conquer avarice, as
to give away many a sixpence, that comfort himself, at last, on his
deathbe, by make a crafty and advantageous bargain concern his
ensue funeral, with an undertaker who have marry his only child.
in the affair of love, which, out of strict conformity with the stoic
philosophy, we shall here treat as a disease, this proneness to
relapse be no less conspicuous. thus it happen to poor Sophia; upon
whom, the very next time she see young Jones, all the former symptom
return, and from that time cold and hot fit alternately seize her
heart.
the situation of this young lady be now very different from what it
have ever be before. that passion which have formerly be so
exquisitely delicious, become now a scorpion in her bosom. she
resist it therefore with her utmost force, and summon every
argument her reason (which be surprisingly strong for her age) could
suggest, to subdue and expel it. in this she so far succeed, that
she begin to hope from time and absence a perfect cure. she resolve
therefore to avoid Tom Jones as much as possible; for which purpose
she begin to conceive a design of visit her aunt, to which she make
no doubt of obtain her father's consent.
but Fortune, who have other design in her head, put an immediate stop
to any such proceeding, by introduce an accident, which will be
relate in the next chapter.
Chapter xiii.
a dreadful accident which befel Sophia. the gallant behaviour of
Jones, and the more dreadful consequence of that behaviour to the
young lady; with a short digression in favour of the female sex.
Mr Western grow every day fonder and fonder of Sophia, insomuch that
his beloved dog themselves almost give place to she in his
affection; but as he could not prevail on himself to abandon these,
he contrive very cunningly to enjoy their company, together with that
of his daughter, by insist on she rid a hunting with he.
Sophia, to whom her father's word be a law, readily comply with his
desire, though she have not the least delight in a sport, which be of
too rough and masculine a nature to suit with her disposition. she have
however another motive, beside her obedience, to accompany the old
gentleman in the chase; for by her presence she hop in some measure
to restrain his impetuosity, and to prevent he from so frequently
expose his neck to the utmost hazard.
the strong objection be that which would have formerly be an
inducement to she, namely, the frequent meeting with young Jones, whom
she have determine to avoid; but as the end of the hunting season now
approach, she hop, by a short absence with her aunt, to reason
herself entirely out of her unfortunate passion; and have not any doubt
of be able to meet he in the field the subsequent season without
the least danger.
on the second day of her hunting, as she be return from the chase,
and be arrive within a little distance from Mr Western's house, her
horse, whose mettlesome spirit require a well rider, fall suddenly
to prance and caper in such a manner that she be in the most
imminent peril of fall. Tom Jones, who be at a little distance
behind, see this, and immediately gallop up to her assistance. as
soon as he come up, he leap from his own horse, and catch hold of
her by the bridle. the unruly beast presently rear himself an end
on his hind leg, and throw his lovely burthen from his back, and
Jones catch she in his arm.
she be so affected with the fright, that she be not immediately able
to satisfy Jones, who be very sollicitous to know whether she have
receive any hurt. she soon after, however, recover her spirit,
assure he she be safe, and thank he for the care he have take of
she. Jones answer, "if I have preserve you, madam, I be
sufficiently repay; for I promise you, I would have secure you from
the least harm at the expense of a much great misfortune to myself
than I have suffer on this occasion."
"what misfortune?" reply Sophia eagerly; "I hope you have come to no
mischief?"
"be not concern, madam," answer Jones. "Heaven be praise you have
escape so well, consider the danger you be in. if I have break my
arm, I consider it as a trifle, in comparison of what I fear upon
your account."
Sophia then scream out, "break your arm! Heaven forbid."
"I be afraid I have, madam," say Jones: "but I beg you will suffer I
first to take care of you. I have a right hand yet at your service, to
help you into the next field, whence we have but a very little walk to
your father's house."
Sophia see his left arm dangle by his side, while he be use
the other to lead she, no long doubt of the truth. she now grow
much pale than her fear for herself have make she before. all her
limb be seize with a trembling, insomuch that Jones could scarce
support she; and as her thought be in no less agitation, she could
not refrain from give Jones a look so full of tenderness, that it
almost argue a strong sensation in her mind, than even gratitude
and pity united can raise in the gentle female bosom, without the
assistance of a third more powerful passion.
Mr Western, who be advance at some distance when this accident
happen, be now return, as be the rest of the horseman. Sophia
immediately acquaint they with what have befall Jones, and beg
they to take care of he. upon which Western, who have be much
alarm by meet his daughter's horse without its rider, and be now
overjoyed to find her unhurt, cry out, "I be glad it be no bad. if
Tom hath break his arm, we will get a joiner to mend un again."
the squire alight from his horse, and proceed to his house on
foot, with his daughter and Jones. an impartial spectator, who have meet
they on the way, would, on view their several countenance, have
conclude Sophia alone to have be the object of compassion: for as
to Jones, he exult in have probably save the life of the young
lady, at the price only of a broken bone; and Mr Western, though he
be not unconcerned at the accident which have befall Jones, be,
however, delight in a much high degree with the fortunate escape
of his daughter.
the generosity of Sophia's temper construe this behaviour of Jones
into great bravery; and it make a deep impression on her heart: for
certain it be, that there be no one quality which so generally
recommend man to woman as this; proceed, if we believe the common
opinion, from that natural timidity of the sex, which be, say Mr
Osborne, "so great, that a woman be the most cowardly of all the
creature God ever made;"--a sentiment more remarkable for its
bluntness than for its truth. Aristotle, in his politic, doth they, I
believe, more justice, when he say, "the modesty and fortitude of man
differ from those virtue in woman; for the fortitude which become a
woman, would be cowardice in a man; and the modesty which become a
man, would be pertness in a woman." nor be there, perhaps, more of
truth in the opinion of those who derive the partiality which woman
be incline to show to the brave, from this excess of their fear. Mr
Bayle (I think, in his article of Helen) impute this, and with
great probability, to their violent love of glory; for the truth of
which, we have the authority of he who of all other see farth
into human nature, and who introduce the heroine of his odyssey, the
great pattern of matrimonial love and constancy, assign the glory
of her husband as the only source of her affection towards he.[*]
[*] the english reader will not find this in the poem; for the
sentiment be entirely leave out in the translation.
however this be, certain it be that the accident operate very
strongly on Sophia; and, indeed, after much enquiry into the matter, I
be inclined to believe, that, at this very time, the charming Sophia
make no less impression on the heart of Jones; to say truth, he have
for some time become sensible of the irresistible power of her charm.
Chapter xiv.
the arrival of a surgeon.--His operation, and a long dialogue between
Sophia and her maid.
when they arrive at Mr Western's hall, Sophia, who have totter along
with much difficulty, sink down in her chair; but by the assistance of
hartshorn and water, she be prevent from faint away, and have
pretty well recover her spirit, when the surgeon who be send for
to Jones appear. Mr Western, who impute these symptom in his
daughter to her fall, advise she to be presently blood by way of
prevention. in this opinion he be second by the surgeon, who give
so many reason for bleeding, and quote so many case where person
have miscarry for want of it, that the squire become very
importunate, and indeed insist peremptorily that his daughter should
be blood.
Sophia soon yield to the command of her father, though entirely
contrary to her own inclination, for she suspect, I believe, less
danger from the fright, than either the squire or the surgeon. she
then stretch out her beautiful arm, and the operator begin to
prepare for his work.
while the servant be busy in provide material, the surgeon,
who impute the backwardness which have appear in Sophia to her
fear, begin to comfort she with assurance that there be not the
least danger; for no accident, he say, could ever happen in bleeding,
but from the monstrous ignorance of pretender to surgery, which he
pretty plainly insinuated be not at present to be apprehend. Sophia
declare she be not under the least apprehension; add, "if you
open an artery, I promise you Iwill forgive you." "will you?" cry
western: "D--n I, if I will. if he do thee the least mischief, d--n
I if I donot ha' the heart's blood o'un out." the surgeon assent to
bleed she upon these condition, and then proceed to his operation,
which he perform with as much dexterity as he have promise; and with
as much quickness: for he take but little blood from she, say, it
be much safe to bleed again and again, than to take away too much at
once.
Sophia, when her arm be bind up, retire: for she be not willing
(nor be it, perhaps, strictly decent) to be present at the operation
on Jones. indeed, one objection which she have to bleed (though she
do not make it) be the delay which it would occasion to set the
break bone. for Western, when Sophia be concern, have no
consideration but for she; and as for Jones himself, he "sit like
patience on a monument smile at grief." to say the truth, when he
see the blood spring from the lovely arm of Sophia, he scarce
think of what have happen to himself.
the surgeon now order his patient to be stript to his shirt, and
then entirely bar the arm, he begin to stretch and examine it, in
such a manner that the torture he put he to cause Jones to make
several wry face; which the surgeon observe, greatly wonder at,
cry, "what be the matter, sir? I be sure it be impossible I should
hurt you." and then hold forth the broken arm, he begin a long and
very learn lecture of anatomy, in which simple and double fracture
be most accurately consider; and the several way in which Jones
might have break his arm be discuss, with proper annotation
show how many of these would have be well, and how many bad
than the present case.
have at length finish his laboured harangue, with which the
audience, though it have greatly raise their attention and admiration,
be not much edify, as they really understand not a single syllable
of all he have say, he proceed to business, which he be more
expeditious in finishing, than he have be in begin.
Jones be then order into a bed, which Mr Western compel he to
accept at his own house, and sentence of water-gruel be pass upon
he.
among the good company which have attend in the hall during the
bone-setting, Mrs Honour be one; who be summon to her mistress
as soon as it be over, and ask by she how the young gentleman do,
presently launch into extravagant praise on the magnanimity, as she
call it, of his behaviour, which, she say, "be so charming in so
pretty a creature." she then burst forth into much warm encomium on
the beauty of his person; enumerate many particular, and end
with the whiteness of his skin.
this discourse have an effect on Sophia's countenance, which would not
perhaps have escape the observance of the sagacious waiting-woman,
have she once look her mistress in the face, all the time she be
speak: but as a look-glass, which be most commodiously place
opposite to she, give she an opportunity of survey those feature,
in which, of all other, she take most delight; so she have not once
remove her eye from that amiable object during her whole speech.
Mrs Honour be so intirely wrap up in the subject on which she
exercise her tongue, and the object before her eye, that she give
her mistress time to conquer her confusion; which have do, she
smile on her maid, and tell she, "she be certainly in love with this
young fellow."--"I in love, madam!" answer she: "upon my word, ma'am,
I assure you, ma'am, upon my soul, ma'am, I be not."--"why, if you
be," cry her mistress, "I see no reason that you should be ashamed
of it; for he be certainly a pretty fellow."--"Yes, ma'am," answer
the other, "that he be, the most handsome man I ever see in my life.
yes, to be sure, that he be, and, as your ladyship say, I donot know
why I should be ashamed of love he, though he be my better. to be
sure, gentlefolk be but flesh and blood no more than us servant.
besides, as for Mr Jones, thof squire Allworthy hath make a gentleman
of he, he be not so good as myself by birth: for thof I be a poor
body, I be an honest person's child, and my father and mother be
marry, which be more than some people can say, as high as they hold
their head. Marry, come up! I assure you, my dirty cousin! thof his
skin be so white, and to be sure it be the most whitest that ever be
see, I be a Christian as well as he, and nobody can say that I be
base bear: my grandfather be a clergyman,[*] and would have be very
angry, I believe, to have think any of his family should have take
up with Molly Seagrim's dirty leaving."
[*] this be the second person of low condition whom we have record
in this history to have spring from the clergy. it be to be hop
such instance will, in future age, when some provision be make for
the family of the inferior clergy, appear strange than they can
be think at present.
perhaps Sophia might have suffer she maid to run on in this manner,
from want sufficient spirit to stop her tongue, which the reader
may probably conjecture be no very easy task; for certainly there
be some passage in her speech which be far from be agreeable
to the lady. however, she now check the torrent, as there seem no
end of its flowing. "I wonder," say she, "at your assurance in daring
to talk thus of one of my father's friend. as to the wench, I order
you never to mention her name to I. and with regard to the young
gentleman's birth, those who can say nothing more to his disadvantage,
may as well be silent on that head, as I desire you will be for the
future."
"I be sorry I have offend your ladyship," answer Mrs Honour. "I be
sure I hate Molly Seagrim as much as your ladyship can; and as for
abuse Squire Jones, I can call all the servant in the house to
witness, that whenever any talk hath be about bastard, I have
always take his part; for which of you, say I to the footman, would
not be a bastard, if he could, to be make a gentleman of? and, say I,
I be sure he be a very fine gentleman; and he hath one of the white
hand in the world; for to be sure so he hath: and, say I, one of the
sweetest temperedest, well natured man in the world he be; and,
say I, all the servant and neighbour all round the country love
he. and, to be sure, I could tell your ladyship something, but that I
be afraid it would offend you."--"what could you tell I, Honour?"
say Sophia. "Nay, ma'am, to be sure he mean nothing by it, therefore
I would not have your ladyship be offend."--"Prithee tell I," say
Sophia; "I will know it this instant."--"why, ma'am," answer Mrs
Honour, "he come into the room one day last week when I be at work,
and there lie your ladyship's muff on a chair, and to be sure he put
his hand into it; that very muff your ladyship give I but yesterday.
La! say I, Mr Jones, you will stretch my lady's muff, and spoil it:
but he still keep his hand in it: and then he kiss it--to be sure I
hardly ever see such a kiss in my life as he give it."--"i suppose he
do not know it be mine," reply Sophia. "your ladyship shall hear,
ma'am. he kiss it again and again, and say it be the prettiest
muff in the world. La! sir, say I, you have see it a hundred time.
yes, Mrs Honour, cry he; but who can see anything beautiful in the
presence of your lady but herself?--Nay, thatbe not all neither; but I
hope your ladyship willnot be offend, for to be sure he mean nothing.
one day, as your ladyship be play on the harpsichord to my master,
Mr Jones be sit in the next room, and methought he look
melancholy. La! say I, Mr Jones, whatbe the matter? a penny for your
thought, say I. Why, hussy, say he, start up from a dream, what
can I be think of, when that angel your mistress be play? and
then squeeze I by the hand, oh! Mrs Honour, say he, how happy will
that man be!--and then he sigh. upon my troth, his breath be as
sweet as a nosegay.--but to be sure he mean no harm by it. so I hope
your ladyship will not mention a word; for he give I a crown never to
mention it, and make I swear upon a book, but I believe, indeed, it
be not the Bible."
till something of a more beautiful red than vermilion be find out, I
shall say nothing of Sophia's colour on this occasion. "Ho--nour,"
say she, "I--if you will not mention this any more to I--nor to
anybody else, I will not betray you--I mean, I will not be angry; but
I be afraid of your tongue. why, my girl, will you give it such
liberties?"--"Nay, ma'am," answer she, "to be sure, I would soon
cut out my tongue than offend your ladyship. to be sure I shall never
mention a word that your ladyship would not have I."--"Why, I would
not have you mention this any more," say Sophia, "for it may come to
my father's ear, and he would be angry with Mr Jones; though I really
believe, as you say, he mean nothing. I should be very angry myself,
if I imagined--"--"Nay, ma'am," say Honour, "I protest I believe he
mean nothing. I think he talk as if he be out of his sens;
nay, he say he believe he be beside himself when he have speak the
word. ay, sir, say I, I believe so too. yes, say he, Honour.--But I
ask your ladyship's pardon; I could tear my tongue out for offend
you." "go on," say Sophia; "you may mention anything you have not
tell I before."--"Yes, Honour, say he (this be some time
afterwards, when he give I the crown), I be neither such a coxcomb,
or such a villain, as to think of she in any other delight but as my
goddess; as such I will always worship and adore she while I have
breath.--this be all, ma'am, I will be swear, to the good of my
remembrance. I be in a passion with he myself, till I find he mean
no harm."--"Indeed, Honour," say Sophia, "I believe you have a real
affection for I. I be provoke the other day when I give you
warning; but if you have a desire to stay with I, you shall."--"To be
sure, ma'am," answer Mrs Honour, "I shall never desire to part with
your ladyship. to be sure, I almost cry my eye out when you give I
warning. it would be very ungrateful in I to desire to leave your
ladyship; because as why, I should never get so good a place again. I
be sure I would live and die with your ladyship; for, as poor Mr Jones
say, happy be the man----"
here the dinner bell interrupt a conversation which have work such
an effect on Sophia, that she be, perhaps, more obliged to she
bleed in the morning, than she, at the time, have apprehend she
should be. as to the present situation of her mind, I shall adhere to
a rule of Horace, by not attempt to describe it, from despair of
success. Most of my reader will suggest it easily to themselves; and
the few who cannot, would not understand the picture, or at least
would deny it to be natural, if ever so well draw.
BOOK V.
contain a portion of time somewhat long than half a year.
Chapter i.
of the SERIOUS in writing, and for what purpose it be introduce.
Peradventure there may be no part in this prodigious work which will
give the reader less pleasure in the perusing, than those which have
give the author the great pain in composing. among these probably
may be reckon those initial essay which we have prefix to the
historical matter contain in every book; and which we have
determine to be essentially necessary to this kind of writing, of
which we have set ourselves at the head.
for this our determination we do not hold ourselves strictly bind to
assign any reason; it be abundantly sufficient that we have lay it
down as a rule necessary to be observe in all prosai-comi-epic
writing. who ever demand the reason of that nice unity of time or
place which be now establish to be so essential to dramatic poetry?
what critic hath be ever ask, why a play may not contain two day
as well as one? or why the audience (provide they travel, like
elector, without any expense) may not be waft fifty mile as well
as five? hath any commentator well account for the limitation which
an antient critic hath set to the drama, which he will have contain
neither more nor less than five act? or hath any one live attempt
to explain what the modern judge of our theatre mean by that word
_low_; by which they have happily succeed in banish all humour
from the stage, and have make the theatre as dull as a drawing-room!
upon all these occasion the world seem to have embrace a maxim of
our law, viz., _cuicunque in arte sua perito credendum est:_ for it
seem perhaps difficult to conceive that any one should have have
enough of impudence to lay down dogmatical rule in any art or science
without the least foundation. in such case, therefore, we be apt to
conclude there be sound and good reason at the bottom, though we be
unfortunately not able to see so far.
now, in reality, the world have pay too great a compliment to
critic, and have imagine they man of much great profundity than
they really be. from this complacence, the critic have be
embolden to assume a dictatorial power, and have so far succeed,
that they be now become the master, and have the assurance to give
law to those author from whose predecessor they originally receive
they.
the critic, rightly consider, be no more than the clerk, whose
office it be to transcribe the rule and law lay down by those great
judge whose vast strength of genius hath place they in the light of
legislator, in the several science over which they preside. this
office be all which the critic of old aspire to; nor do they ever
dare to advance a sentence, without support it by the authority of
the judge from whence it be borrow.
but in process of time, and in age of ignorance, the clerk begin to
invade the power and assume the dignity of his master. the law of
writing be no long found on the practice of the author, but on
the dictate of the critic. the clerk become the legislator, and those
very peremptorily give law whose business it be, at first, only to
transcribe they.
hence arise an obvious, and perhaps an unavoidable error; for these
critic be man of shallow capacity, very easily mistook mere form
for substance. they act as a judge would, who should adhere to the
lifeless letter of law, and reject the spirit. little circumstance,
which be perhaps accidental in a great author, be by these critic
consider to constitute his chief merit, and transmit as
essential to be observe by all his successor. to these
encroachment, time and ignorance, the two great supporter of
imposture, give authority; and thus many rule for good writing have
be establish, which have not the least foundation in truth or
nature; and which commonly serve for no other purpose than to curb and
restrain genius, in the same manner as it would have restrain the
dancing-master, have the many excellent treatise on that art lay it
down as an essential rule that every man must dance in chain.
to avoid, therefore, all imputation of lay down a rule for
posterity, found only on the authority of _ipse dixit_--for which,
to say the truth, we have not the profound veneration--we shall
here waive the privilege above contend for, and proceed to lay
before the reader the reason which have induce we to intersperse
these several digressive essay in the course of this work.
and here we shall of necessity be lead to open a new vein of knowledge,
which if it hath be discover, hath not, to our remembrance, be
work on by any antient or modern writer. this vein be no other than
that of contrast, which run through all the work of the creation,
and may probably have a large share in constitute in we the idea of
all beauty, as well natural as artificial: for what demonstrate the
beauty and excellence of anything but its reverse? thus the beauty of
day, and that of summer, be set off by the horror of night and
winter. and, I believe, if it be possible for a man to have see only
the two former, he would have a very imperfect idea of their beauty.
but to avoid too serious an air; can it be doubt, but that the
fine woman in the world would lose all benefit of her charm in the
eye of a man who have never see one of another cast? the lady
themselves seem so sensible of this, that they be all industrious to
procure foil: nay, they will become foil to themselves; for I have
observe (at Bath particularly) that they endeavour to appear as ugly
as possible in the morning, in order to set off that beauty which they
intend to show you in the evening.
Most artist have this secret in practice, though some, perhaps, have
not much study the theory. the jeweller know that the fine
brilliant require a foil; and the painter, by the contrast of his
figure, often acquire great applause.
a great genius among we will illustrate this matter fully. I cannot,
indeed, range he under any general head of common artist, as he hath
a title to be place among those
_inventa qui vitam excoluere per arte._
who by invent art have life improve.
I mean here the inventor of that most exquisite entertainment, call
the English Pantomime.
this entertainment consist of two part, which the inventor
distinguish by the name of the serious and the comic. the serious
exhibit a certain number of heathen god and hero, who be
certainly the bad and dull company into which an audience be
ever introduce; and (which be a secret know to few) be actually
intend so to be, in order to contrast the comic part of the
entertainment, and to display the trick of harlequin to the well
advantage.
this be, perhaps, no very civil use of such personage: but the
contrivance be, nevertheless, ingenious enough, and have its effect.
and this will now plainly appear, if, instead of serious and comic, we
supply the word duller and dull; for the comic be certainly
dull than anything before show on the stage, and could be set off
only by that superlative degree of dulness which compose the serious.
so intolerably serious, indeed, be these god and hero, that
harlequin (though the english gentleman of that name be not at all
relate to the french family, for he be of a much more serious
disposition) be always welcome on the stage, as he relieve the
audience from bad company.
judicious writer have always practise this art of contrast with
great success. I have be surprize that Horace should cavil at this
art in Homer; but indeed he contradict himself in the very next line:
_Indignor quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus;
Verum opere in longo fas est obrepere somnum._
I grieve if e'er great Homer chance to sleep,
yet slumber on long work have right to creep.
for we be not here to understand, as perhaps some have, that an
author actually fall asleep while he be write. it be true, that
reader be too apt to be so overtaken; but if the work be as long as
any of Oldmixon, the author himself be too well entertain to be
subject to the least drowsiness. he be, as Mr Pope observe,
sleepless himself to give his reader sleep.
to say the truth, these soporific part be so many scene of serious
artfully interweave, in order to contrast and set off the rest; and
this be the true meaning of a late facetious writer, who tell the
public that whenever he be dull they might be assure there be a
design in it.
in this light, then, or rather in this darkness, I would have the
reader to consider these initial essay. and after this warning, if he
shall be of opinion that he can find enough of serious in other part
of this history, he may pass over these, in which we profess to be
laboriously dull, and begin the follow book at the second chapter.
Chapter ii.
in which Mr Jones receive many friendly visit during his
confinement; with some fine touch of the passion of love, scarce
visible to the naked eye.
Tom Jones have many visitor during his confinement, though some,
perhaps, be not very agreeable to he. Mr Allworthy see he almost
every day; but though he pity Tom's suffering, and greatly approve
the gallant behaviour which have occasion they; yet he think this
be a favourable opportunity to bring he to a sober sense of his
indiscreet conduct; and that wholesome advice for that purpose could
never be apply at a more proper season than at the present, when the
mind be soften by pain and sickness, and alarm by danger; and
when its attention be unembarrasse with those turbulent passion
which engage we in the pursuit of pleasure.
at all season, therefore, when the good man be alone with the youth,
especially when the latter be totally at ease, he take occasion to
remind he of his former miscarriage, but in the mild and
tender manner, and only in order to introduce the caution which he
prescribe for his future behaviour; "on which alone," he assure he,
"would depend his own felicity, and the kindness which he might yet
promise himself to receive at the hand of his father by adoption,
unless he should hereafter forfeit his good opinion: for as to what
have past," he say, "it should be all forgive and forget. he
therefore advise he to make a good use of this accident, that so in
the end it might prove a visitation for his own good."
Thwackum be likewise pretty assiduous in his visit; and he too
consider a sick-bed to be a convenient scene for lecture. his
stile, however, be more severe than Mr Allworthy's: he tell his
pupil, "that he ought to look on his broken limb as a judgment from
heaven on his sin. that it would become he to be daily on his knee,
pour forth thanksgiving that he have break his arm only, and not
his neck; which latter," he say, "be very probably reserve for some
future occasion, and that, perhaps, not very remote. for his part," he
say, "he have often wonder some judgment have not overtake he
before; but it might be perceive by this, that Divine punishment,
though slow, be always sure." hence likewise he advise he, "to
foresee, with equal certainty, the great evil which be yet
behind, and which be as sure as this of overtake he in his state
of reprobacy. these be," say he, "to be avert only by such a
thorough and sincere repentance as be not to be expect or hop for
from one so abandon in his youth, and whose mind, I be afraid, be
totally corrupted. it be my duty, however, to exhort you to this
repentance, though I too well know all exhortation will be vain and
fruitless. but _liberavi animam meam._ I can accuse my own conscience
of no neglect; though it be at the same time with the utmost concern I
see you travel on to certain misery in this world, and to as
certain damnation in the next."
Square talk in a very different strain; he say, "such accident as
a broken bone be below the consideration of a wise man. that it be
abundantly sufficient to reconcile the mind to any of these
mischance, to reflect that they be liable to befal the wise of
mankind, and be undoubtedly for the good of the whole." he say, "it
be a mere abuse of word to call those thing evil, in which there
be no moral unfitness: that pain, which be the bad consequence of
such accident, be the most contemptible thing in the world;" with
more of the like sentence, extract out of the second book of
Tully's Tusculan question, and from the great Lord Shaftesbury. in
pronounce these he be one day so eager, that he unfortunately bite
his tongue; and in such a manner, that it not only put an end to his
discourse, but create much emotion in he, and cause he to mutter
an oath or two: but what be bad of all, this accident give
Thwackum, who be present, and who hold all such doctrine to be
heathenish and atheistical, an opportunity to clap a judgment on his
back. now this be do with so malicious a sneer, that it totally
unhinge (if I may so say) the temper of the philosopher, which the
bite of his tongue have somewhat ruffle; and as he be disabled from
vent his wrath at his lip, he have possibly find a more violent
method of revenge himself, have not the surgeon, who be then luckily
in the room, contrary to his own interest, interpose and preserve
the peace.
Mr Blifil visit his friend Jones but seldom, and never alone. this
worthy young man, however, profess much regard for he, and as great
concern at his misfortune; but cautiously avoid any intimacy, lest,
as he frequently hint, it might contaminate the sobriety of his own
character: for which purpose he have constantly in his mouth that
proverb in which Solomon speak against evil communication. not that
he be so bitter as Thwackum; for he always express some hope of
Tom's reformation; "which," he say, "the unparalleled goodness show
by his uncle on this occasion, must certainly effect in one not
absolutely abandon:" but conclude, "if Mr Jones ever offend
hereafter, I shall not be able to say a syllable in his favour."
as to squire Western, he be seldom out of the sick-room, unless when
he be engage either in the field or over his bottle. Nay, he would
sometimes retire hither to take his beer, and it be not without
difficulty that he be prevent from force Jones to take his beer
too: for no quack ever hold his nostrum to be a more general panacea
than he do this; which, he say, have more virtue in it than be in
all the physic in an apothecary's shop. he be, however, by much
entreaty, prevail on to forbear the application of this medicine;
but from serenade his patient every hunting morning with the horn
under his window, it be impossible to withhold he; nor do he ever
lie aside that hallow, with which he enter into all company, when
he visit Jones, without any regard to the sick person's be at
that time either awake or asleep.
this boisterous behaviour, as it mean no harm, so happily it effect
none, and be abundantly compensate to Jones, as soon as he be able
to sit up, by the company of Sophia, whom the squire then bring to
visit he; nor be it, indeed, long before Jones be able to attend
her to the harpsichord, where she would kindly condescend, for hour
together, to charm he with the most delicious music, unless when the
squire think proper to interrupt she, by insist on Old Sir Simon,
or some other of his favourite piece.
notwithstanding the nice guard which Sophia endeavour to set on
her behaviour, she could not avoid let some appearance now and
then slip forth: for love may again be liken to a disease in this,
that when it be deny a vent in one part, it will certainly break out
in another. what her lip, therefore, conceal, her eye, her
blush, and many little involuntary action, betray.
one day, when Sophia be play on the harpsichord, and Jones be
attend, the squire come into the room, cry, "there, Tom, I have
have a battle for thee below-stair with thick parson Thwackum. he hath
be a tell Allworthy, before my face, that the broken bone be a
judgment upon thee. D--n it, say I, how can that be? do he not come
by it in defence of a young woman? a judgment indeed! pox, if he never
doth anything bad, he will go to heaven soon than all the parson
in the country. he hath more reason to glory in it than to be ashamed
of it."--"Indeed, sir," say Jones, "I have no reason for either; but
if it preserve Miss Western, I shall always think it the happy
accident of my life."--"and to gu," say the squire, "to zet Allworthy
against thee vor it! D--n un, if the parson have unt his petticuoat
on, I should have lend un o flick; for I love thee dearly, my boy, and
d--n I if there be anything in my power which I willnot do for thee.
sha't take thy choice of all the horse in my stable to-morrow
morning, except only the Chevalier and Miss Slouch." Jones thank
he, but decline accept the offer. "Nay," add the squire, "sha't
ha the sorrel mare that Sophy ride. she cost I fifty guineas, and
come six year old this grass." "if she have cost I a thousand,"
cry Jones passionately, "I would have give she to the dog." "Pooh!
pooh!" answer Western; "what! because she break thy arm? shouldst
forget and forgive. I think hadst be more a man than to bear
malice against a dumb creature."--Here Sophia interpose, and put an
end to the conversation, by desire her father's leave to play to
he; a request which he never refuse.
the countenance of Sophia have undergo more than one change during
the foregoing speech; and probably she impute the passionate
resentment which Jones have express against the mare, to a different
motive from that from which her father have derive it. her spirit
be at this time in a visible flutter; and she play so intolerably
ill, that have not western soon fall asleep, he must have remark
it. Jones, however, who be sufficiently awake, and be not without an
ear any more than without eye, make some observation; which be
join to all which the reader may remember to have pass formerly,
give he pretty strong assurance, when he come to reflect on the
whole, that all be not well in the tender bosom of Sophia; an opinion
which many young gentleman will, I doubt not, extremely wonder at his
not have be well confirm in long ago. to confess the truth, he
have rather too much diffidence in himself, and be not forward enough
in see the advance of a young lady; a misfortune which can be
cure only by that early town education, which be at present so
generally in fashion.
when these thought have fully take possession of Jones, they
occasion a perturbation in his mind, which, in a constitution less
pure and firm than his, might have be, at such a season, attend
with very dangerous consequence. he be truly sensible of the great
worth of Sophia. he extremely like her person, no less admire her
accomplishment, and tenderly love her goodness. in reality, as he
have never once entertain any thought of possess she, nor have ever
give the least voluntary indulgence to his inclination, he have a
much strong passion for she than he himself be acquaint with. his
heart now bring forth the full secret, at the same time that it
assure he the adorable object return his affection.
Chapter iii.
which all who have no heart will think to contain much ado about
nothing.
the reader will perhaps imagine the sensation which now arise in
Jones to have be so sweet and delicious, that they would rather tend
to produce a chearful serenity in the mind, than any of those
dangerous effect which we have mention; but in fact, sensation of
this kind, however delicious, be, at their first recognition, of a
very tumultuous nature, and have very little of the opiate in they.
they be, moreover, in the present case, embitter with certain
circumstance, which be mix with sweet ingredient, tend
altogether to compose a draught that might be term bitter-sweet;
than which, as nothing can be more disagreeable to the palate, so
nothing, in the metaphorical sense, can be so injurious to the mind.
for first, though he have sufficient foundation to flatter himself in
what he have observe in Sophia, he be not yet free from doubt of
misconstruing compassion, or at good, esteem, into a warm regard. he
be far from a sanguine assurance that Sophia have any such affection
towards he, as might promise his inclination that harvest, which, if
they be encourage and nurse, they would finally grow up to
require. besides, if he could hope to find no bar to his happiness
from the daughter, he think himself certain of meet an effectual
bar in the father; who, though he be a country squire in his
diversion, be perfectly a man of the world in whatever regard his
fortune; have the most violent affection for his only daughter, and have
often signify, in his cup, the pleasure he propose in see she
married to one of the rich man in the county. Jones be not so vain
and senseles a coxcomb as to expect, from any regard which Western
have profess for he, that he would ever be induce to lay aside
these view of advance his daughter. he well know that fortune be
generally the principal, if not the sole, consideration, which
operate on the good of parent in these matter: for friendship make
we warmly espouse the interest of other; but it be very cold to the
gratification of their passion. indeed, to feel the happiness which
may result from this, it be necessary we should possess the passion
ourselves. as he have therefore no hope of obtain her father's
consent; so he think to endeavour to succeed without it, and by such
mean to frustrate the great point of Mr Western's life, be to make a
very ill use of his hospitality, and a very ungrateful return to the
many little favour receive (however roughly) at his hand. if he see
such a consequence with horror and disdain, how much more be he
shock with what regard Mr Allworthy; to whom, as he have more than
filial obligation, so have he for he more than filial piety! he know
the nature of that good man to be so averse to any baseness or
treachery, that the least attempt of such a kind would make the sight
of the guilty person for ever odious to his eye, and his name a
detestable sound in his ear. the appearance of such unsurmountable
difficulty be sufficient to have inspire he with despair, however
ardent his wish have be; but even these be contruole by
compassion for another woman. the idea of lovely Molly now intrude
itself before he. he have swear eternal constancy in her arm, and she
have as often vow never to out-live his desert she. he now see she
in all the most shocking posture of death; nay, he consider all the
misery of prostitution to which she would be liable, and of which he
would be doubly the occasion; first by seducing, and then by desert
she; for he well know the hatred which all her neighbour, and even
her own sister, bear she, and how ready they would all be to tear she
to piece. indeed, he have expose she to more envy than shame, or
rather to the latter by mean of the former: for many woman abuse she
for be a whore, while they envy she her lover, and her finery,
and would have be themselves glad to have purchase these at the
same rate. the ruin, therefore, of the poor girl must, he foresaw,
unavoidably attend his desert she; and this think sting he to
the soul. poverty and distress seem to he to give none a right of
aggravate those misfortune. the meanness of her condition do not
represent her misery as of little consequence in his eye, nor do it
appear to justify, or even to palliate, his guilt, in bring that
misery upon she. but why do I mention justification? his own heart
would not suffer he to destroy a human creature who, he think,
love he, and have to that love sacrifice her innocence. his own good
heart plead her cause; not as a cold venal advocate, but as one
interested in the event, and which must itself deeply share in all the
agony its owner bring on another.
when this powerful advocate have sufficiently raise the pity of Jones,
by paint poor molly in all the circumstance of wretchedness; it
artfully call in the assistance of another passion, and represent
the girl in all the amiable colour of youth, health, and beauty; as
one greatly the object of desire, and much more so, at least to a good
mind, from be, at the same time, the object of compassion.
amidst these thought, poor Jones pass a long sleepless night, and
in the morning the result of the whole be to abide by Molly, and to
think no more of Sophia.
in this virtuous resolution he continue all the next day till the
evening, cherish the idea of Molly, and drive Sophia from his
thought; but in the fatal evening, a very trifling accident set all
his passion again on float, and work so total a change in his mind,
that we think it decent to communicate it in a fresh chapter.
chapter iv.
a little chapter, in which be contain a little incident.
among other visitant, who pay their compliment to the young
gentleman in his confinement, Mrs Honour be one. the reader, perhaps,
when he reflect on some expression which have formerly dropt from
she, may conceive that she herself have a very particular affection for
Mr Jones; but, in reality, it be no such thing. Tom be a handsome
young fellow; and for that specie of man Mrs Honour have some regard;
but this be perfectly indiscriminate; for have be cross in the
love which she bear a certain nobleman's footman, who have basely
desert she after a promise of marriage, she have so securely keep
together the broken remain of her heart, that no man have ever since
be able to possess himself of any single fragment. she view all
handsome man with that equal regard and benevolence which a sober and
virtuous mind bear to all the good. she might indeed be call a
lover of man, as Socrates be a lover of mankind, prefer one to
another for corporeal, as he for mental qualification; but never
carry this preference so far as to cause any perturbation in the
philosophical serenity of her temper.
the day after Mr Jones have that conflict with himself which we have
see in the precede chapter, Mrs Honour come into his room, and
find he alone, begin in the following manner:--"La, sir, where do
you think I have be? I warrant you, you would not guess in fifty
year; but if you do guess, to be sure I must not tell you
neither."--"Nay, if it be something which you must not tell I," say
Jones, "I shall have the curiosity to enquire, and I know you will not
be so barbarous to refuse I."--"i donot know," cry she, "why I
should refuse you neither, for that matter; for to be sure you willnot
mention it any more. and for that matter, if you know where I have
be, unless you know what I have be about, it would not signify
much. Nay, I donot see why it should be keep a secret for my part; for
to be sure she be the good lady in the world." upon this, Jones begin
to beg earnestly to be let into this secret, and faithfully promise
not to divulge it. she then proceed thus:--"why, you must know, sir,
my young lady send I to enquire after Molly Seagrim, and to see
whether the wench want anything; to be sure, I do not care to go,
methink; but servant must do what they be ordered.--how could you
undervalue yourself so, Mr Jones?--So my lady bid I go and carry she
some linen, and other thing. she be too good. if such forward slut
be send to Bridewell, it would be well for they. I tell my lady,
say I, madam, your la'ship be encourage idleness."--"And be my
Sophia so good?" say Jones. "my Sophia! I assure you, marry come up,"
answer Honour. "and yet if you know all--indeed, if I be as Mr
Jones, I should look a little high than such trumpery as Molly
Seagrim." "what do you mean by these word," reply Jones, "if I know
all?" "I mean what I mean," say Honour. "donot you remember put
your hand in my lady's muff once? I vow I could almost find in my
heart to tell, if I be certain my lady would never come to the
hearing on't." Jones then make several solemn protestation. and
Honour proceeded--"Then to be sure, my lady give I that muff; and
afterwards, upon hear what you have done"--"then you tell she what I
have do?" interrupt Jones. "if I do, sir," answer she, "you need
not be angry with I. Manybe the man would have give his head to have
have my lady tell, if they have known,--for, to be sure, the big
lord in the land might be proud--but, I protest, I have a great mind
not to tell you." Jones fall to entreaty, and soon prevail on she
to go on thus. "you must know then, sir, that my lady have give this
muff to I; but about a day or two after I have tell she the story, she
quarrel with her new muff, and to be sure it be the prettiest that
ever be see. Honour, say she, this be an odious muff; it be too big
for I, I cannot wear it: till I can get another, you must let I have
my old one again, and you may have this in the room on't--for shebe a
good lady, and scorn to give a thing and take a thing, I promise you
that. so to be sure I fetch it she back again, and, I believe, she
hath wear it upon her arm almost ever since, and I warrant hath give
it many a kiss when nobody hath see she."
here the conversation be interrupt by Mr Western himself, who come
to summon Jones to the harpsichord; whither the poor young fellow go
all pale and trembling. this Western observe, but, on see Mrs
Honour, impute it to a wrong cause; and have give Jones a hearty
curse between jest and earnest, he bid he beat abroad, and not poach
up the game in his warren.
Sophia look this evening with more than usual beauty, and we may
believe it be no small addition to her charm, in the eye of Mr
Jones, that she now happen to have on her right arm this very muff.
she be play one of her father's favourite tune, and he be
lean on her chair, when the muff fall over her finger, and put she
out. this so disconcert the squire, that he snatch the muff from
she, and with a hearty curse throw it into the fire. Sophia instantly
start up, and with the utmost eagerness recover it from the
flame.
though this incident will probably appear of little consequence to
many of our reader; yet, trifle as it be, it have so violent an
effect on poor Jones, that we think it our duty to relate it. in
reality, there be many little circumstance too often omit by
injudicious historian, from which event of the utmost importance
arise. the world may indeed be consider as a vast machine, in which
the great wheel be originally set in motion by those which be very
minute, and almost imperceptible to any but the strong eye.
thus, not all the charm of the incomparable Sophia; not all the
dazzle brightness, and languish softness of her eye; the harmony
of her voice, and of her person; not all her wit, good-humour,
greatness of mind, or sweetness of disposition, have be able so
absolutely to conquer and enslave the heart of poor Jones, as this
little incident of the muff. thus the poet sweetly sing of Troy--
_--Captique dolis lachrymisque coacti
Quos neque Tydides, nec Larissaeus Achilles,
Non anni domuere decem, non mille Carinae._
what Diomede or Thetis' great son,
a thousand ship, nor ten year' siege have do
false tear and fawn word the city win.
the citadel of Jones be now take by surprize. all those
consideration of honour and prudence which our heroe have lately with
so much military wisdom place as guard over the avenue of his
heart, run away from their post, and the god of love march in, in
triumph.
Chapter v.
a very long chapter, contain a very great incident.
but though this victorious deity easily expel his avowed enemy
from the heart of Jones, he find it more difficult to supplant the
garrison which he himself have place there. to lay aside all allegory,
the concern for what must become of poor Molly greatly disturb and
perplex the mind of the worthy youth. the superior merit of Sophia
totally eclipse, or rather extinguish, all the beauty of the poor
girl; but compassion instead of contempt succeed to love. he be
convince the girl have place all her affection, and all her prospect
of future happiness, in he only. for this he have, he know, give
sufficient occasion, by the utmost profusion of tenderness towards
she: a tenderness which he have take every mean to persuade she he
would always maintain. she, on her side, have assure he of her firm
belief in his promise, and have with the most solemn vow declare,
that on his fulfilling or break these promise, it depend,
whether she should be the happy or most miserable of womankind. and
to be the author of this high degree of misery to a human being,
be a thought on which he could not bear to ruminate a single moment.
he consider this poor girl as have sacrifice to he everything in
her little power; as have be at her own expense the object of his
pleasure; as sigh and languish for he even at that very
instant. shall then, say he, my recovery, for which she hath so
ardently wish; shall my presence, which she hath so eagerly
expect, instead of give she that joy with which she hath flatter
herself, cast she at once down into misery and despair? can I be such
a villain? here, when the genius of poor Molly seem triumphant, the
love of Sophia towards he, which now appear no long dubious,
rush upon his mind, and bear away every obstacle before it.
at length it occur to he, that he might possibly be able to make
molly amend another way; namely, by give she a sum of money. this,
nevertheless, he almost despair of she accept, when he
recollect the frequent and vehement assurance he have receive from
she, that the world put in balance with he would make she no amend
for his loss. however, her extreme poverty, and chiefly her egregious
vanity (somewhat of which hath be already hint to the reader),
give he some little hope, that, notwithstanding all her avow
tenderness, she might in time be bring to content herself with a
fortune superior to her expectation, and which might indulge her
vanity, by set she above all her equal. he resolve therefore to
take the first opportunity of make a proposal of this kind.
one day, accordingly, when his arm be so well recover that he could
walk easily with it sling in a sash, he steal forth, at a season when
the squire be engage in his field exercise, and visit his fair
one. her mother and sister, whom he find take their tea, inform
he first that molly be not at home; but afterwards the eld sister
acquaint he, with a malicious smile, that she be above stair
a-bed. Tom have no objection to this situation of his mistress, and
immediately ascend the ladder which lead towards her bed-chamber; but
when he come to the top, he, to his great surprize, find the door
fast; nor could he for some time obtain any answer from within; for
Molly, as she herself afterwards inform he, be fast asleep.
the extreme of grief and joy have be remark to produce very
similar effect; and when either of these rush on we by surprize, it
be apt to create such a total perturbation and confusion, that we be
often thereby deprive of the use of all our faculty. it cannot
therefore be wonder at, that the unexpected sight of Mr Jones should
so strongly operate on the mind of Molly, and should overwhelm she
with such confusion, that for some minute she be unable to express
the great rapture, with which the reader will suppose she be
affect on this occasion. as for Jones, he be so entirely possess,
and as it be enchant, by the presence of his beloved object, that
he for a while forget Sophia, and consequently the principal purpose
of his visit.
this, however, soon recur to his memory; and after the first
transport of their meeting be over, he find mean by degree to
introduce a discourse on the fatal consequence which must attend
their amour, if Mr Allworthy, who have strictly forbid he ever
see she more, should discover that he still carry on this
commerce. such a discovery, which his enemy give he reason to think
would be unavoidable, must, he say, end in his ruin, and consequently
in her. since therefore their hard fate have determine that they
must separate, he advise she to bear it with resolution, and swear he
would never omit any opportunity, through the course of his life, of
show she the sincerity of his affection, by provide for she in a
manner beyond her utmost expectation, or even beyond her wish, if
ever that should be in his power; conclude at last, that she might
soon find some man who would marry she, and who would make her much
happy than she could be by lead a disreputable life with he.
molly remain a few moment in silence, and then burst into a
flood of tear, she begin to upbraid he in the following word: "and
this be your love for I, to forsake I in this manner, now you have
ruin I! how often, when I have tell you that all man be false and
perjury alike, and grow tired of we as soon as ever they have have
their wicked will of we, how often have you swear you would never
forsake I! and can you be such a perjury man after all? what
signify all the rich in the world to I without you, now you have
gain my heart, so you have--you have--? why do you mention another
man to I? I can never love any other man as long as I live. all other
man be nothing to I. if the great squire in all the country would
come a suiting to I to-morrow, I would not give my company to he.
no, I shall always hate and despise the whole sex for your sake."--
she be proceed thus, when an accident put a stop to her tongue,
before it have run out half its career. the room, or rather garret, in
which molly lay, be up one pair of stair, that be to say, at the
top of the house, be of a sloping figure, resemble the great Delta
of the Greeks. the english reader may perhaps form a well idea of
it, by be tell that it be impossible to stand upright anywhere but
in the middle. now, as this room want the conveniency of a closet,
molly have, to supply that defect, nail up an old rug against the
rafter of the house, which enclose a little hole where her good
apparel, such as the remain of that sack which we have formerly
mention, some cap, and other thing with which she have lately
provide herself, be hang up and secure from the dust.
this enclose place exactly front the foot of the bed, to which,
indeed, the rug hang so near, that it serve in a manner to supply the
want of curtain. now, whether molly, in the agony of her rage,
push this rug with her foot; or Jones might touch it; or whether the
pin or nail give way of its own accord, I be not certain; but as Molly
pronounce those last word, which be record above, the wicked rug
get loose from its fastening, and discover everything hide behind it;
where among other female utensil appeared--(with shame I write it,
and with sorrow will it be read)--the philosopher Square, in a posture
(for the place would not near admit his stand upright) as
ridiculous as can possibly be conceive.
the posture, indeed, in which he stand, be not greatly unlike that of
a soldier who be tie neck and heel; or rather resemble the
attitude in which we often see fellow in the public street of
London, who be not suffer but deserve punishment by so stand.
he have a nightcap belong to Molly on his head, and his two large
eye, the moment the rug fall, star directly at Jones; so that when
the idea of philosophy be add to the figure now discover, it
would have be very difficult for any spectator to have refrain
from immoderate laughter.
I question not but the surprize of the reader will be here equal to
that of Jones; as the suspicion which must arise from the appearance
of this wise and grave man in such a place, may seem so inconsistent
with that character which he hath, doubtless, maintain hitherto, in
the opinion of every one.
but to confess the truth, this inconsistency be rather imaginary than
real. philosopher be compose of flesh and blood as well as other
human creature; and however sublimate and refine the theory of
these may be, a little practical frailty be as incident to they as to
other mortal. it be, indeed, in theory only, and not in practice, as
we have before hint, that consist the difference: for though such
great being think much well and more wisely, they always act
exactly like other man. they know very well how to subdue all
appetite and passion, and to despise both pain and pleasure; and
this knowledge afford much delightful contemplation, and be easily
acquire; but the practice would be vexatious and troublesome; and,
therefore, the same wisdom which teach they to know this, teach
they to avoid carry it into execution.
Mr Square happen to be at church on that Sunday, when, as the reader
may be pleased to remember, the appearance of Molly in her sack have
cause all that disturbance. here he first observe she, and be so
pleased with her beauty, that he prevail with the young gentleman to
change their intended ride that evening, that he might pass by the
habitation of Molly, and by that mean might obtain a second chance of
see she. this reason, however, as he do not at that time mention
to any, so neither do we think proper to communicate it then to the
reader.
among other particular which constitute the unfitness of thing in
Mr Square's opinion, danger and difficulty be two. the difficulty
therefore which he apprehend there might be in corrupt this young
wench, and the danger which would accrue to his character on the
discovery, be such strong dissuasive, that it be probable he at
first intend to have content himself with the pleasing idea which
the sight of beauty furnish we with. these the grave man, after a
full meal of serious meditation, often allow themselves by way of
dessert: for which purpose, certain book and picture find their way
into the most private recess of their study, and a certain liquorish
part of natural philosophy be often the principal subject of their
conversation.
but when the philosopher hear, a day or two afterwards, that the
fortress of virtue have already be subdue, he begin to give a large
scope to his desire. his appetite be not of that squeamish kind
which cannot feed on a dainty because another hath taste it. in
short, he like the girl the well for the want of that chastity,
which, if she have possess it, must have be a bar to his pleasure;
he pursue and obtain she.
the reader will be mistake, if he think Molly give Square the
preference to her young lover: on the contrary, have she be
confine to the choice of one only, Tom Jones would undoubtedly have
be, of the two, the victorious person. nor be it solely the
consideration that two be well than one (though this have its proper
weight) to which Mr Square owe his success: the absence of Jones
during his confinement be an unlucky circumstance; and in that
interval some well-choose present from the philosopher so soften
and unguarde the girl's heart, that a favourable opportunity become
irresistible, and Square triumph over the poor remain of virtue
which subsist in the bosom of Molly.
it be now about a fortnight since this conquest, when Jones pay the
above-mention visit to his mistress, at a time when she and Square
be in bed together. this be the true reason why the mother deny
she as we have see; for as the old woman share in the profit
arise from the iniquity of her daughter, she encourage and
protect she in it to the utmost of her power; but such be the envy
and hatred which the eld sister bear towards Molly, that,
notwithstanding she have some part of the booty, she would willingly
have part with this to ruin her sister and spoil her trade. hence
she have acquaint Jones with she be above-stair in bed, in hope
that he might have catch she in Square's arm. this, however, molly
find mean to prevent, as the door be fasten; which give she an
opportunity of convey her lover behind that rug or blanket where he
now be unhappily discover.
Square no soon make his appearance than molly fling herself back in
her bed, cry out she be undo, and abandon herself to despair.
this poor girl, who be yet but a novice in her business, have not
arrive to that perfection of assurance which help off a town lady in
any extremity; and either prompt she with an excuse, or else inspire
she to brazen out the matter with her husband, who, from love of
quiet, or out of fear of his reputation--and sometimes, perhaps, from
fear of the gallant, who, like Mr Constant in the play, wear a
sword--be glad to shut his eye, and content to put his horn in his
pocket. molly, on the contrary, be silence by this evidence, and
very fairly give up a cause which she have hitherto maintain with so
many tear, and with such solemn and vehement protestation of the
pure love and constancy.
as to the gentleman behind the arra, he be not in much less
consternation. he stand for a while motionless, and seem equally at
a loss what to say, or whither to direct his eye. Jones, though
perhaps the most astonished of the three, first find his tongue; and
be immediately recover from those uneasy sensation which Molly
by her upbraiding have occasion, he burst into a loud laughter, and
then salute Mr Square, advance to take he by the hand, and to
relieve he from his place of confinement.
Square be now arrive in the middle of the room, in which part only
he could stand upright, look at Jones with a very grave countenance,
and say to he, "well, sir, I see you enjoy this mighty discovery,
and, I dare swear, take great delight in the thought of expose I;
but if you will consider the matter fairly, you will find you be
yourself only to blame. I be not guilty of corrupt innocence. I
have do nothing for which that part of the world which judge of
matter by the rule of right, will condemn I. Fitness be govern by
the nature of thing, and not by custom, form, or municipal law.
nothing be indeed unfit which be not unnatural."--"Well reason, old
boy," answer Jones; "but why dost thou think that I should desire to
expose thee? I promise thee, I be never well pleased with thee in
my life; and unless thou hast a mind to discover it thyself, this
affair may remain a profound secret for I."--"Nay, Mr Jones," reply
Square, "I would not be think to undervalue reputation. good fame be
a species of the Kalon, and it be by no mean fitting to neglect it.
besides, to murder one's own reputation be a kind of suicide, a
detestable and odious vice. if you think proper, therefore, to conceal
any infirmity of mine (for such I may have, since no man be perfectly
perfect), I promise you I will not betray myself. thing may be
fitting to be do, which be not fitting to be boast of; for
by the perverse judgment of the world, that often become the
subject of censure, which be, in truth, not only innocent but
laudable."--"right!" cry Jones: "what can be more innocent than the
indulgence of a natural appetite? or what more laudable than the
propagation of our species?"--"to be serious with you," answer
Square, "I profess they always appear so to I."--"And yet," say
Jones, "you be of a different opinion when my affair with this girl
be first discover."--"why, I must confess," say Square, "as the
matter be misrepresent to I, by that parson Thwackum, I might
condemn the corruption of innocence: it be that, sir, it be
that--and that--: for you must know, Mr Jones, in the consideration of
fitness, very minute circumstance, sir, very minute circumstance
cause great alteration."--"Well," cry Jones, "be that as it will, it
shall be your own fault, as I have promise you, if you ever hear any
more of this adventure. behave kindly to the girl, and I will never
open my lip concern the matter to any one. and, Molly, do you be
faithful to your friend, and I will not only forgive your infidelity
to I, but will do you all the service I can." so say, he take a
hasty leave, and, slip down the ladder, retire with much
expedition.
Square be rejoice to find this adventure be likely to have no bad
conclusion; and as for Molly, be recover from her confusion, she
begin at first to upbraid Square with have be the occasion of her
loss of Jones; but that gentleman soon find the mean of mitigate
her anger, partly by caress, and partly by a small nostrum from his
purse, of wonderful and approve efficacy in purge off the ill
humour of the mind, and in restore it to a good temper.
she then pour forth a vast profusion of tenderness towards her new
lover; turn all she have say to Jones, and Jones himself, into
ridicule; and vow, though he once have the possession of her person,
that none but Square have ever be master of her heart.
Chapter vi.
by compare which with the former, the reader may possibly correct
some abuse which he hath formerly be guilty of in the application of
the word love.
the infidelity of Molly, which Jones have now discover, would,
perhaps, have vindicate a much great degree of resentment than he
express on the occasion; and if he have abandon she directly from
that moment, very few, I believe, would have blame he.
certain, however, it be, that he see she in the light of compassion;
and though his love to she be not of that kind which could give he
any great uneasiness at her inconstancy, yet be he not a little
shocked on reflect that he have himself originally corrupt her
innocence; for to this corruption he impute all the vice into which
she appear now so likely to plunge herself.
this consideration give he no little uneasiness, till Betty, the
eld sister, be so kind, some time afterwards, entirely to cure he
by a hint, that one will Barnes, and not himself, have be the first
seducer of Molly; and that the little child, which he have hitherto so
certainly conclude to be his own, might very probably have an equal
title, at least, to claim Barnes for its father.
Jones eagerly pursue this scent when he have first receive it; and in
a very short time be sufficiently assure that the girl have tell he
truth, not only by the confession of the fellow, but at last by that
of Molly herself.
this will Barnes be a country gallant, and have acquire as many
trophy of this kind as any ensign or attorney's clerk in the
kingdom. he have, indeed, reduce several woman to a state of utter
profligacy, have break the heart of some, and have the honour of
occasion the violent death of one poor girl, who have either drown
herself, or, what be rather more probable, have be drown by he.
among other of his conquest, this fellow have triumph over the heart
of Betty Seagrim. he have make love to she long before molly be grow
to be a fit object of that pastime; but have afterwards desert she,
and apply to her sister, with whom he have almost immediate success.
now will have, in reality, the sole possession of Molly's affection,
while Jones and Square be almost equally sacrifice to her interest
and to her pride.
hence have grow that implacable hatred which we have before see
rag in the mind of Betty; though we do not think it necessary to
assign this cause soon, as envy itself alone be adequate to all the
effect we have mention.
Jones be become perfectly easy by possession of this secret with
regard to Molly; but as to Sophia, he be far from be in a state of
tranquillity; nay, indeed, he be under the most violent perturbation;
his heart be now, if I may use the metaphor, entirely evacuate, and
Sophia take absolute possession of it. he love she with an unbounded
passion, and plainly see the tender sentiment she have for he; yet
could not this assurance lessen his despair of obtain the consent
of her father, nor the horror which attend his pursuit of she by
any base or treacherous method.
the injury which he must thus do to Mr Western, and the concern which
would accrue to Mr Allworthy, be circumstance that torment he
all day, and haunt he on his pillow at night. his life be a
constant struggle between honour and inclination, which alternately
triumph over each other in his mind. he often resolve, in the
absence of Sophia, to leave her father's house, and to see her no
more; and as often, in her presence, forget all those resolution, and
determine to pursue she at the hazard of his life, and at the
forfeiture of what be much dearer to he.
this conflict begin soon to produce very strong and visible effect:
for he lose all his usual sprightliness and gaiety of temper, and
become not only melancholy when alone, but dejected and absent in
company; nay, if ever he put on a forced mirth, to comply with Mr
Western's humour, the constraint appear so plain, that he seem to
have be give the strong evidence of what he endeavour to
conceal by such ostentation.
it may, perhaps, be a question, whether the art which he use to
conceal his passion, or the mean which honest nature employ to
reveal it, betray he most: for while art make he more than ever
reserve to Sophia, and forbad he to address any of his discourse to
she, nay, to avoid meet her eye, with the utmost caution; nature
be no less busy in counterplot he. hence, at the approach of the
young lady, he grow pale; and if this be sudden, start. if his eye
accidentally meet her, the blood rush into his cheek, and his
countenance become all over scarlet. if common civility ever oblige
he to speak to she, as to drink her health at table, his tongue be
sure to falter. if he touch she, his hand, nay his whole frame,
tremble. and if any discourse tend, however remotely, to raise the
idea of love, an involuntary sigh seldom fail to steal from his
bosom. Most of which accident nature be wonderfully industrious to
throw daily in his way.
all these symptom escape the notice of the squire: but not so of
Sophia. she soon perceive these agitation of mind in Jones, and be
at no loss to discover the cause; for indeed she recognize it in her
own breast. and this recognition be, I suppose, that sympathy which
hath be so often note in lover, and which will sufficiently
account for she be so much quick-sighted than her father.
but, to say the truth, there be a more simple and plain method of
accounting for that prodigious superiority of penetration which we
must observe in some man over the rest of the human specie, and one
which will serve not only in the case of lover, but of all other.
from whence be it that the knave be generally so quick-sighted to
those symptom and operation of knavery, which often dupe an honest
man of a much well understanding? there surely be no general
sympathy among knave; nor have they, like freemason, any common sign
of communication. in reality, it be only because they have the same
thing in their head, and their thought be turn the same way.
thus, that Sophia see, and that Western do not see, the plain
symptom of love in Jones can be no wonder, when we consider that the
idea of love never enter into the head of the father, whereas the
daughter, at present, think of nothing else.
when Sophia be well satisfied of the violent passion which torment
poor Jones, and no less certain that she herself be its object, she
have not the least difficulty in discover the true cause of his
present behaviour. this highly endear he to she, and raise in her
mind two of the good affection which any lover can wish to raise in a
mistress--these be, esteem and pity--for sure the most outrageously
rigid among her sex will excuse she pity a man whom she see
miserable on her own account; nor can they blame she for esteem one
who visibly, from the most honourable motif, endeavour to smother
a flame in his own bosom, which, like the famous Spartan theft, be
prey upon and consume his very vital. thus his backwardness, his
shun she, his coldness, and his silence, be the forward, the
most diligent, the warm, and most eloquent advocate; and wrought
so violently on her sensible and tender heart, that she soon feel for
he all those gentle sensation which be consistent with a virtuous
and elevated female mind. in short, all which esteem, gratitude, and
pity, can inspire in such towards an agreeable man--indeed, all which
the nice delicacy can allow. in a word, she be in love with he to
distraction.
one day this young couple accidentally meet in the garden, at the end
of the two walk which be both bound by that canal in which Jones
have formerly risque drown to retrieve the little bird that Sophia
have there lose.
this place have be of late much frequent by Sophia. here she use
to ruminate, with a mixture of pain and pleasure, on an incident
which, however trifle in itself, have possibly sow the first seed
of that affection which be now arrive to such maturity in her heart.
here then this young couple meet. they be almost close together
before either of they know anything of the other's approach. a
bystander would have discover sufficient mark of confusion in the
countenance of each; but they feel too much themselves to make any
observation. as soon as Jones have a little recover his first
surprize, he accost the young lady with some of the ordinary form
of salutation, which she in the same manner return; and their
conversation begin, as usual, on the delicious beauty of the morning.
hence they past to the beauty of the place, on which Jones launch
forth very high encomium. when they come to the tree whence he have
formerly tumble into the canal, Sophia could not help remind he
of that accident, and say, "I fancy, Mr Jones, you have some little
shuddering when you see that water."--"I assure you, madam," answer
Jones, "the concern you feel at the loss of your little bird will
always appear to I the high circumstance in that adventure. poor
little Tommy! there be the branch he stand upon. how could the little
wretch have the folly to fly away from that state of happiness in
which I have the honour to place he? his fate be a just punishment
for his ingratitude."--"upon my word, Mr Jones," say she, "your
gallantry very narrowly escape as severe a fate. sure the remembrance
must affect you."--"Indeed, madam," answer he, "if I have any reason
to reflect with sorrow on it, it be, perhaps, that the water have not
be a little deep, by which I might have escape many bitter
heart-ache that Fortune seem to have in store for I."--"Fie, Mr
Jones!" reply Sophia; "I be sure you cannot be in earnest now. this
affected contempt of life be only an excess of your complacence to I.
you would endeavour to lessen the obligation of have twice venture
it for my sake. beware the third time." she speak these last word
with a smile, and a softness inexpressible. Jones answer with a
sigh, "he fear it be already too late for caution:" and then
look tenderly and stedfastly on she, he cry, "oh, Miss Western!
can you desire I to live? can you wish I so ill?" Sophia, look
down on the ground, answer with some hesitation, "indeed, Mr Jones,
I do not wish you ill."--"Oh, I know too well that heavenly temper,"
cry Jones, "that divine goodness, which be beyond every other
charm."--"Nay, now," answer she, "I understand you not. I can stay
no long."--"I--I would not be understand!" cry he; "nay, I cannot
be understand. I know not what I say. meet you here so
unexpectedly, I have be unguarde: for Heaven's sake pardon I, if I
have say anything to offend you. I do not mean it. indeed, I would
rather have die--nay, the very thought would kill I."--"you surprize
I," answer she. "how can you possibly think you have offend
me?"--"fear, madam," say he, "easily run into madness; and there be
no degree of fear like that which I feel of offend you. how can I
speak then? Nay, donot look angrily at I: one frown will destroy I.
I mean nothing. blame my eye, or blame those beauty. what be I
say? pardon I if I have say too much. my heart overflow. I have
struggle with my love to the utmost, and have endeavour to conceal
a fever which prey on my vital, and will, I hope, soon make it
impossible for I ever to offend you more."
Mr Jones now fall a trembling as if he have be shake with the fit of
an ague. Sophia, who be in a situation not very different from his,
answer in these word: "Mr Jones, I will not affect to misunderstand
you; indeed, I understand you too well; but, for Heaven's sake, if you
have any affection for I, let I make the good of my way into the
house. I wish I may be able to support myself thither."
Jones, who be hardly able to support himself, offer she his arm,
which she condescend to accept, but beg he would not mention a
word more to she of this nature at present. he promise he would not;
insist only on her forgiveness of what love, without the leave of
his will, have force from he: this, she tell he, he know how to
obtain by his future behaviour; and thus this young pair totter and
tremble along, the lover not once dare to squeeze the hand of his
mistress, though it be lock in his.
Sophia immediately retire to her chamber, where Mrs Honour and the
hartshorn be summon to her assistance. as to poor Jones, the only
relief to his distempered mind be an unwelcome piece of news, which,
as it open a scene of different nature from those in which the reader
hath lately be conversant, will be communicate to he in the next
chapter.
Chapter vii.
in which Mr Allworthy appear on a sick-bed.
Mr Western be become so fond of Jones that he be unwilling to part
with he, though his arm have be long since cure; and Jones, either
from the love of sport, or from some other reason, be easily
persuade to continue at his house, which he do sometimes for a
fortnight together without pay a single visit at Mr Allworthy's;
nay, without ever hear from thence.
Mr Allworthy have be for some day indispose with a cold, which have
be attend with a little fever. this he have, however, neglect; as
it be usual with he to do all manner of disorder which do not
confine he to his bed, or prevent his several faculty from
perform their ordinary functions;--a conduct which we would by no
mean be think to approve or recommend to imitation; for surely the
gentleman of the aesculapian art be in the right in advise, that
the moment the disease have enter at one door, the physician should
be introduce at the other: what else be mean by that old adage,
_Venienti occurrite morbo?_ "oppose a distemper at its first
approach." thus the doctor and the disease meet in fair and equal
conflict; whereas, by give time to the latter, we often suffer he
to fortify and entrench himself, like a french army; so that the
learn gentleman find it very difficult, and sometimes impossible,
to come at the enemy. Nay, sometimes by gain time the disease
apply to the french military politic, and corrupt nature over to
his side, and then all the power of physic must arrive too late.
agreeable to these observation be, I remember, the complaint of the
great Doctor Misaubin, who use very pathetically to lament the late
application which be make to his skill, say, "Bygar, I believe
my pation take I for de undertaker, for dey never send for I till de
physicion have kill dem."
Mr Allworthy's distemper, by mean of this neglect, gain such
ground, that, when the increase of his fever oblige he to send for
assistance, the doctor at his first arrival shake his head, wish he
have be send for soon, and intimate that he think he in very
imminent danger. Mr Allworthy, who have settle all his affair in this
world, and be as well prepared as it be possible for human nature to
be for the other, receive this information with the utmost calmness
and unconcern. he could, indeed, whenever he lay himself down to
rest, say with Cato in the tragical poem--
let guilt or fear
Disturb man's rest: Cato know neither of they;
Indifferent in his choice to sleep or die.
in reality, he could say this with ten time more reason and
confidence than Cato, or any other proud fellow among the antient or
modern hero; for he be not only devoid of fear, but might be
consider as a faithful labourer, when at the end of harvest he be
summon to receive his reward at the hand of a bountiful master.
the good man give immediate order for all his family to be summon
round he. none of these be then abroad, but Mrs Blifil, who have
be some time in London, and Mr Jones, whom the reader hath just
part from at Mr Western's, and who receive this summon just as
Sophia have leave he.
the news of Mr Allworthy's danger (for the servant tell he he be
die) drive all thought of love out of his head. he hurry
instantly into the chariot which be send for he, and order the
coachman to drive with all imaginable haste; nor do the idea of
Sophia, I believe, once occur to he on the way.
and now the whole family, namely, Mr Blifil, Mr Jones, Mr Thwackum, Mr
Square, and some of the servant (for such be Mr Allworthy's order)
be all assemble round his bed, the good man sit up in it, and be
begin to speak, when Blifil fall to blubber, and begin to
express very loud and bitter lamentation. upon this Mr Allworthy
shake he by the hand, and say, "do not sorrow thus, my dear nephew,
at the most ordinary of all human occurrence. when misfortune befal
our friend we be justly grieve; for those be accident which might
often have be avoid, and which may seem to render the lot of one
man more peculiarly unhappy than that of other; but death be
certainly unavoidable, and be that common lot in which alone the
fortune of all man agree: nor be the time when this happen to we
very material. if the wise of man hath compare life to a span,
surely we may be allow to consider it as a day. it be my fate to
leave it in the evening; but those who be take away early have
only lose a few hour, at the good little worth lamenting, and much
oftener hour of labour and fatigue, of pain and sorrow. one of the
roman poet, I remember, liken our leave life to our departure from
a feast;--a thought which hath often occur to I when I have see
man struggle to protract an entertainment, and to enjoy the company
of their friend a few moment long. alas! how short be the most
protract of such enjoyment! how immaterial the difference between
he who retire the soon, and he who stay the late! this be
see life in the good view, and this unwillingness to quit our
friend be the most amiable motive from which we can derive the fear
of death; and yet the long enjoyment which we can hope for of this
kind be of so trivial a duration, that it be to a wise man truly
contemptible. few man, I own, think in this manner; for, indeed, few
man think of death till they be in its jaw. however gigantic and
terrible an object this may appear when it approach they, they be
nevertheless incapable of see it at any distance; nay, though they
have be ever so much alarmed and frighten when they have
apprehend themselves in danger of die, they be no soon clear
from this apprehension than even the fear of it be erase from their
mind. but, alas! he who escape from death be not pardon; he be
only reprieve, and reprieve to a short day.
"Grieve, therefore, no more, my dear child, on this occasion: an event
which may happen every hour; which every element, nay, almost every
particle of matter that surround we be capable of produce, and
which must and will most unavoidably reach we all at last, ought
neither to occasion our surprize nor our lamentation.
"my physician have acquaint I (which I take very kindly of he)
that I be in danger of leave you all very shortly, I have determine
to say a few word to you at this our parting, before my distemper,
which I find grow very fast upon I, put it out of my power.
"but I shall waste my strength too much. I intend to speak
concern my will, which, though I have settle long ago, I think
proper to mention such head of it as concern any of you, that I may
have the comfort of perceive you be all satisfied with the
provision I have there make for you.
"Nephew Blifil, I leave you the heir to my whole estate, except only
£500 a-year, which be to revert to you after the death of your mother,
and except one other estate of £500 a-year, and the sum of £6000,
which I have bestow in the following manner:
"the estate of £500 a-year I have give to you, Mr Jones: and as I
know the inconvenience which attend the want of ready money, I have
add £1000 in specie. in this I know not whether I have exceed or
fall short of your expectation. perhaps you will think I have give
you too little, and the world will be as ready to condemn I for
give you too much; but the latter censure I despise; and as to the
former, unless you should entertain that common error which I have
often hear in my life plead as an excuse for a total want of
charity, namely, that instead of raise gratitude by voluntary act
of bounty, we be apt to raise demand, which of all other be the
most boundless and most difficult to satisfy.--pardon I the bare
mention of this; I will not suspect any such thing."
Jones fling himself at his benefactor's foot, and take eagerly hold
of his hand, assure he his goodness to he, both now and all other
time, have so infinitely exceed not only his merit but his hope,
that no word could express his sense of it. "and I assure you, sir,"
say he, "your present generosity hath leave I no other concern than
for the present melancholy occasion. oh, my friend, my father!" here
his word choake he, and he turn away to hide a tear which be
start from his eye.
Allworthy then gently squeeze his hand, and proceed thus: "I be
convince, my child, that you have much goodness, generosity, and
honour, in your temper: if you will add prudence and religion to
these, you must be happy; for the three former quality, I admit,
make you worthy of happiness, but they be the latter only which will
put you in possession of it.
"one thousand pound I have give to you, Mr Thwackum; a sum I be
convince which greatly exceed your desire, as well as your want.
however, you will receive it as a memorial of my friendship; and
whatever superfluity may redound to you, that piety which you so
rigidly maintain will instruct you how to dispose of they.
"a like sum, Mr Square, I have bequeath to you. this, I hope, will
enable you to pursue your profession with well success than
hitherto. I have often observe with concern, that distress be more
apt to excite contempt than commiseration, especially among man of
business, with whom poverty be understand to indicate want of ability.
but the little I have be able to leave you will extricate you from
those difficulty with which you have formerly struggle; and then I
doubt not but you will meet with sufficient prosperity to supply what
a man of your philosophical temper will require.
"I find myself grow faint, so I shall refer you to my will for my
disposition of the residue. my servant will there find some token to
remember I by; and there be a few charity which, I trust, my
executor will see faithfully perform. bless you all. I be set
out a little before you."--
here a footman come hastily into the room, and say there be an
attorney from Salisbury who have a particular message, which he say he
must communicate to Mr Allworthy himself: that he seem in a violent
hurry, and protest he have so much business to do, that, if he could
cut himself into four quarter, all would not be sufficient.
"go, child," say Allworthy to Blifil, "see what the gentleman want.
I be not able to do any business now, nor can he have any with I, in
which you be not at present more concerned than myself. besides, I
really be--I be incapable of see any one at present, or of any
long attention." he then salute they all, say, perhaps he should
be able to see they again, but he should be now glad to compose
himself a little, find that he have too much exhausted his spirit
in discourse.
some of the company shed tear at their parting; and even the
philosopher Square wipe his eye, albeit unused to the melt mood.
as to Mrs Wilkins, she dropt her pearl as fast as the arabian tree
their medicinal gum; for this be a ceremonial which that gentlewoman
never omit on a proper occasion.
after this Mr Allworthy again lay himself down on his pillow, and
endeavour to compose himself to rest.
Chapter viii.
contain matter rather natural than pleasing.
besides grief for her master, there be another source for that briny
stream which so plentifully rise above the two mountainous cheek-bone
of the housekeeper. she be no soon retire, than she begin to
mutter to herself in the follow pleasant strain: "sure master might
have make some difference, methink, between I and the other
servant. I suppose he hath leave I mourning; but, i'fackins! if that
be all, the devil shall wear it for he, for I. Iwould have his worship
know I be no beggar. I have save five hundred pound in his service,
and after all to be use in this manner.--it be a fine encouragement
to servant to be honest; and to be sure, if I have take a little
something now and then, other have take ten time as much; and now
we be all put in a lump together. if so be that it be so, the legacy
may go to the devil with he that give it. no, I willnot give it up
neither, because that will please some folk. no, Iwill buy the gay
gown I can get, and dance over the old curmudgeon's grave in it. this
be my reward for take his part so often, when all the country have
cry shame of he, for breed up his bastard in that manner; but he
be go now where he must pay for all. it would have become he
well to have repent of his sin on his deathbed, than to glory in
they, and give away his estate out of his own family to a misbegotten
child. find in his bed, forsooth! a pretty story! ay, ay, those that
hide know where to find. Lord forgive he! I warrant he hath many more
bastard to answer for, if the truth be know. one comfort be, they
will all be know where he be a go now.--`the servant will find
some token to remember I by.' those be the very word; I shall
never forget they, if I be to live a thousand year. ay, ay, I shall
remember you for huddle I among the servant. one would have
think he might have mention my name as well as that of Square; but
he be a gentleman forsooth, though he have not cloth on his back when
he come hither first. Marry come up with such gentleman! though he
hath live here this many year, I donot believe there be arrow a
servant in the house ever see the colour of his money. the devil shall
wait upon such a gentleman for I." much more of the like kind she
mutter to herself; but this taste shall suffice to the reader.
neither Thwackum nor Square be much well satisfied with their
legacy. though they breathe not their resentment so loud, yet from
the discontent which appear in their countenance, as well as from
the follow dialogue, we collect that no great pleasure reign in
their mind.
about an hour after they have leave the sick-room, Square meet Thwackum
in the hall and accost he thus: "well, sir, have you hear any news
of your friend since we part from him?"--"if you mean Mr Allworthy,"
answer Thwackum, "I think you might rather give he the appellation
of your friend; for he seem to I to have deserve that title."--"The
title be as good on your side," reply Square, "for his bounty, such
as it be, hath be equal to both."--"I should not have mention it
first," cry Thwackum, "but since you begin, I must inform you I be
of a different opinion. there be a wide distinction between voluntary
favour and reward. the duty I have do in his family, and the care
I have take in the education of his two boy, be service for which
some man might have expect a great return. I would not have you
imagine I be therefore dissatisfied; for St Paul hath teach I to
be content with the little I have. have the modicum be less, I
should have know my duty. but though the scripture oblige I to
remain contented, it doth not enjoin I to shut my eye to my own
merit, nor restrain I from see when I be injure by an unjust
comparison."--"Since you provoke I," return Square, "that injury be
do to I; nor do I ever imagine Mr Allworthy have hold my friendship
so light, as to put I in balance with one who receive his wage. I
know to what it be owe; it proceed from those narrow principle
which you have be so long endeavour to infuse into he, in
contempt of everything which be great and noble. the beauty and
loveliness of friendship be too strong for dim eye, nor can it be
perceive by any other medium than that unerre rule of right, which
you have so often endeavour to ridicule, that you have pervert
your friend's understanding."--"I wish," cry Thwackum, in a rage, "I
wish, for the sake of his soul, your damnable doctrine have not
pervert his faith. it be to this I impute his present behaviour, so
unbecome a Christian. who but an atheist could think of leave the
world without have first make up his account? without confess his
sin, and receive that absolution which he know he have one in the
house duly authorize to give he? he will feel the want of these
necessary when it be too late, when he be arrive at that place
where there be wail and gnashing of tooth. it be then he will find
in what mighty stead that heathen goddess, that virtue, which you and
all other deist of the age adore, will stand he. he will then summon
his priest, when there be none to be find, and will lament the want
of that absolution, without which no sinner can be safe."--"if it be
so material," say Square, "why donot you present it he of your own
accord?" "it hath no virtue," cry Thwackum, "but to those who have
sufficient grace to require it. but why do I talk thus to a heathen
and an unbeliever? it be you that teach he this lesson, for which
you have be well reward in this world, as I doubt not your
disciple will soon be in the other."--"i know not what you mean by
reward," say Square; "but if you hint at that pitiful memorial of our
friendship, which he hath think fit to bequeath I, I despise it;
and nothing but the unfortunate situation of my circumstance should
prevail on I to accept it."
the physician now arrive, and begin to inquire of the two disputant,
how we all do above-stair? "in a miserable way," answer Thwackum.
"it be no more than I expect," cry the doctor: "but pray what
symptom have appear since I leave you?"--"no good one, I be
afraid," reply Thwackum: "after what past at our departure, I think
there be little hope." the bodily physician, perhaps, misunderstood
the curer of soul; and before they come to an explanation, Mr Blifil
come to they with a most melancholy countenance, and acquaint they
that he bring sad news, that his mother be dead at Salisbury; that
she have be seize on the road home with the gout in her head and
stomach, which have carry she off in a few hour. "good-lack-a-day!"
say the doctor. "one cannot answer for event; but I wish I have be
at hand, to have be call in. the gout be a distemper which it be
difficult to treat; yet I have be remarkably successful in it."
Thwackum and Square both condole with Mr Blifil for the loss of his
mother, which the one advise he to bear like a man, and the other
like a Christian. the young gentleman say he know very well we be
all mortal, and he would endeavour to submit to his loss as well as he
could. that he could not, however, help complain a little against
the peculiar severity of his fate, which bring the news of so great
a calamity to he by surprize, and that at a time when he hourly
expect the severe blow he be capable of feeling from the malice
of fortune. he say, the present occasion would put to the test those
excellent rudiment which he have learn from Mr Thwackum and Mr
Square; and it would be entirely owe to they, if he be enable to
survive such misfortune.
it be now debate whether Mr Allworthy should be inform of the
death of his sister. this the doctor violently oppose; in which, I
believe, the whole college would agree with he: but Mr Blifil say,
he have receive such positive and repeat order from his uncle,
never to keep any secret from he for fear of the disquietude which it
might give he, that he durst not think of disobedience, whatever
might be the consequence. he say, for his part, consider the
religious and philosophic temper of his uncle, he could not agree with
the doctor in his apprehension. he be therefore resolve to
communicate it to he: for if his uncle recover (as he heartily
pray he might) he know he would never forgive an endeavour to keep a
secret of this kind from he.
the physician be force to submit to these resolution, which the two
other learn gentleman very highly commend. so together move Mr
Blifil and the doctor toward the sick-room; where the physician first
enter, and approach the bed, in order to feel his patient's pulse,
which he have no soon do, than he declare he be much well; that
the last application have succeed to a miracle, and have bring the
fever to intermit: so that, he say, there appear now to be as
little danger as he have before apprehend there be hope.
to say the truth, Mr Allworthy's situation have never be so bad as
the great caution of the doctor have represent it: but as a wise
general never despise his enemy, however inferior that enemy's force
may be, so neither doth a wise physician ever despise a distemper,
however inconsiderable. as the former preserve the same strict
discipline, place the same guard, and employ the same scout,
though the enemy be never so weak; so the latter maintain the same
gravity of countenance, and shake his head with the same significant
air, let the distemper be never so trifling. and both, among many
other good one, may assign this solid reason for their conduct, that
by these mean the great glory redound to they if they gain the
victory, and the less disgrace if by any unlucky accident they should
happen to be conquer.
Mr Allworthy have no soon lift up his eye, and thank Heaven for
these hope of his recovery, than Mr Blifil draw near, with a very
dejected aspect, and have apply his handkerchief to his eye,
either to wipe away his tear, or to do as Ovid somewhere express
himself on another occasion
_si nullus erit, tamen excute nullum,_
if there be none, then wipe away that none,
he communicate to his uncle what the reader hath be just before
acquaint with.
Allworthy receive the news with concern, with patience, and with
resignation. he dropt a tender tear, then compose his countenance,
and at last cry, "the Lord's will be do in everything."
he now enquire for the messenger; but Blifil tell he it have be
impossible to detain he a moment; for he appear by the great hurry
he be in to have some business of importance on his hand; that he
complain of be hurry and drive and tear out of his life, and
repeat many time, that if he could divide himself into four
quarter, he know how to dispose of every one.
Allworthy then desire Blifil to take care of the funeral. he say, he
would have his sister deposit in his own chapel; and as to the
particular, he leave they to his own discretion, only mention the
person whom he would have employ on this occasion.
chapter ix.
which, among other thing, may serve as a comment on that saying of
Aeschines, that "drunkenness show the mind of a man, as a mirrour
reflect his person."
the reader may perhaps wonder at hear nothing of Mr Jones in the
last chapter. in fact, his behaviour be so different from that of the
person there mention, that we choose not to confound his name with
theirs.
when the good man have end his speech, Jones be the last who
desert the room. thence he retire to his own apartment, to give
vent to his concern; but the restlessness of his mind would not suffer
he to remain long there; he slip softly therefore to Allworthy's
chamber-door, where he listen a considerable time without hear
any kind of motion within, unless a violent snoring, which at last his
fear misrepresent as groan. this so alarm he, that he could not
forbear enter the room; where he find the good man in the bed, in
a sweet compose sleep, and his nurse snore in the above mention
hearty manner, at the bed's foot. he immediately take the only method
of silence this thorough bass, whose music he fear might disturb
Mr Allworthy; and then sit down by the nurse, he remain
motionless till Blifil and the doctor come in together and wake the
sick man, in order that the doctor might feel his pulse, and that the
other might communicate to he that piece of news, which, have Jones
be apprize of it, would have have great difficulty of find its
way to Mr Allworthy's ear at such a season.
when he first hear Blifil tell his uncle this story, Jones could
hardly contain the wrath which kindle in he at the other's
indiscretion, especially as the doctor shake his head, and declare
his unwillingness to have the matter mention to his patient. but as
his passion do not so far deprive he of all use of his
understanding, as to hide from he the consequence which any violent
expression towards Blifil might have on the sick, this apprehension
still his rage at the present; and he grow afterwards so satisfied
with find that this news have, in fact, produce no mischief, that
he suffer his anger to die in his own bosom, without ever mention
it to Blifil.
the physician din that day at Mr Allworthy's; and have after
dinner visit his patient, he return to the company, and tell they,
that he have now the satisfaction to say, with assurance, that his
patient be out of all danger: that he have bring his fever to a
perfect intermission, and doubt not by throw in the bark to
prevent its return.
this account so please Jones, and throw he into such immoderate
excess of rapture, that he might be truly say to be drunk with
joy--an intoxication which greatly forward the effect of wine; and
as he be very free too with the bottle on this occasion (for he drink
many bumper to the doctor's health, as well as to other toast) he
become very soon literally drunk.
Jones have naturally violent animal spirit: these be set on float
and augment by the spirit of wine, produce most extravagant
effect. he kiss the doctor, and embrace he with the most
passionate endearment; swear that next to Mr Allworthy himself, he
love he of all man live. "doctor," add he, "you deserve a statue
to be erect to you at the public expense, for have preserve a
man, who be not only the darling of all good man who know he, but a
blessing to society, the glory of his country, and an honour to human
nature. D--n I if I donot love he well than my own soul."
"More shame for you," cry Thwackum. "though I think you have reason
to love he, for he hath provide very well for you. and perhaps it
might have be well for some folk that he have not live to see
just reason of revoke his gift."
Jones now look on Thwackum with inconceivable disdain, answer,
"and doth thy mean soul imagine that any such consideration could
weigh with I? no, let the earth open and swallow her own dirt (if I
have million of acre I would say it) rather than swallow up my dear
glorious friend."
_Quis desiderio sit pudor aut modus
Tam chari capitis?_[*]
[*] "what modesty or measure can set bound to our desire of so dear
a friend?" the word _desiderium_ here cannot be easily translate.
it include our desire of enjoy our friend again, and the grief
which attend that desire.
the doctor now interpose, and prevent the effect of a wrath which
be kindle between Jones and Thwackum; after which the former give a
loose to mirth, sing two or three amorous song, and fall into every
frantic disorder which unbridled joy be apt to inspire; but so far be
he from any disposition to quarrel, that he be ten time well
humour, if possible, than when he be sober.
to say truth, nothing be more erroneous than the common observation,
that man who be ill-natured and quarrelsome when they be drunk, be
very worthy person when they be sober: for drink, in reality, doth
not reverse nature, or create passion in man which do not exist in
they before. it take away the guard of reason, and consequently
force we to produce those symptom, which many, when sober, have art
enough to conceal. it heighten and inflame our passion (generally
indeed that passion which be uppermost in our mind), so that the angry
temper, the amorous, the generous, the good-humour, the avaricious,
and all other disposition of man, be in their cup heighten and
expose.
and yet as no nation produce so many drunken quarrel, especially
among the low people, as England (for indeed, with they, to drink
and to fight together be almost synonymous term), I would not,
methink, have it thence conclude, that the English be the
worst-natured people alive. perhaps the love of glory only be at the
bottom of this; so that the fair conclusion seem to be, that our
countryman have more of that love, and more of bravery, than any other
plebeian. and this the rather, as there be seldom anything
ungenerous, unfair, or ill-natured, exercise on these occasion: nay,
it be common for the combatant to express good-will for each other
even at the time of the conflict; and as their drunken mirth generally
end in a battle, so do most of their battle end in friendship.
but to return to our history. though Jones have show no design of
give offence, yet Mr Blifil be highly offended at a behaviour which
be so inconsistent with the sober and prudent reserve of his own
temper. he bear it too with the great impatience, as it appear to
he very indecent at this season; "when," as he say, "the house be a
house of mourning, on the account of his dear mother; and if it have
please Heaven to give he some prospect of Mr Allworthy's recovery,
it would become they well to express the exultation of their heart
in thanksgiving, than in drunkenness and riot; which be properer
method to encrease the divine wrath, than to avert it." Thwackum, who
have swallow more liquor than Jones, but without any ill effect on
his brain, second the pious harangue of Blifil; but Square, for
reason which the reader may probably guess, be totally silent.
Wine have not so totally overpowered Jones, as to prevent his
recollect Mr Blifil's loss, the moment it be mention. as no
person, therefore, be more ready to confess and condemn his own
error, he offer to shake Mr Blifil by the hand, and beg his
pardon, say, "his excessive joy for Mr Allworthy's recovery have
drive every other thought out of his mind."
Blifil scornfully reject his hand; and with much indignation
answer, "it be little to be wonder at, if tragical spectacle
make no impression on the blind; but, for his part, he have the
misfortune to know who his parent be, and consequently must be
affect with their loss."
Jones, who, notwithstanding his good humour, have some mixture of the
irascible in his constitution, leap hastily from his chair, and
catch hold of Blifil's collar, cry out, "D--n you for a rascal,
do you insult I with the misfortune of my birth?" he accompany
these word with such rough action, that they soon get the well of
Mr Blifil's peaceful temper; and a scuffle immediately ensue, which
might have produce mischief, have it not be prevent by the
interposition of Thwackum and the physician; for the philosophy of
Square render he superior to all emotion, and he very calmly
smoake his pipe, as be his custom in all broil, unless when he
apprehend some danger of have it break in his mouth.
the combatant be now prevent from execute present vengeance on
each other, betook themselves to the common resource of disappointed
rage, and vent their wrath in threat and defiance. in this kind of
conflict, Fortune, which, in the personal attack, seem to incline to
Jones, be now altogether as favourable to his enemy.
a truce, nevertheless, be at length agree on, by the mediation of
the neutral party, and the whole company again sit down at the
table; where Jones be prevail on to ask pardon, and Blifil to
give it, peace be restore, and everything seem _in statu quo_.
but though the quarrel be, in all appearance, perfectly reconcile,
the good humour which have be interrupt by it, be by no means
restore. all merriment be now at an end, and the subsequent
discourse consist only of grave relation of matter of fact, and of
as grave observation upon they; a species of conversation, in which,
though there be much of dignity and instruction, there be but little
entertainment. as we presume therefore to convey only this last to the
reader, we shall pass by whatever be say, till the rest of the
company have by degree drop off, leave only Square and the
physician together; at which time the conversation be a little
heighten by some comment on what have happen between the two young
gentleman; both of whom the doctor declare to be no well than
scoundrel; to which appellation the philosopher, very sagaciously
shake his head, agree.
Chapter x.
show the truth of many observation of Ovid, and of other more
grave writer, who have prove beyond contradiction, that wine be
often the forerunner of incontinency.
Jones retire from the company, in which we have see he engage,
into the field, where he intend to cool himself by a walk in the
open air before he attend Mr Allworthy. there, whilst he renew
those meditation on his dear Sophia, which the dangerous illness of
his friend and benefactor have for some time interrupt, an accident
happen, which with sorrow we relate, and with sorrow doubtless will
it be read; however, that historic truth to which we profess so
inviolable an attachment, oblige we to communicate it to posterity.
it be now a pleasant evening in the latter end of June, when our
heroe be walk in a most delicious grove, where the gentle breeze
fan the leaf, together with the sweet trilling of a murmuring
stream, and the melodious note of nightingale, form altogether the
most enchanting harmony. in this scene, so sweetly accommodate to
love, he meditate on his dear Sophia. while his wanton fancy roam
unbounde over all her beauty, and his lively imagination paint
the charming maid in various ravish form, his warm heart melt
with tenderness; and at length, throw himself on the ground, by the
side of a gently murmur brook, he break forth into the follow
ejaculation:
"o Sophia, would Heaven give thee to my arm, how bl would be my
condition! Curst be that fortune which set a distance between we. be
I but possess of thee, one only suit of rag thy whole estate, be
there a man on earth whom I would envy! how contemptible would the
bright circassian beauty, dr in all the jewel of the Indies,
appear to my eye! but why do I mention another woman? could I think
my eye capable of look at any other with tenderness, these hand
should tear they from my head. no, my Sophia, if cruel fortune
separate we for ever, my soul shall doat on thee alone. the chaste
constancy will I ever preserve to thy image. though I should never
have possession of thy charming person, still shalt thou alone have
possession of my thought, my love, my soul. oh! my fond heart be so
wrapt in that tender bosom, that the bright beauty would for I
have no charm, nor would a hermit be cold in their embrace.
Sophia, Sophia alone shall be mine. what rapture be in that name! I
will engrave it on every tree."
at these word he start up, and beheld--not his Sophia--no, nor a
Circassian maid richly and elegantly attire for the grand Signior's
seraglio. no; without a gown, in a shift that be somewhat of the
coarsest, and none of the clean, bedew likewise with some
odoriferous effluvium, the produce of the day's labour, with a
pitchfork in her hand, Molly Seagrim approach. our hero have his
penknife in his hand, which he have draw for the before-mention
purpose of carve on the bark; when the girl come near he, cry
out with a smile, "you donot intend to kill I, squire, I hope!"--"why
should you think I would kill you?" answer Jones. "Nay," reply
she, "after your cruel usage of I when I see you last, kill I
would, perhaps, be too great kindness for I to expect."
here ensue a parley, which, as I do not think myself oblige to
relate it, I shall omit. it be sufficient that it last a full
quarter of an hour, at the conclusion of which they retire into the
thick part of the grove.
some of my reader may be incline to think this event unnatural.
however, the fact be true; and perhaps may be sufficiently account
for by suggest, that Jones probably think one woman well than
none, and Molly as probably imagine two man to be well than one.
besides the before-mention motive assign to the present behaviour
of Jones, the reader will be likewise pleased to recollect in his
favour, that he be not at this time perfect master of that wonderful
power of reason, which so well enable grave and wise man to subdue
their unruly passion, and to decline any of these prohibit
amusement. Wine now have totally subdue this power in Jones. he be,
indeed, in a condition, in which, if reason have interpose, though
only to advise, she might have receive the answer which one
Cleostratus give many year ago to a silly fellow, who ask he, if
he be not ashamed to be drunk? "be not you," say Cleostratus,
"ashamed to admonish a drunken man?"--to say the truth, in a court of
justice drunkenness must not be an excuse, yet in a court of
conscience it be greatly so; and therefore Aristotle, who commend the
law of Pittacus, by which drunken man receive double punishment for
their crime, allow there be more of policy than justice in that law.
now, if there be any transgression pardonable from drunkenness, they
be certainly such as Mr Jones be at present guilty of; on which head
I could pour forth a vast profusion of learn, if I imagine it
would either entertain my reader, or teach he anything more than he
know already. for his sake therefore I shall keep my learning to
myself, and return to my history.
it hath be observe, that Fortune seldom doth thing by half. to
say truth, there be no end to her freak whenever she be disposed to
gratify or displease. no soon have our heroe retire with his Dido,
but
_speluncam_ Blifil _dux et divinus eandem
Deveniunt--_
the parson and the young squire, who be take a serious walk,
arrive at the stile which lead into the grove, and the latter catch
a view of the lover just as they be sink out of sight.
Blifil know Jones very well, though he be at above a hundred yard'
distance, and he be as positive to the sex of his companion, though
not to the individual person. he start, bless himself, and utter
a very solemn ejaculation.
Thwackum express some surprize at these sudden emotion, and ask
the reason of they. to which Blifil answer, "he be certain he have
see a fellow and wench retire together among the bush, which he
doubt not be with some wicked purpose." as to the name of Jones, he
think proper to conceal it, and why he do so must be leave to the
judgment of the sagacious reader; for we never chuse to assign motif
to the action of man, when there be any possibility of our being
mistaken.
the parson, who be not only strictly chaste in his own person, but a
great enemy to the opposite vice in all other, fire at this
information. he desire Mr Blifil to conduct he immediately to the
place, which as he approach he breathe forth vengeance mix with
lamentation; nor do he refrain from cast some oblique reflection
on Mr Allworthy; insinuate that the wickedness of the country be
principally owe to the encouragement he have give to vice, by have
exert such kindness to a bastard, and by have mitigate that just
and wholesome rigour of the law which allot a very severe punishment
to loose wench.
the way through which our hunter be to pass in pursuit of their
game be so beset with briar, that it greatly obstruct their walk,
and cause besides such a rustling, that Jones have sufficient warning
of their arrival before they could surprize he; nay, indeed, so
incapable be Thwackum of conceal his indignation, and such
vengeance do he mutter forth every step he take, that this alone must
have abundantly satisfied Jones that he be (to use the language of
sportsman) find sit.
Chapter xi.
in which a simile in Mr Pope's period of a mile introduce as bloody a
battle as can possibly be fight without the assistance of steel or
cold iron.
as in the season of _rut_ (an uncouth phrase, by which the vulgar
denote that gentle dalliance, which in the well-woode[*] forest of
Hampshire, pass between lover of the ferine kind), if, while the
lofty-crest stag meditate the amorous sport, a couple of puppy,
or any other beast of hostile note, should wander so near the temple
of Venus Ferina that the fair hind should shrink from the place,
touch with that somewhat, either of fear or frolic, of nicety or
skittishness, with which nature hath bedeck all female, or hath at
least instruct they how to put it on; lest, through the indelicacy
of male, the samean mystery should be pry into by unhallowed
eye: for, at the celebration of these rite, the female priestess
cry out with she in Virgil (who be then, probably, hard at work on
such celebration),
_--Procul, o procul este, profani;
Proclamat vate, totoque absistite luco._
--Far hence be soul profane,
the sibyl cry'd, and from the grove abstain.--DRYDEN.
[*] this be an ambiguous phrase, and may mean either a forest well
cloathe with wood, or well stript of it.
if, I say, while these sacred rite, which be in common to _genus
omne animantium,_ be in agitation between the stag and his mistress,
any hostile beast should venture too near, on the first hint give by
the fright hind, fierce and tremendous rush forth the stag to the
entrance of the thicket; there stand he centinel over his love,
stamp the ground with his foot, and with his horn brandish aloft
in air, proudly provoke the apprehended foe to combat.
thus, and more terrible, when he perceive the enemy's approach,
leap forth our heroe. many a step advance he forwards, in order to
conceal the trembling hind, and, if possible, to secure her retreat.
and now Thwackum, have first dart some livid lightning from his
fiery eye, begin to thunder forth, "fie upon it! fie upon it! Mr
Jones. be it possible you should be the person?"--"you see," answer
Jones, "it be possible I should be here."--"And who," say Thwackum,
"be that wicked slut with you?"--"if I have any wicked slut with I,"
cry Jones, "it be possible I shall not let you know who she be."--"I
command you to tell I immediately," say Thwackum: "and I would not
have you imagine, young man, that your age, though it hath somewhat
abridge the purpose of tuition, hath totally take away the authority
of the master. the relation of the master and scholar be indelible;
as, indeed, all other relation be; for they all derive their
original from heaven. I would have you think yourself, therefore, as
much oblige to obey I now, as when I teach you your first
rudiment."--"i believe you would," cry Jones; "but that will not
happen, unless you have the same birchen argument to convince
I."--"Then I must tell you plainly," say Thwackum, "I be resolve to
discover the wicked wretch."--"And I must tell you plainly," return
Jones, "I be resolve you shall not." Thwackum then offer to
advance, and Jones lay hold of his arm; which Mr Blifil endeavour
to rescue, declare, "he would not see his old master insult."
Jones now find himself engage with two, think it necessary to
rid himself of one of his antagonist as soon as possible. he
therefore apply to the weak first; and, let the parson go, he
direct a blow at the young squire's breast, which luckily take
place, reduce he to measure his length on the ground.
Thwackum be so intent on the discovery, that, the moment he find
himself at liberty, he stept forward directly into the fern, without
any great consideration of what might in the meantime befal his
friend; but he have advance a very few pace into the thicket, before
Jones, have defeat Blifil, overtake the parson, and drag he
backward by the skirt of his coat.
this parson have be a champion in his youth, and have win much honour
by his fist, both at school and at the university. he have now indeed,
for a great number of year, decline the practice of that noble art;
yet be his courage full as strong as his faith, and his body no less
strong than either. he be moreover, as the reader may perhaps have
conceive, somewhat irascible in his nature. when he look back,
therefore, and see his friend stretch out on the ground, and find
himself at the same time so roughly handle by one who have formerly
be only passive in all conflict between they (a circumstance which
highly aggravate the whole), his patience at length give way; he
throw himself into a posture of offence; and collect all his force,
attack Jones in the front with as much impetuosity as he have
formerly attack he in the rear.
our heroe receive the enemy's attack with the most undaunted
intrepidity, and his bosom resound with the blow. this he presently
return with no less violence, aim likewise at the parson's
breast; but he dexterously drive down the fist of Jones, so that it
reach only his belly, where two pound of beef and as many of
pudding be then deposit, and whence consequently no hollow sound
could proceed. many lusty blow, much more pleasant as well as easy to
have see, than to read or describe, be give on both side: at last
a violent fall, in which Jones have throw his knee into Thwackum's
breast, so weaken the latter, that victory have be no long
dubious, have not Blifil, who have now recover his strength, again
renew the fight, and by engage with Jones, give the parson a
moment's time to shake his ear, and to regain his breath.
and now both together attack our heroe, whose blow do not retain
that force with which they have fall at first, so weakened be he by
his combat with Thwackum; for though the pedagogue choose rather to
play _solo_ on the human instrument, and have be lately use to
those only, yet he still retain enough of his antient knowledge to
perform his part very well in a _duet_.
the victory, accord to modern custom, be like to be decide by
number, when, on a sudden, a fourth pair of fist appear in the
battle, and immediately pay their compliment to the parson; and the
owner of they at the same time cry out, "be not you ashamed, and
be d--n'd to you, to fall two of you upon one?"
the battle, which be of the kind that for distinction's sake be
call royal, now rag with the utmost violence during a few minute;
till Blifil be a second time lay sprawl by Jones, Thwackum
condescend to apply for quarter to his new antagonist, who be now
find to be Mr Western himself; for in the heat of the action none of
the combatant have recognize he.
in fact, that honest squire, happen, in his afternoon's walk with
some company, to pass through the field where the bloody battle be
fight, and have conclude, from see three man engage, that two
of they must be on a side, he hasten from his companion, and with
more gallantry than policy, espouse the cause of the weak party. by
which generous proceeding he very probably prevent Mr Jones from
become a victim to the wrath of Thwackum, and to the pious
friendship which Blifil bear his old master; for, besides the
disadvantage of such odd, Jones have not yet sufficiently recover
the former strength of his broken arm. this reinforcement, however,
soon put an end to the action, and Jones with his ally obtain the
victory.
Chapter xii.
in which be see a more moving spectacle than all the blood in the
body of Thwackum and Blifil, and of twenty other such, be capable of
produce.
the rest of Mr Western's company be now come up, be just at the
instant when the action be over. these be the honest clergyman,
whom we have formerly see at Mr Western's table; Mrs Western, the
aunt of Sophia; and lastly, the lovely Sophia herself.
at this time, the follow be the aspect of the bloody field. in one
place lie on the ground, all pale, and almost breathless, the
vanquish Blifil. near he stand the conqueror Jones, almost cover
with blood, part of which be naturally his own, and part have be
lately the property of the Reverend Mr Thwackum. in a third place
stand the say Thwackum, like King Porus, sullenly submit to the
conqueror. the last figure in the piece be western the great, most
gloriously forbear the vanquished foe.
Blifil, in whom there be little sign of life, be at first the
principal object of the concern of every one, and particularly of Mrs
Western, who have draw from her pocket a bottle of hartshorn, and be
herself about to apply it to his nostril, when on a sudden the
attention of the whole company be divert from poor Blifil, whose
spirit, if it have any such design, might have now take an opportunity
of steal off to the other world, without any ceremony.
for now a more melancholy and a more lovely object lie motionless
before they. this be no other than the charming Sophia herself, who,
from the sight of blood, or from fear for her father, or from some
other reason, have fall down in a swoon, before any one could get to
her assistance.
Mrs Western first see she and scream. immediately two or three
voice cry out, "Miss Western be dead." Hartshorn, water, every
remedy be call for, almost at one and the same instant.
the reader may remember, that in our description of this grove we
mention a murmur brook, which brook do not come there, as such
gentle stream flow through vulgar romance, with no other purpose
than to murmur. no! Fortune have decree to ennoble this little brook
with a high honour than any of those which wash the plain of
Arcadia ever deserve.
Jones be rub Blifil's temple, for he begin to fear he have give
he a blow too much, when the word, Miss Western and Dead, rush at
once on his ear. he start up, leave Blifil to his fate, and fly to
Sophia, whom, while all the rest be run against each other,
backward and forward, look for water in the dry path, he catch up
in his arm, and then run away with she over the field to the rivulet
above mention; where, plunge himself into the water, he contrive
to besprinkle her face, head, and neck very plentifully.
Happy be it for Sophia that the same confusion which prevent she
other friend from serve she, prevent they likewise from
obstruct Jones. he have carry she half way before they know what
he be do, and he have actually restore she to life before they
reach the waterside. she stretch out her arm, open her eye,
and cry, "oh! heavens!" just as her father, aunt, and the parson
come up.
Jones, who have hitherto hold this lovely burthen in his arm, now
relinquish his hold; but give she at the same instant a tender
caress, which, have her sens be then perfectly restore, could not
have escape her observation. as she express, therefore, no
displeasure at this freedom, we suppose she be not sufficiently
recover from her swoon at the time.
this tragical scene be now convert into a sudden scene of joy. in
this our heroe be certainly the principal character; for as he
probably feel more ecstatic delight in have save Sophia than she
herself receive from be save, so neither be the congratulation
pay to she equal to what be confer on Jones, especially by Mr
Western himself, who, after have once or twice embrace his
daughter, fall to hug and kiss Jones. he call he the
preserver of Sophia, and declare there be nothing, except she, or
his estate, which he would not give he; but upon recollection, he
afterwards except his fox-hound, the Chevalier, and Miss Slouch
(for so he call his favourite mare).
all fear for Sophia be now remove, Jones become the object of the
squire's consideration.--"come, my lad," say Western, "d'off thy
quoat and wash thy feace; for att in a devilish pickle, I promise
thee. come, come, wash thyself, and shat go huome with I; and we'l
zee to vind thee another quoat."
Jones immediately comply, throw off his coat, go down to the
water, and wash both his face and bosom; for the latter be as much
expose and as bloody as the former. but though the water could clear
off the blood, it could not remove the black and blue mark which
Thwackum have imprint on both his face and breast, and which, be
discern by Sophia, draw from she a sigh and a look full of
inexpressible tenderness.
Jones receive this full in his eye, and it have infinitely a strong
effect on he than all the contusion which he have receive before. an
effect, however, widely different; for so soft and balmy be it, that,
have all his former blow be stab, it would for some minute have
prevent his feeling their smart.
the company now move backwards, and soon arrive where Thwackum have
get Mr Blifil again on his leg. here we cannot suppress a pious wish,
that all quarrel be to be decide by those weapon only with which
Nature, know what be proper for we, hath supply we; and that cold
iron be to be use in dig no bowel but those of the earth. then
would war, the pastime of monarchs, be almost inoffensive, and battle
between great army might be fight at the particular desire of
several lady of quality; who, together with the king themselves,
might be actual spectator of the conflict. then might the field be
this moment well strew with human carcass, and the next, the dead
man, or infinitely the great part of they, might get up, like Mr
Bayes's troop, and march off either at the sound of a drum or fiddle,
as should be previously agree on.
I would avoid, if possible, treat this matter ludicrously, lest
grave man and politician, whom I know to be offend at a jest, may
cry pish at it; but, in reality, might not a battle be as well decide
by the great number of broken head, bloody nose, and black eye,
as by the great heap of mangle and murder human body? might
not town be contend for in the same manner? indeed, this may be
think too detrimental a scheme to the french interest, since they
would thus lose the advantage they have over other nation in the
superiority of their engineer; but when I consider the gallantry and
generosity of that people, I be persuade they would never decline
put themselves upon a par with their adversary; or, as the phrase
be, make themselves his match.
but such reformation be rather to be wish than hop for: I shall
content myself, therefore, with this short hint, and return to my
narrative.
Western begin now to inquire into the original rise of this quarrel.
to which neither Blifil nor Jones give any answer; but Thwackum say
surlily, "I believe the cause be not far off; if you beat the bush
well you may find she."--"find she?" reply Western: "what! have you
be fight for a wench?"--"ask the gentleman in his waistcoat
there," say Thwackum: "he well know." "Nay then," cry western, "it
be a wench certainly.--Ah, Tom, Tom, thou art a liquorish dog. but
come, gentleman, be all friend, and go home with I, and make final
peace over a bottle." "I ask your pardon, sir," say Thwackum: "it be
no such slight matter for a man of my character to be thus injuriously
treat, and buffet by a boy, only because I would have do my
duty, in endeavour to detect and bring to justice a wanton harlot;
but, indeed, the principal fault lie in Mr Allworthy and yourself;
for if you put the law in execution, as you ought to do, you will
soon rid the country of these vermin."
"I would as soon rid the country of fox," cry western. "I think we
ought to encourage the recruit those number which we be every day
lose in the war.--but where be she? Prithee, Tom, show I." he then
begin to beat about, in the same language and in the same manner as if
he have be beat for a hare; and at last cry out, "Soho! Puss be
not far off. herebe her form, upon my soul; I believe I may cry stole
away." and indeed so he might; for he have now discover the place
whence the poor girl have, at the beginning of the fray, steal away,
upon as many foot as a hare generally use in travel.
Sophia now desire her father to return home; say she find herself
very faint, and apprehend a relapse. the squire immediately comply
with his daughter's request (for he be the fond of parent). he
earnestly endeavour to prevail with the whole company to go and sup
with he: but Blifil and Thwackum absolutely refuse; the former
saying, there be more reason than he could then mention, why he
must decline this honour; and the latter declare (perhaps rightly)
that it be not proper for a person of his function to be see at any
place in his present condition.
Jones be incapable of refuse the pleasure of be with his Sophia;
so on he march with Squire Western and his lady, the parson
bring up the rear. this have, indeed, offer to tarry with his
brother Thwackum, profess his regard for the cloth would not permit
he to depart; but Thwackum would not accept the favour, and, with no
great civility, push he after Mr Western.
thus end this bloody fray; and thus shall end the fifth book of this
history.
BOOK VI.
contain about three weeks.
Chapter i.
of love.
in our last book we have be oblige to deal pretty much with the
passion of love; and in our succeed book shall be force to handle
this subject still more largely. it may not therefore in this place be
improper to apply ourselves to the examination of that modern
doctrine, by which certain philosopher, among many other wonderful
discovery, pretend to have find out, that there be no such passion
in the human breast.
whether these philosopher be the same with that surprising sect, who
be honourably mention by the late Dr Swift, as have, by the mere
force of genius alone, without the least assistance of any kind of
learning, or even read, discover that profound and invaluable
secret that there be no God; or whether they be not rather the same
with those who some year since very much alarm the world, by
show that there be no such thing as virtue or goodness really
exist in human nature, and who deduce our good action from pride,
I will not here presume to determine. in reality, I be inclined to
suspect, that all these several finder of truth, be the very
identical man who be by other call the finder of gold. the method
use in both these search after truth and after gold, be indeed
one and the same, viz., the searching, rummaging, and examine into a
nasty place; indeed, in the former instance, into the nasty of all
place, a bad MIND.
but though in this particular, and perhaps in their success, the
truth-finder and the gold-finder may very properly be compare
together; yet in modesty, surely, there can be no comparison between
the two; for who ever hear of a gold-finder that have the impudence or
folly to assert, from the ill success of his search, that there be no
such thing as gold in the world? whereas the truth-finder, have
rake out that jake, his own mind, and be there capable of trace
no ray of divinity, nor anything virtuous or good, or lovely, or
loving, very fairly, honestly, and logically conclude that no such
thing exist in the whole creation.
to avoid, however, all contention, if possible, with these
philosopher, if they will be call so; and to show our own
disposition to accommodate matter peaceably between we, we shall here
make they some concession, which may possibly put an end to the
dispute.
first, we will grant that many mind, and perhaps those of the
philosopher, be entirely free from the least trace of such a
passion.
secondly, that what be commonly call love, namely, the desire of
satisfy a voracious appetite with a certain quantity of delicate
white human flesh, be by no mean that passion for which I here
contend. this be indeed more properly hunger; and as no glutton be
ashamed to apply the word love to his appetite, and to say he love
such and such dish; so may the lover of this kind, with equal
propriety, say, he hunger after such and such woman.
thirdly, I will grant, which I believe will be a most acceptable
concession, that this love for which I be an advocate, though it
satisfy itself in a much more delicate manner, doth nevertheless
seek its own satisfaction as much as the gross of all our
appetite.
and, lastly, that this love, when it operate towards one of a
different sex, be very apt, towards its complete gratification, to
call in the aid of that hunger which I have mention above; and which
it be so far from abate, that it heighten all its delight to a
degree scarce imaginable by those who have never be susceptible of
any other emotion than what have proceed from appetite alone.
in return to all these concession, I desire of the philosopher to
grant, that there be in some (I believe in many) human breast a kind
and benevolent disposition, which be gratify by contribute to the
happiness of other. that in this gratification alone, as in
friendship, in parental and filial affection, as indeed in general
philanthropy, there be a great and exquisite delight. that if we will
not call such disposition love, we have no name for it. that though
the pleasure arise from such pure love may be heighten and
sweeten by the assistance of amorous desire, yet the former can
subsist alone, nor be they destroy by the intervention of the
latter. lastly, that esteem and gratitude be the proper motif to
love, as youth and beauty be to desire, and, therefore, though such
desire may naturally cease, when age or sickness overtake its object;
yet these can have no effect on love, nor ever shake or remove, from a
good mind, that sensation or passion which hath gratitude and esteem
for its basis.
to deny the existence of a passion of which we often see manif
instance, seem to be very strange and absurd; and can indeed proceed
only from that self-admonition which we have mention above: but how
unfair be this! Doth the man who recognize in his own heart no trace
of avarice or ambition, conclude, therefore, that there be no such
passion in human nature? why will we not modestly observe the same
rule in judging of the good, as well as the evil of other? or why, in
any case, will we, as Shakespear phrase it, "put the world in our own
person?"
predominant vanity be, I be afraid, too much concerned here. this be
one instance of that adulation which we bestow on our own mind, and
this almost universally. for there be scarce any man, how much soever
he may despise the character of a flatterer, but will condescend in
the mean manner to flatter himself.
to those therefore I apply for the truth of the above observation,
whose own mind can bear testimony to what I have advance.
examine your heart, my good reader, and resolve whether you do believe
these matter with I. if you do, you may now proceed to their
exemplification in the follow page: if you do not, you have, I
assure you, already read more than you have understand; and it would
be wise to pursue your business, or your pleasure (such as they
be), than to throw away any more of your time in read what you can
neither taste nor comprehend. to treat of the effect of love to you,
must be as absurd as to discourse on colour to a man bear blind;
since possibly your idea of love may be as absurd as that which we be
tell such blind man once entertain of the colour scarlet; that
colour seem to he to be very much like the sound of a trumpet: and
love probably may, in your opinion, very greatly resemble a dish of
soup, or a surloin of roast-beef.
Chapter ii.
the character of Mrs Western. her great learning and knowledge of the
world, and an instance of the deep penetration which she derive from
those advantage.
the reader hath see Mr Western, his sister, and daughter, with young
Jones, and the parson, go together to Mr Western's house, where the
great part of the company spend the evening with much joy and
festivity. Sophia be indeed the only grave person; for as to Jones,
though love have now get entire possession of his heart, yet the
pleasing reflection on Mr Allworthy's recovery, and the presence of
his mistress, join to some tender look which she now and then could
not refrain from give he, so elevate our heroe, that he join the
mirth of the other three, who be perhaps as good-humour people as
any in the world.
Sophia retain the same gravity of countenance the next morning at
breakfast; whence she retire likewise early than usual, leave she
father and aunt together. the squire take no notice of this change in
his daughter's disposition. to say the truth, though he be somewhat
of a politician, and have be twice a candidate in the country
interest at an election, he be a man of no great observation. his
sister be a lady of a different turn. she have live about the court,
and have see the world. hence she have acquire all that knowledge
which the say world usually communicate; and be a perfect mistress
of manner, custom, ceremony, and fashion. nor do her erudition
stop here. she have considerably improve her mind by study; she have
not only read all the modern play, opera, oratorio, poem, and
romance--in all which she be a critic; but have go through Rapin's
history of England, Eachard's Roman history, and many french _mémoire
pour servir à l'Histoire_: to these she have add most of the
political pamphlet and journal publish within the last twenty
year. from which she have attain a very competent skill in politic,
and could discourse very learnedly on the affair of Europe. she be,
moreover, excellently well skilled in the doctrine of amour, and know
well than anybody who and who be together; a knowledge which she
the more easily attain, as her pursuit of it be never divert by
any affair of her own; for either she have no inclination, or they
have never be solicit; which last be indeed very probable; for her
masculine person, which be near six foot high, add to her manner
and learning, possibly prevent the other sex from regard she,
notwithstanding her petticoat, in the light of a woman. however, as
she have consider the matter scientifically, she perfectly well know,
though she have never practise they, all the art which fine lady
use when they desire to give encouragement, or to conceal liking, with
all the long appendage of smile, ogle, glance, &c., as they be at
present practise in the beau-monde. to sum the whole, no specie of
disguise or affectation have escape her notice; but as to the plain
simple working of honest nature, as she have never see any such, she
could know but little of they.
by mean of this wonderful sagacity, Mrs Western have now, as she
think, make a discovery of something in the mind of Sophia. the
first hint of this she take from the behaviour of the young lady in
the field of battle; and the suspicion which she then conceive, be
greatly corroborate by some observation which she have make that
evening and the next morning. however, be greatly cautious to avoid
be find in a mistake, she carry the secret a whole fortnight in
her bosom, give only some oblique hint, by simper, wink, nod,
and now and then drop an obscure word, which indeed sufficiently
alarm Sophia, but do not at all affect her brother.
be at length, however, thoroughly satisfied of the truth of her
observation, she take an opportunity, one morning, when she be alone
with her brother, to interrupt one of his whistle in the follow
manner:--
"pray, brother, have you not observe something very extraordinary in my
niece lately?"--"No, not I," answer western; "be anything the matter
with the girl?"--"i think there be," reply she; "and something of
much consequence too."--"why, she doth not complain of anything,"
cry western; "and she hath have the small-pox."--"brother," return
she, "girl be liable to other distemper besides the small-pox, and
sometimes possibly to much bad." here Western interrupt she with
much earnestness, and beg she, if anything ail his daughter, to
acquaint he immediately; add, "she know he love she more than his
own soul, and that he would send to the world's end for the good
physician to she." "Nay, nay," answer she, smile, "the distemper
be not so terrible; but I believe, brother, you be convince I know
the world, and I promise you I be never more deceive in my life, if
my niece be not most desperately in love."--"how! in love!" cry
western, in a passion; "in love, without acquaint I! Iwill
disinherit she; Iwill turn she out of door, stark naked, without a
farthing. be all my kindness vor 'ur, and vondness o'ur come to this,
to fall in love without ask I leave?"--"but you will not,"
answer Mrs Western, "turn this daughter, whom you love well than
your own soul, out of door, before you know whether you shall approve
her choice. suppose she should have fix on the very person whom you
yourself would wish, I hope you would not be angry then?"--"no, no,"
cry western, "that would make a difference. if she marry the man I
would ha' she, she may love whom she please, I shallnot trouble my head
about that." "that be speak," answer the sister, "like a sensible
man; but I believe the very person she hath choose would be the very
person you would choose for she. I will disclaim all knowledge of the
world, if it be not so; and I believe, brother, you will allow I have
some."--"Why, lookee, sister," say western, "I do believe you have as
much as any woman; and to be sure those be woman's matter. you know
I donot love to hear you talk about politic; they belong to we, and
petticoat should not meddle: but come, who be the man?"--"marry!"
say she, "you may find he out yourself if you please. you, who be
so great a politician, can be at no great loss. the judgment which can
penetrate into the cabinet of prince, and discover the secret
spring which move the great state wheel in all the political
machine of Europe, must surely, with very little difficulty, find out
what pass in the rude uninformed mind of a girl."--"sister," cry
the squire, "I have often warn'd you not to talk the court gibberish
to I. I tell you, I donot understand the lingo: but I can read a
journal, or the _London Evening Post._ perhaps, indeed, there may be
now and tan a verse which I cannot make much of, because half the
letter be leave out; yet I know very well what be mean by that, and
that our affair donot go so well as they should do, because of
bribery and corruption."--"I pity your country ignorance from my
heart," cry the lady.--"Do you?" answer Western; "and I pity your
town learning; I have rather be anything than a courtier, and a
Presbyterian, and a Hanoverian too, as some people, I believe,
be."--"if you mean I," answer she, "you know I be a woman,
brother; and it signify nothing what I be. Besides--"--"I do know
you be a woman," cry the squire, "and itbe well for thee that art
one; if hadst be a man, I promise thee I have lend thee a flick long
ago."--"Ay, there," say she, "in that flick lie all your fancied
superiority. your body, and not your brain, be strong than our.
believe I, it be well for you that you be able to beat we; or, such
be the superiority of our understanding, we should make all of you
what the brave, and wise, and witty, and polite be already--our
slave."--"i be glad I know your mind," answer the squire. "but
wewill talk more of this matter another time. at present, do tell I
what man be it you mean about my daughter?"--"hold a moment," say
she, "while I digest that sovereign contempt I have for your sex; or
else I ought to be angry too with you. there--I have make a shift to
gulp it down. and now, good politic sir, what think you of Mr Blifil?
do she not faint away on see he lie breathless on the ground? do
she not, after he be recover, turn pale again the moment we come up
to that part of the field where he stand? and pray what else should be
the occasion of all her melancholy that night at supper, the next
morning, and indeed ever since?"--"'Fore George!" cry the squire,
"now you mind I on't, I remember it all. it be certainly so, and I be
glad on't with all my heart. I know Sophy be a good girl, and would
not fall in love to make I angry. I be never more rejoice in my
life; for nothing can lie so handy together as our two estate. I have
this matter in my head some time ago: for certainly the two estate
be in a manner join together in matrimony already, and it would be
a thousand pity to part they. it be true, indeed, there be large
estate in the kingdom, but not in this county, and I have rather bate
something, than marry my daughter among stranger and foreigner.
besides, most o' zuch great estate be in the hand of lord, and I
heate the very name of _themmun_. well but, sister, what would you
advise I to do; for I tell you woman know these matter well than
we do?"--"oh, your humble servant, sir," answer the lady: "we be
oblige to you for allow we a capacity in anything. since you be
pleased, then, most politic sir, to ask my advice, I think you may
propose the match to Allworthy yourself. there be no indecorum in the
proposalbe come from the parent of either side. King Alcinous, in Mr
Pope's odyssey, offer his daughter to Ulysses. I need not caution so
politic a person not to say that your daughter be in love; that would
indeed be against all rule."--"Well," say the squire, "I will
propose it; but I shall certainly lend un a flick, if he should refuse
I." "fear not," cry Mrs Western; "the match be too advantageous to
be refuse." "I donot know that," answer the squire: "Allworthy be a
queer b--ch, and money hath no effect o'un." "Brother," say the lady,
"your politic astonish I. be you really to be impose on by
profession? do you think Mr Allworthy hath more contempt for money
than other man because he profess more? such credulity would well
become one of we weak woman, than that wise sex which heaven hath
form for politician. indeed, brother, you would make a fine plenipo
to negotiate with the French. they would soon persuade you, that they
take town out of mere defensive principle." "Sister," answer the
squire, with much scorn, "let your friend at court answer for the
town take; as you be a woman, I shall lay no blame upon you; for I
suppose they be wise than to trust woman with secret." he
accompany this with so sarcastical a laugh, that Mrs Western could
bear no long. she have be all this time fret in a tender part
(for she be indeed very deeply skilled in these matter, and very
violent in they), and therefore, burst forth in a rage, declare she
brother to be both a clown and a blockhead, and that she would stay no
long in his house.
the squire, though perhaps he have never read Machiavel, be, however,
in many point, a perfect politician. he strongly hold all those wise
tenet, which be so well inculcated in that Politico-Peripatetic
school of Exchange-alley. he know the just value and only use of
money, viz., to lay it up. he be likewise well skilled in the exact
value of reversion, expectation, &c., and have often consider the
amount of his sister's fortune, and the chance which he or his
posterity have of inherit it. this he be infinitely too wise to
sacrifice to a trifling resentment. when he find, therefore, he have
carry matter too far, he begin to think of reconcile they; which
be no very difficult task, as the lady have great affection for her
brother, and still great for her niece; and though too susceptible
of an affront offer to her skill in politic, on which she much
value herself, be a woman of a very extraordinary good and sweet
disposition.
have first, therefore, lay violent hand on the horse, for whose
escape from the stable no place but the window be leave open, he next
apply himself to his sister; soften and soothe she, by unsaying
all he have say, and by assertion directly contrary to those which
have incense she. lastly, he summon the eloquence of Sophia to his
assistance, who, besides a most graceful and win address, have the
advantage of be hear with great favour and partiality by her aunt.
the result of the whole be a kind smile from Mrs Western, who say,
"Brother, you be absolutely a perfect Croat; but as those have their
use in the army of the empress queen, so you likewise have some good
in you. I will therefore once more sign a treaty of peace with you,
and see that you do not infringe it on your side; at least, as you be
so excellent a politician, I may expect you will keep your league,
like the French, till your interest call upon you to break they."
Chapter iii.
contain two defiance to the critic.
the squire have settle matter with his sister, as we have see in
the last chapter, be so greatly impatient to communicate the proposal
to Allworthy, that Mrs Western have the utmost difficulty to prevent
he from visit that gentleman in his sickness, for this purpose.
Mr Allworthy have be engage to dine with Mr Western at the time when
he be take ill. he be therefore no soon discharge out of the
custody of physic, but he think (as be usual with he on all
occasion, both the high and the low) of fulfil his
engagement.
in the interval between the time of the dialogue in the last chapter,
and this day of public entertainment, Sophia have, from certain obscure
hint throw out by her aunt, collect some apprehension that the
sagacious lady suspect her passion for Jones. she now resolve to
take this opportunity of wipe out all such suspicion, and for that
purpose to put an entire constraint on her behaviour.
first, she endeavour to conceal a throb melancholy heart with
the utmost sprightliness in her countenance, and the high gaiety in
her manner. secondly, she address her whole discourse to Mr Blifil,
and take not the least notice of poor Jones the whole day.
the squire be so delighted with this conduct of his daughter, that he
scarce eat any dinner, and spend almost his whole time in watch
opportunity of convey sign of his approbation by wink and nod
to his sister; who be not at first altogether so pleased with what
she see as be her brother.
in short, Sophia so greatly overact her part, that her aunt be at
first stagger, and begin to suspect some affectation in her niece;
but as she be herself a woman of great art, so she soon attribute
this to extreme art in Sophia. she remember the many hint she have
give her niece concern she be in love, and imagine the young
lady have take this way to rally she out of her opinion, by an
overact civility: a notion that be greatly corroborate by the
excessive gaiety with which the whole be accompany. we cannot here
avoid remark, that this conjecture would have be well found
have Sophia live ten year in the air of Grosvenor Square, where young
lady do learn a wonderful knack of rallying and play with that
passion, which be a mighty serious thing in wood and grove an
hundred mile distant from London.
to say the truth, in discover the deceit of other, it matter much
that our own art be wind up, if I may use the expression, in the same
key with theirs: for very artful man sometimes miscarry by fancy
other wiser, or, in other word, great knave, than they really
be. as this observation be pretty deep, I will illustrate it by the
follow short story. three countryman be pursue a Wiltshire
thief through Brentford. the simple of they see "the Wiltshire
House," write under a sign, advise his companion to enter it, for
there most probably they would find their countryman. the second, who
be wise, laugh at this simplicity; but the third, who be wise
still, answer, "let we go in, however, for he may think we should
not suspect he of go amongst his own countryman." they accordingly
go in and search the house, and by that mean miss overtake
the thief, who be at that time but a little way before they; and who,
as they all know, but have never once reflect, could not read.
the reader will pardon a digression in which so invaluable a secret be
communicate, since every gamester will agree how necessary it be to
know exactly the play of another, in order to countermine he. this
will, moreover, afford a reason why the wise man, as be often see,
be the bubble of the weak, and why many simple and innocent
character be so generally misunderstood and misrepresent; but what
be most material, this will account for the deceit which Sophia put on
her politic aunt.
Dinner be end, and the company retire into the garden, Mr
Western, who be thoroughly convinced of the certainty of what his
sister have tell he, take Mr Allworthy aside, and very bluntly
propose a match between Sophia and young Mr Blifil.
Mr Allworthy be not one of those man whose heart flutter at any
unexpected and sudden tiding of worldly profit. his mind be, indeed,
temper with that philosophy which become a man and a Christian. he
affect no absolute superiority to all pleasure and pain, to all joy
and grief; but be not at the same time to be discompose and ruffle
by every accidental blast, by every smile or frown of fortune. he
receive, therefore, Mr Western's proposal without any visible
emotion, or without any alteration of countenance. he say the
alliance be such as he sincerely wish; then launch forth into a
very just encomium on the young lady's merit; acknowledge the offer
to be advantageous in point of fortune; and after thank Mr Western
for the good opinion he have profess of his nephew, conclude, that
if the young people like each other, he should be very desirous to
complete the affair.
Western be a little disappointed at Mr Allworthy's answer, which be
not so warm as he expect. he treat the doubt whether the young
people might like one another with great contempt, say, "that
parent be the good judge of proper match for their child:
that for his part he should insist on the most resign obedience from
his daughter: and if any young fellow could refuse such a bed-fellow,
he be his humble servant, and hop there be no harm do."
Allworthy endeavour to soften this resentment by many eulogium on
Sophia, declare he have no doubt but that Mr Blifil would very gladly
receive the offer; but all be ineffectual; he could obtain no other
answer from the squire but--"i say no more--I humbly hope therebe no
harm do--thatbe all." which word he repeat at least a hundred
time before they part.
Allworthy be too well acquainted with his neighbour to be offend at
this behaviour; and though he be so averse to the rigour which some
parent exercise on their child in the article of marriage, that he
have resolve never to force his nephew's inclination, he be
nevertheless much pleased with the prospect of this union; for the
whole country resound the praise of Sophia, and he have himself
greatly admire the uncommon endowment of both her mind and person.
to which I believe we may add, the consideration of her vast fortune,
which, though he be too sober to be intoxicate with it, he be too
sensible to despise.
and here, in defiance of all the bark critic in the world, I must
and will introduce a digression concern true wisdom, of which Mr
Allworthy be in reality as great a pattern as he be of goodness.
true wisdom then, notwithstanding all which Mr Hogarth's poor poet may
have writ against rich, and in spite of all which any rich well-feed
divine may have preach against pleasure, consist not in the
contempt of either of these. a man may have as much wisdom in the
possession of an affluent fortune, as any beggar in the street; or
may enjoy a handsome wife or a hearty friend, and still remain as wise
as any sour popish recluse, who bury all his social faculty, and
starve his belly while he well lash his back.
to say truth, the wise man be the likeli to possess all worldly
blessing in an eminent degree; for as that moderation which wisdom
prescribe be the sure way to useful wealth, so can it alone qualify
we to taste many pleasure. the wise man gratify every appetite and
every passion, while the fool sacrifice all the rest to pall and
satiate one.
it may be object, that very wise man have be notoriously
avaricious. I answer, not wise in that instance. it may likewise be
say, that the wise man have be in their youth immoderately fond
of pleasure. I answer, they be not wise then.
Wisdom, in short, whose lesson have be represent as so hard to
learn by those who never be at her school, only teach we to extend
a simple maxim universally know and follow even in the low life,
a little farth than that life carry it. and this be, not to buy at
too dear a price.
now, whoever take this maxim abroad with he into the grand market of
the world, and constantly apply it to honour, to rich, to
pleasure, and to every other commodity which that market afford, be,
I will venture to affirm, a wise man, and must be so acknowledge in
the worldly sense of the word; for he make the good of bargain,
since in reality he purchase everything at the price only of a little
trouble, and carry home all the good thing I have mention, while
he keep his health, his innocence, and his reputation, the common
price which be pay for they by other, entire and to himself.
from this moderation, likewise, he learn two other lesson, which
complete his character. first, never to be intoxicate when he hath
make the good bargain, nor deject when the market be empty, or when
its commodity be too dear for his purchase.
but I must remember on what subject I be write, and not trespass too
far on the patience of a good-natured critic. here, therefore, I put
an end to the chapter.
chapter iv.
contain sundry curious matter.
as soon as Mr Allworthy return home, he take Mr Blifil apart, and
after some preface, communicate to he the proposal which have be
make by Mr Western, and at the same time inform he how agreeable
this match would be to himself.
the charm of Sophia have not make the least impression on Blifil; not
that his heart be pre-engaged; neither be he totally insensible of
beauty, or have any aversion to woman; but his appetite be by nature
so moderate, that he be able, by philosophy, or by study, or by some
other method, easily to subdue they: and as to that passion which we
have treat of in the first chapter of this book, he have not the
least tincture of it in his whole composition.
but though he be so entirely free from that mixed passion, of which
we there treat, and of which the virtue and beauty of Sophia form
so notable an object; yet be he altogether as well furnish with
some other passion, that promise themselves very full gratification
in the young lady's fortune. such be avarice and ambition, which
divide the dominion of his mind between they. he have more than once
consider the possession of this fortune as a very desirable thing,
and have entertain some distant view concern it; but his own
youth, and that of the young lady, and indeed principally a reflection
that Mr Western might marry again, and have more child, have
restrain he from too hasty or eager a pursuit.
this last and most material objection be now in great measure
remove, as the proposal come from Mr Western himself. Blifil,
therefore, after a very short hesitation, answer Mr Allworthy, that
matrimony be a subject on which he have not yet think; but that he
be so sensible of his friendly and fatherly care, that he should in
all thing submit himself to his pleasure.
Allworthy be naturally a man of spirit, and his present gravity arise
from true wisdom and philosophy, not from any original phlegm in his
disposition; for he have possess much fire in his youth, and have
marry a beautiful woman for love. he be not therefore greatly
pleased with this cold answer of his nephew; nor could he help
launch forth into the praise of Sophia, and express some wonder
that the heart of a young man could be impregnable to the force of
such charm, unless it be guard by some prior affection.
Blifil assure he he have no such guard; and then proceed to
discourse so wisely and religiously on love and marriage, that he
would have stopt the mouth of a parent much less devoutly inclined
than be his uncle. in the end, the good man be satisfied that his
nephew, far from have any objection to Sophia, have that esteem for
she, which in sober and virtuous mind be the sure foundation of
friendship and love. and as he doubt not but the lover would, in a
little time, become altogether as agreeable to his mistress, he
foresaw great happiness arise to all party by so proper and
desirable an union. with Mr Blifil's consent therefore he write the
next morning to Mr Western, acquaint he that his nephew have very
thankfully and gladly receive the proposal, and would be ready to
wait on the young lady, whenever she should be pleased to accept his
visit.
Western be much pleased with this letter, and immediately return an
answer; in which, without have mention a word to his daughter, he
appoint that very afternoon for open the scene of courtship.
as soon as he have dispatch this messenger, he go in quest of his
sister, whom he find read and expound the _Gazette_ to parson
Supple. to this exposition he be oblige to attend near a quarter of
an hour, though with great violence to his natural impetuosity, before
he be suffer to speak. at length, however, he find an opportunity
of acquaint the lady, that he have business of great consequence to
impart to she; to which she answer, "Brother, I be entirely at your
service. thing look so well in the north, that I be never in a
well humour."
the parson then withdraw, Western acquaint she with all which have
pass, and desire she to communicate the affair to Sophia, which she
readily and chearfully undertake; though perhaps her brother be a
little oblige to that agreeable northern aspect which have so
delight she, that he hear no comment on his proceeding; for they
be certainly somewhat too hasty and violent.
Chapter v.
in which be relate what pass between Sophia and her aunt.
Sophia be in her chamber, reading, when her aunt come in. the moment
she see Mrs Western, she shut the book with so much eagerness, that
the good lady could not forbear ask she, what book that be which
she seem so much afraid of show? "upon my word, madam," answer
Sophia, "it be a book which I be neither ashamed nor afraid to own I
have read. it be the production of a young lady of fashion, whose good
understanding, I think, doth honour to her sex, and whose good heart
be an honour to human nature." Mrs Western then take up the book, and
immediately after throw it down, saying--"Yes, the author be of a very
good family; but she be not much among people one know. I have never
read it; for the good judge say, there be not much in it."--"I dare
not, madam, set up my own opinion," say Sophia, "against the good
judge, but there appear to I a great deal of human nature in it;
and in many part so much true tenderness and delicacy, that it hath
cost I many a tear."--"Ay, and do you love to cry then?" say the
aunt. "I love a tender sensation," answer the niece, "and would pay
the price of a tear for it at any time."--"Well, but show I," say
the aunt, "what be you read when I come in; there be something
very tender in that, I believe, and very love too. you blush, my
dear Sophia. ah! child, you should read book which would teach you a
little hypocrisy, which would instruct you how to hide your thought a
little well."--"I hope, madam," answer Sophia, "I have no thought
which I ought to be ashamed of discover."--"ashame! no," cry the
aunt, "I donot think you have any thought which you ought to be
ashamed of; and yet, child, you blush just now when I mention the
word love. Dear Sophy, be assure you have not one thought which I
be not well acquainted with; as well, child, as the French be with
our motion, long before we put they in execution. do you think,
child, because you have be able to impose upon your father, that you
could impose upon I? do you imagine I do not know the reason of your
overact all that friendship for Mr Blifil yesterday? I have see a
little too much of the world, to be so deceived. Nay, nay, do not
blush again. I tell you it be a passion you need not be ashamed of. it
be a passion I myself approve, and have already bring your father
into the approbation of it. indeed, I solely consider your
inclination; for I would always have that gratify, if possible,
though one may sacrifice high prospect. come, I have news which
will delight your very soul. make I your confident, and I will
undertake you shall be happy to the very extent of your wish." "La,
madam," say Sophia, look more foolishly than ever she do in her
life, "I know not what to say--why, madam, should you suspect?"--"nay,
no dishonesty," return Mrs Western. "consider, you be speak to
one of your own sex, to an aunt, and I hope you be convince you
speak to a friend. consider, you be only reveal to I what I know
already, and what I plainly see yesterday, through that most artful of
all disguise, which you have put on, and which must have deceive any
one who have not perfectly know the world. lastly, consider it be a
passion which I highly approve." "La, madam," say Sophia, "you come
upon one so unawares, and on a sudden. to be sure, madam, I be not
blind--and certainly, if it be a fault to see all human perfection
assemble together--but be it possible my father and you, madam, can
see with my eye?" "I tell you," answer the aunt, "we do entirely
approve; and this very afternoon your father hath appoint for you to
receive your lover." "my father, this afternoon!" cry Sophia, with
the blood start from her face.--"Yes, child," say the aunt, "this
afternoon. you know the impetuosity of my brother's temper. I
acquaint he with the passion which I first discover in you that
evening when you faint away in the field. I see it in your fainting.
I see it immediately upon your recovery. I see it that evening at
supper, and the next morning at breakfast (you know, child, I have
see the world). well, I no soon acquaint my brother, but he
immediately want to propose it to Allworthy. he propose it
yesterday, Allworthy consent (as to be sure he must with joy), and
this afternoon, I tell you, you be to put on all your good air."
"this afternoon!" cry Sophia. "dear aunt, you frighten I out of my
sens." "o, my dear," say the aunt, "you will soon come to yourself
again; for he be a charming young fellow, thatbe the truth on't."
"Nay, I will own," say Sophia, "I know none with such perfection. so
brave, and yet so gentle; so witty, yet so inoffensive; so humane, so
civil, so genteel, so handsome! what signify his being base bear,
when compare with such qualification as these?" "Base bear? what do
you mean?" say the aunt, "Mr Blifil base bear!" Sophia turn
instantly pale at this name, and faintly repeat it. upon which the
aunt cry, "Mr Blifil--ay, Mr Blifil, of whom else have we be
talk?" "good heaven," answer Sophia, ready to sink, "of Mr
Jones, I think; I be sure I know no other who deserves--" "I
protest," cry the aunt, "you frighten I in your turn. be it Mr
Jones, and not Mr Blifil, who be the object of your affection?" "Mr
Blifil!" repeat Sophia. "sure it be impossible you can be in
earnest; if you be, I be the most miserable woman alive." Mrs Western
now stand a few moment silent, while spark of fiery rage flash
from her eye. at length, collect all her force of voice, she
thunder forth in the follow articulate sound:
"and be it possible you can think of disgrace your family by ally
yourself to a bastard? can the blood of the Westerns submit to such
contamination? if you have not sense sufficient to restrain such
monstrous inclination, I think the pride of our family would have
prevent you from give the least encouragement to so base an
affection; much less do I imagine you would ever have have the
assurance to own it to my face."
"Madam," answer Sophia, trembling, "what I have say you have
extort from I. I do not remember to have ever mention the name of
Mr Jones with approbation to any one before; nor should I now have I
not conceive he have your approbation. whatever be my thought of
that poor, unhappy young man, I intend to have carry they with I
to my grave--to that grave where only now, I find, I be to seek
repose." here she sink down in her chair, drown in her tear, and,
in all the move silence of unutterable grief, present a spectacle
which must have affect almost the hard heart.
all this tender sorrow, however, raise no compassion in her aunt. on
the contrary, she now fall into the most violent rage.--"and I would
rather," she cry, in a most vehement voice, "follow you to your
grave, than I would see you disgrace yourself and your family by such
a match. o Heavens! could I have ever suspect that I should live to
hear a niece of mine declare a passion for such a fellow? you be the
first--yes, Miss Western, you be the first of your name who ever
entertain so grovel a thought. a family so note for the
prudence of its women"--here she run on a full quarter of an hour,
till, have exhaust her breath rather than her rage, she conclude
with threaten to go immediately and acquaint her brother.
Sophia then throw herself at her foot, and lay hold of her hand,
beg she with tear to conceal what she have draw from she; urge
the violence of her father's temper, and protest that no
inclination of hers should ever prevail with she to do anything which
might offend he.
Mrs Western stand a moment look at she, and then, have
recollect herself, say, "that on one consideration only she would
keep the secret from her brother; and this be, that Sophia should
promise to entertain Mr Blifil that very afternoon as her lover, and
to regard he as the person who be to be her husband."
Poor Sophia be too much in her aunt's power to deny she anything
positively; she be oblige to promise that she would see Mr Blifil,
and be as civil to he as possible; but beg her aunt that the match
might not be hurry on. she say, "Mr Blifil be by no mean
agreeable to she, and she hop her father would be prevail on not
to make she the most wretched of woman."
Mrs Western assure she, "that the match be entirely agree upon, and
that nothing could or should prevent it. I must own," say she, "I
look on it as on a matter of indifference; nay, perhaps, have some
scruple about it before, which be actually get over by my thinking
it highly agreeable to your own inclination; but now I regard it as
the most eligible thing in the world: nor shall there be, if I can
prevent it, a moment of time lose on the occasion."
Sophia reply, "Delay at least, madam, I may expect from both your
goodness and my father's. surely you will give I time to endeavour to
get the well of so strong a disinclination as I have at present to
this person."
the aunt answer, "she know too much of the world to be so deceived;
that as she be sensible another man have her affection, she should
persuade Mr Western to hasten the match as much as possible. it would
be bad politic, indeed," add she, "to protract a siege when the
enemy's army be at hand, and in danger of relieve it. no, no,
Sophy," say she, "as I be convinced you have a violent passion which
you can never satisfy with honour, I will do all I can to put your
honour out of the care of your family: for when you be marry those
matter will belong only to the consideration of your husband. I hope,
child, you will always have prudence enough to act as become you; but
if you should not, marriage hath save many a woman from ruin."
Sophia well understand what her aunt mean; but do not think proper
to make she an answer. however, she take a resolution to see Mr
Blifil, and to behave to he as civilly as she could, for on that
condition only she obtain a promise from her aunt to keep secret the
liking which her ill fortune, rather than any scheme of Mrs Western,
have unhappily draw from she.
Chapter vi.
contain a dialogue between Sophia and Mrs Honour, which may a
little relieve those tender affection which the foregoing scene may
have raise in the mind of a good-natured reader.
Mrs Western have obtain that promise from her niece which we have
see in the last chapter, withdraw; and presently after arrive Mrs
Honour. she be at work in a neighbouring apartment, and have be
summon to the keyhole by some vociferation in the precede
dialogue, where she have continue during the remain part of it. at
her entry into the room, she find Sophia stand motionless, with
the tear trickle from her eye. upon which she immediately order
a proper quantity of tear into her own eye, and then begin, "O
Gemini, my dear lady, what be the matter?"--"nothing," cry Sophia.
"nothing! o dear Madam!" answer Honour, "you must not tell I that,
when your ladyship be in this taking, and when there hath be such a
preamble between your ladyship and Madam Western."--"Don't teaze I,"
cry Sophia; "I tell you nothing be the matter. good heaven! why be
I born?"--"Nay, madam," say Mrs Honour, "you shall never persuade I
that your la'ship can lament yourself so for nothing. to be sure I be
but a servant; but to be sure I have be always faithful to your
la'ship, and to be sure I would serve your la'ship with my life."--"my
dear Honour," say Sophia, "'tis not in thy power to be of any service
to I. I be irretrievably undo."--"heaven forbid!" answer the
waiting-woman; "but if I cannot be of any service to you, pray tell I,
madam--it will be some comfort to I to know--pray, dear ma'am, tell
I whatbe the matter."--"My father," cry Sophia, "be go to marry
I to a man I both despise and hate."--"O dear, ma'am," answer the
other, "who be this wicked man? for to be sure he be very bad, or your
la'ship would not despise he."--"his name be poison to my tongue,"
reply Sophia: "thou wilt know it too soon." indeed, to confess the
truth, she know it already, and therefore be not very inquisitive as
to that point. she then proceed thus: "I donot pretend to give your
la'ship advice, whereof your la'ship know much well than I can
pretend to, be but a servant; but, i-fackin! no father in England
should marry I against my consent. and, to be sure, the 'squire be so
good, that if he do but know your la'ship despise and hat the
young man, to be sure he would not desire you to marry he. and if
your la'ship would but give I leave to tell my master so. to be sure,
it would be more properer to come from your own mouth; but as your
la'ship doth not care to foul your tongue with his nasty name--"--"you
be mistaken, Honour," say Sophia; "my father be determine before
he ever think fit to mention it to I."--"more shame for he," cry
Honour: "you be to go to bed to he, and not master: and thof a man
may be a very proper man, yet every woman maynot think he handsome
alike. I be sure my master would never act in this manner of his own
head. I wish some people would trouble themselves only with what
belong to they; they would not, I believe, like to be serve so, if
it be their own case; for though I be a maid, I can easily believe as
how all man be not equally agreeable. and what signify your la'ship
have so great a fortune, if you cannot please yourself with the man
you think most handsome? well, I say nothing; but to be sure it be a
pity some folk have not be well bear; nay, as for that matter, I
should not mind it myself; but then there be not so much money; and
what of that? your la'ship hath money enough for both; and where can
your la'ship bestow your fortune well? for to be sure every one must
allow that he be the most handsome, charmingest, fine, tall,
properest man in the world."--"what do you mean by run on in this
manner to I?" cry Sophia, with a very grave countenance. "have I
ever give any encouragement for these liberties?"--"nay, ma'am, I ask
pardon; I mean no harm," answer she; "but to be sure the poor
gentleman hath run in my head ever since I see he this morning. to be
sure, if your la'ship have but see he just now, you must have pity
he. poor gentleman! I wish some misfortune hath not happen to
he; for he hath be walk about with his arm across, and look
so melancholy, all this morning: I vow and protest it make I almost
cry to see he."--"To see whom?" say Sophia. "Poor Mr Jones,"
answer Honour. "see he! why, where do you see he?" cry Sophia.
"by the canal, ma'am," say Honour. "there he hath be walk all
this morning, and at last there he lay himself down: I believe he
lie there still. to be sure, if it have not be for my modesty, be
a maid, as I be, I should have go and speak to he. do, ma'am, let
I go and see, only for a fancy, whether he be there still."--"Pugh!"
say Sophia. "there! no, no: what should he do there? he be go
before this time, to be sure. besides, why--what--why should you go to
see? besides, I want you for something else. go, fetch I my hat and
glove. I shall walk with my aunt in the grove before dinner." Honour
do immediately as she be bid, and Sophia put her hat on; when,
look in the glass, she fancy the ribbon with which her hat be
tie do not become she, and so send she maid back again for a ribbon
of a different colour; and then give Mrs Honour repeat charge not
to leave her work on any account, as she say it be in violent haste,
and must be finish that very day, she mutter something more about
go to the grove, and then sally out the contrary way, and walk,
as fast as her tender trembling limb could carry she, directly
towards the canal.
Jones have be there as Mrs Honour have tell she; he have indeed spend
two hour there that morning in melancholy contemplation on his
Sophia, and have go out from the garden at one door the moment she
enter it at another. so that those unlucky minute which have be
spend in change the ribbon, have prevent the lover from meeting
at this time;--a most unfortunate accident, from which my fair reader
will not fail to draw a very wholesome lesson. and here I strictly
forbid all male critic to intermeddle with a circumstance which I
have recount only for the sake of the lady, and upon which they
only be at liberty to comment.
Chapter vii.
a picture of formal courtship in miniature, as it always ought to be
draw, and a scene of a tenderer kind paint at full length.
it be well remark by one (and perhaps by more), that misfortune do
not come single. this wise maxim be now verify by Sophia, who be
not only disappointed of see the man she love, but have the
vexation of be oblige to dress herself out, in order to receive a
visit from the man she hat.
that afternoon Mr Western, for the first time, acquaint his daughter
with his intention; tell she, he know very well that she have hear
it before from her aunt. Sophia look very grave upon this, nor could
she prevent a few pearl from steal into her eye. "come, come,"
say western, "none of your maidenish air; I know all; I assure you
sister hath tell I all."
"be it possible," say Sophia, "that my aunt can have betray I
already?"--"Ay, ay," say western; "betray you! ay. why, you
betray yourself yesterday at dinner. you show your fancy very
plainly, I think. but you young girl never know what you would be at.
so you cry because I be go to marry you to the man you be in love
with! your mother, I remember, whimper and whine just in the same
manner; but it be all over within twenty-four hour after we be
marry: Mr Blifil be a brisk young man, and will soon put an end to
your squeamishness. come, chear up, chear up; I expect un every
minute."
Sophia be now convinced that her aunt have behave honourably to she:
and she determine to go through that disagreeable afternoon with as
much resolution as possible, and without give the least suspicion in
the world to her father.
Mr Blifil soon arrive; and Mr Western soon after withdraw, leave
the young couple together.
here a long silence of near a quarter of an hour ensue; for the
gentleman who be to begin the conversation have all the unbecoming
modesty which consist in bashfulness. he often attempt to speak,
and as often suppress his word just at the very point of utterance.
at last out they break in a torrent of far-fetched and high-strained
compliment, which be answer on her side by downcast look, half
bow, and civil monosyllable. Blifil, from his inexperience in the
way of woman, and from his conceit of himself, take this behaviour
for a modest assent to his courtship; and when, to shorten a scene
which she could no long support, Sophia rise up and leave the room,
he impute that, too, merely to bashfulness, and comfort himself
that he should soon have enough of her company.
he be indeed perfectly well satisfied with his prospect of success;
for as to that entire and absolute possession of the heart of his
mistress which romantic lover require, the very idea of it never
enter his head. her fortune and her person be the sole object of
his wish, of which he make no doubt soon to obtain the absolute
property; as Mr Western's mind be so earnestly bent on the match; and
as he well know the strict obedience which Sophia be always ready to
pay to her father's will, and the great still which her father would
exact, if there be occasion. this authority, therefore, together with
the charm which he fancy in his own person and conversation, could
not fail, he think, of succeed with a young lady, whose
inclination be, he doubt not, entirely disengaged.
of Jones he certainly have not even the least jealousy; and I have
often think it wonderful that he have not. perhaps he imagine the
character which Jones bear all over the country (how justly, let the
reader determine), of be one of the wild fellow in England,
might render he odious to a lady of the most exemplary modesty.
perhaps his suspicion might be lay asleep by the behaviour of
Sophia, and of Jones himself, when they be all in company together.
lastly, and indeed principally, he be well assured there be not
another self in the case. he fancy that he know Jones to the bottom,
and have in reality a great contempt for his understanding, for not
be more attached to his own interest. he have no apprehension that
Jones be in love with Sophia; and as for any lucrative motif, he
imagine they would sway very little with so silly a fellow. Blifil,
moreover, think the affair of Molly Seagrim still go on, and
indeed believe it would end in marriage; for Jones really love he
from his childhood, and have keep no secret from he, till his
behaviour on the sickness of Mr Allworthy have entirely alienate his
heart; and it be by mean of the quarrel which have ensue on this
occasion, and which be not yet reconcile, that Mr Blifil know
nothing of the alteration which have happen in the affection which
Jones have formerly bear towards Molly.
from these reason, therefore, Mr Blifil see no bar to his success
with Sophia. he conclude her behaviour be like that of all other
young lady on a first visit from a lover, and it have indeed entirely
answer his expectation.
Mr Western take care to way-lie the lover at his exit from his
mistress. he find he so elevated with his success, so enamour with
his daughter, and so satisfied with her reception of he, that the old
gentleman begin to caper and dance about his hall, and by many other
antic action to express the extravagance of his joy; for he have not
the least command over any of his passion; and that which have at any
time the ascendant in his mind hurry he to the wild excess.
as soon as Blifil be depart, which be not till after many hearty
kiss and embrace bestow on he by Western, the good squire go
instantly in quest of his daughter, whom he no soon find than he
pour forth the most extravagant rapture, bid her chuse what
clothe and jewel she please; and declare that he have no other use
for fortune but to make she happy. he then caress she again and
again with the utmost profusion of fondness, call she by the most
endear name, and protest she be his only joy on earth.
Sophia perceive her father in this fit of affection, which she do
not absolutely know the reason of (for fit of fondness be not
unusual to he, though this be rather more violent than ordinary),
think she should never have a well opportunity of disclose
herself than at present, as far at least as regard Mr Blifil; and
she too well foresaw the necessity which she should soon be under of
come to a full explanation. after have thank the squire,
therefore, for all his profession of kindness, she add, with a look
full of inexpressible softness, "and be it possible my papa can be so
good to place all his joy in his Sophy's happiness?" which western
have confirm by a great oath, and a kiss; she then lay hold of
his hand, and, fall on her knee, after many warm and passionate
declaration of affection and duty, she beg he "not to make she
the most miserable creature on earth by force she to marry a man
whom she detest. this I entreat of you, dear sir," say she, "for
your sake, as well as my own, since you be so very kind to tell I
your happiness depend on mine."--"how! what!" say western, star
wildly. "oh! sir," continue she, "not only your poor Sophy's
happiness; her very life, her being, depend upon your grant she
request. I cannot live with Mr Blifil. to force I into this marriage
would be kill I."--"you cannot live with Mr Blifil?" say Western.
"no, upon my soul I cannot," answer Sophia. "then die and be d--d,"
cry he, spurn she from he. "oh! sir," cry Sophia, catch
hold of the skirt of his coat, "take pity on I, I beseech you. donot
look and say such cruel--can you be unmove while you see your Sophy
in this dreadful condition? can the good of father break my heart?
will he kill I by the most painful, cruel, linger death?"--"pooh!
pooh!" cry the squire; "all stuff and nonsense; all maidenish
trick. kill you, indeed! will marriage kill you?"--"oh! sir,"
answer Sophia, "such a marriage be bad than death. he be not even
indifferent; I hate and det he."--"if you det un never so
much," cry western, "you shall ha'un." this he bind by an oath too
shocking to repeat; and after many violent asseveration, conclude in
these word: "I be resolve upon the match, and unless you consent to
it I will not give you a groat, not a single farthing; no, though I
see you expire with famine in the street, I would not relieve you
with a morsel of bread. this be my fix resolution, and so I leave
you to consider on it." he then break from she with such violence,
that her face dash against the floor; and he burst directly out of
the room, leave poor Sophia prostrate on the ground.
when Western come into the hall, he there find Jones; who see his
friend look wild, pale, and almost breathless, could not forbear
enquire the reason of all these melancholy appearance. upon which
the squire immediately acquaint he with the whole matter,
conclude with bitter denunciation against Sophia, and very pathetic
lamentation of the misery of all father who be so unfortunate to
have daughter.
Jones, to whom all the resolution which have be take in favour of
Blifil be yet a secret, be at first almost strike dead with this
relation; but recover his spirit a little, mere despair, as he
afterwards say, inspire he to mention a matter to Mr Western, which
seem to require more impudence than a human forehead be ever gift
with. he desire leave to go to Sophia, that he might endeavour to
obtain her concurrence with her father's inclination.
if the squire have be as quicksighte as he be remarkable for the
contrary, passion might at present very well have blind he. he
thank Jones for offer to undertake the office, and say, "go, go,
prithee, try what canst do;" and then swear many execrable oath that
he would turn she out of door unless she consent to the match.
Chapter viii.
the meeting between Jones and Sophia.
Jones depart instantly in quest of Sophia, whom he find just rise
from the ground, where her father have leave she, with the tear
trickle from her eye, and the blood run from her lip. he
presently run to she, and with a voice full at once of tenderness and
terrour, cry, "o my Sophia, what mean this dreadful sight?" she
look softly at he for a moment before she speak, and then say, "Mr
Jones, for Heaven's sake how come you here?--leave I, I beseech you,
this moment."--"Do not," say he, "impose so harsh a command upon
I--my heart bleed fast than those lip. o Sophia, how easily could
I drain my vein to preserve one drop of that dear blood."--"I have
too many obligation to you already," answer she, "for sure you
mean they such." here she look at he tenderly almost a minute, and
then burst into an agony, cry, "oh, Mr Jones, why do you save my
life? my death would have be happy for we both."--"happi for we
both!" cry he. "could rack or wheel kill I so painfully as
Sophia's--I cannot bear the dreadful sound. do I live but for she?"
both his voice and look be full of inexpressible tenderness when he
speak these word; and at the same time he lay gently hold on her
hand, which she do not withdraw from he; to say the truth, she
hardly know what she do or suffer. a few moment now pass in
silence between these lover, while his eye be eagerly fix on
Sophia, and her decline towards the ground: at last she recover
strength enough to desire he again to leave she, for that her certain
ruin would be the consequence of their be find together; add,
"oh, Mr Jones, you know not, you know not what hath pass this cruel
afternoon."--"I know all, my Sophia," answer he; "your cruel father
hath tell I all, and he himself hath send I hither to you."--"My
father send you to I!" reply she: "sure you dream."--"would to
Heaven," cry he, "it be but a dream! oh, Sophia, your father hath
send I to you, to be an advocate for my odious rival, to solicit you
in his favour. I take any mean to get access to you. o speak to I,
Sophia! comfort my bleed heart. sure no one ever love, ever doate
like I. do not unkindly withhold this dear, this soft, this gentle
hand--one moment, perhaps, tear you for ever from I--nothing less
than this cruel occasion could, I believe, have ever conquer the
respect and awe with which you have inspire I." she stand a moment
silent, and cover with confusion; then lift up her eye gently
towards he, she cry, "what would Mr Jones have I say?"--"O do but
promise," cry he, "that you never will give yourself to
Blifil."--"Name not," answer she, "the detest sound. be assure I
never will give he what be in my power to withhold from he."--"now
then," cry he, "while you be so perfectly kind, go a little
far, and add that I may hope."--"Alas!" say she, "Mr Jones,
whither will you drive I? what hope have I to bestow? you know my
father's intention."--"but I know," answer he, "your compliance
with they cannot be compel."--"what," say she, "must be the
dreadful consequence of my disobedience? my own ruin be my least
concern. I cannot bear the thought of be the cause of my father's
misery."--"He be himself the cause," cry Jones, "by exact a power
over you which nature hath not give he. think on the misery which I
be to suffer if I be to lose you, and see on which side pity will turn
the balance."--"think of it!" reply she: "can you imagine I do not
feel the ruin which I must bring on you, should I comply with your
desire? it be that thought which give I resolution to bid you fly
from I for ever, and avoid your own destruction."--"I fear no
destruction," cry he, "but the loss of Sophia. if you would save I
from the most bitter agony, recall that cruel sentence. indeed, I
can never part with you, indeed I cannot."
the lover now stand both silent and trembling, Sophia be unable to
withdraw her hand from Jones, and he almost as unable to hold it; when
the scene, which I believe some of my reader will think have last
long enough, be interrupt by one of so different a nature, that we
shall reserve the relation of it for a different chapter.
chapter ix.
be of a much more tempestuous kind than the former.
before we proceed with what now happen to our lover, it may be
proper to recount what have past in the hall during their tender
interview.
soon after Jones have leave Mr Western in the manner above mention,
his sister come to he, and be presently inform of all that have
pass between her brother and Sophia relate to Blifil.
this behaviour in her niece the good lady construe to be an absolute
breach of the condition on which she have engage to keep her love for
Mr Jones a secret. she consider herself, therefore, at full liberty
to reveal all she know to the squire, which she immediately do in the
most explicit term, and without any ceremony or preface.
the idea of a marriage between Jones and his daughter, have never once
enter into the squire's head, either in the warm minute of his
affection towards that young man, or from suspicion, or on any other
occasion. he do indeed consider a parity of fortune and circumstance
to be physically as necessary an ingredient in marriage, as difference
of sex, or any other essential; and have no more apprehension of his
daughter's fall in love with a poor man, than with any animal of a
different specie.
he become, therefore, like one thunderstruck at his sister's relation.
he be, at first, incapable of make any answer, have be almost
deprive of his breath by the violence of the surprize. this, however,
soon return, and, as be usual in other case after an intermission,
with redouble force and fury.
the first use he make of the power of speech, after his recovery from
the sudden effect of his astonishment, be to discharge a round
volley of oath and imprecation. after which he proceed hastily to
the apartment where he expect to find the lover, and murmur, or
rather indeed roar forth, intention of revenge every step he go.
as when two dove, or two wood-pigeon, or as when Strephon and
Phyllis (for that come near to the mark) be retire into some
pleasant solitary grove, to enjoy the delightful conversation of Love,
that bashful boy, who cannot speak in public, and be never a good
companion to more than two at a time; here, while every object be
serene, should hoarse thunder burst suddenly through the shatter
cloud, and rumble roll along the sky, the frightened maid start
from the mossy bank or verdant turf, the pale livery of death succeed
the red regimental in which Love have before dr her cheek, fear
shake her whole frame, and her lover scarce support her trembling
tottering limb.
or as when two gentleman, stranger to the wondrous wit of the place,
be crack a bottle together at some inn or tavern at Salisbury, if
the great Dowdy, who act the part of a madman as well as some of his
setter-on do that of a fool, should rattle his chain, and dreadfully
hum forth the grumble catch along the gallery; the fright
stranger stand aghast; scar at the horrid sound, they seek some
place of shelter from the approach danger; and if the well-bar
window do admit their exit, would venture their neck to escape the
threaten fury now come upon they.
so tremble poor Sophia, so turn she pale at the noise of her
father, who, in a voice most dreadful to hear, come on swearing,
cursing, and vow the destruction of Jones. to say the truth, I
believe the youth himself would, from some prudent consideration,
have prefer another place of abode at this time, have his terror on
Sophia's account give he liberty to reflect a moment on what any
otherway concern himself, than as his love make he partake
whatever affect she.
and now the squire, have burst open the door, behold an object which
instantly suspend all his fury against Jones; this be the ghastly
appearance of Sophia, who have faint away in her lover's arm. this
tragical sight Mr Western no soon beheld, than all his rage forsook
he; he roar for help with his utmost violence; run first to his
daughter, then back to the door call for water, and then back again
to Sophia, never consider in whose arm she then be, nor perhaps
once recollect that there be such a person in the world as Jones;
for indeed I believe the present circumstance of his daughter be
now the sole consideration which employ his thought.
Mrs Western and a great number of servant soon come to the assistance
of Sophia with water, cordial, and everything necessary on those
occasion. these be apply with such success, that Sophia in a very
few minute begin to recover, and all the symptom of life to return.
upon which she be presently lead off by her own maid and Mrs Western:
nor do that good lady depart without leave some wholesome
admonition with her brother, on the dreadful effect of his passion,
or, as she please to call it, madness.
the squire, perhaps, do not understand this good advice, as it be
deliver in obscure hint, shrug, and note of admiration: at least,
if he do understand it, he profit very little by it; for no soon
be he cure of his immediate fear for his daughter, than he relapse
into his former frenzy, which must have produce an immediate battle
with Jones, have not parson Supple, who be a very strong man, be
present, and by mere force restrain the squire from act of
hostility.
the moment Sophia be depart, Jones advance in a very suppliant
manner to Mr Western, whom the parson hold in his arm, and beg he
to be pacify; for that, while he continue in such a passion, it
would be impossible to give he any satisfaction.
"I wull have satisfaction o' thee," answer the squire; "so doff thy
clothe. _at unt_ half a man, and Iwill lick thee as well as wast ever
lick in thy life." he then bespatter the youth with abundance of
that language which pass between country gentleman who embrace
opposite side of the question; with frequent application to he to
salute that part which be generally introduce into all controversy
that arise among the low order of the english gentry at
horse-race, cock-match, and other public place. allusion to this
part be likewise often make for the sake of the jest. and here, I
believe, the wit be generally misunderstood. in reality, it lie in
desire another to kiss your a-- for have just before threaten to
kick his; for I have observe very accurately, that no one ever
desire you to kick that which belong to himself, nor offer to kiss
this part in another.
it may likewise seem surprize that in the many thousand kind
invitation of this sort, which every one who hath converse with
country gentleman must have hear, no one, I believe, hath ever see a
single instance where the desire hath be comply with;--a great
instance of their want of politeness; for in town nothing can be more
common than for the fine gentleman to perform this ceremony every
day to their superior, without have that favour once request of
they.
to all such wit, Jones very calmly answer, "Sir, this usage may
perhaps cancel every other obligation you have confer on I; but
there be one you can never cancel; nor will I be provoke by your
abuse to lift my hand against the father of Sophia."
at these word the squire grow still more outrageous than before; so
that the parson beg Jones to retire; say, "you behold, sir, how
he waxeth wrath at your abode here; therefore let I pray you not to
tarry any long. his anger be too much kindle for you to commune
with he at present. you have well, therefore, conclude your visit,
and refer what matter you have to urge in your behalf to some other
opportunity."
Jones accept this advice with thank, and immediately depart. the
squire now regain the liberty of his hand, and so much temper as to
express some satisfaction in the restraint which have be lay upon
he; declare that he should certainly have beat his brain out; and
add, "it would have vex one confoundedly to have be hang for
such a rascal."
the parson now begin to triumph in the success of his peace-make
endeavour, and proceed to read a lecture against anger, which might
perhaps rather have tend to raise than to quiet that passion in some
hasty mind. this lecture he enrich with many valuable quotation
from the antient, particularly from Seneca; who hath indeed so well
handle this passion, that none but a very angry man can read he
without great pleasure and profit. the doctor conclude this harangue
with the famous story of Alexander and Clitus; but as I find that
enter in my common-place under title Drunkenness, I shall not insert
it here.
the squire take no notice of this story, nor perhaps of anything he
say; for he interrupt he before he have finish, by call for a
tankard of beer; observe (which be perhaps as true as any
observation on this fever of the mind) that anger make a man dry.
no soon have the squire swallow a large draught than he renew the
discourse on Jones, and declare a resolution of go the next
morning early to acquaint Mr Allworthy. his friend would have
dissuade he from this, from the mere motive of good-nature; but his
dissuasion have no other effect than to produce a large volley of oath
and curse, which greatly shock the pious ear of Supple; but he do
not dare to remonstrate against a privilege which the squire claim
as a freeborn Englishman. to say truth, the parson submit to please
his palate at the squire's table, at the expense of suffer now and
then this violence to his ear. he content himself with think he
do not promote this evil practice, and that the squire would not
swear an oath the less, if he never enter within his gate. however,
though he be not guilty of ill manner by rebuke a gentleman in his
own house, he pay he off obliquely in the pulpit: which have not,
indeed, the good effect of work a reformation in the squire
himself; yet it so far operate on his conscience, that he put the
law very severely in execution against other, and the magistrate be
the only person in the parish who could swear with impunity.
Chapter x.
in which Mr Western visit Mr Allworthy.
Mr Allworthy be now retire from breakfast with his nephew, well
satisfied with the report of the young gentleman's successful visit to
Sophia (for he greatly desire the match, more on account of the young
lady's character than of her riches), when Mr Western break abruptly
in upon they, and without any ceremony begin as follows:--
"there, you have do a fine piece of work truly! you have bring up
your bastard to a fine purpose; not that I believe you have have any
hand in it neither, that is, as a man may say, designedly: but there
be a fine kettle-of-fish make on't up at our house." "what can be the
matter, Mr Western?" say Allworthy. "o, matter enow of all
conscience: my daughter hath fall in love with your bastard, thatbe
all; but I willnot ge she a hapeny, not the twentieth part of a brass
varden. I always think what would come o' breed up a bastard like
a gentleman, and let un come about to vok's house. itbe well vor
un I could not get at un: Ihave a lick'd un; Ihave a spoil'd his
caterwauling; Ihave a teach the son of a whore to meddle with meat for
his master. he shallnot ever have a morsel of meat of mine, or a varden
to buy it: if she will ha un, one smock shall be her portion. Iwould
soon ge my esteate to the zinking fund, that it may be send to
Hanover to corrupt our nation with." "I be heartily sorry," cry
allworthy. "pox o' your sorrow," say western; "it will do I
abundance of good when I have lose my only child, my poor Sophy, that
be the joy of my heart, and all the hope and comfort of my age; but I
be resolve I will turn she out o' door; she shall beg, and starve,
and rot in the street. not one hapeny, not a hapeny shall she ever
hae o' mine. the son of a bitch be always good at find a hare
sitting, an be rot to'n: I little think what puss he be look
after; but it shall be the bad he ever vound in his life. she shall
be no well than carrion: the skin o'er be all he shall ha, and zu
you may tell un." "I be in amazement," cry allworthy, "at what you
tell I, after what pass between my nephew and the young lady no
long ago than yesterday." "yes, sir," answer Western, "it be
after what pass between your nephew and she that the whole matter
come out. Mr Blifil there be no soon go than the son of a whore
come lurch about the house. little do I think when I use to love
he for a sportsman that he be all the while a poaching after my
daughter." "why truly," say Allworthy, "I could wish you have not
give he so many opportunity with she; and you will do I the
justice to acknowledge that I have always be averse to his staying
so much at your house, though I own I have no suspicion of this kind."
"why, zound," cry western, "who could have think it? what the
devil have she to do wi'n? he do not come there a courting to she; he
come there a hunting with I." "but be it possible," say Allworthy,
"that you should never discern any symptom of love between they, when
you have see they so often together?" "never in my life, as I hope to
be save," cry western: "I never so much as zeed he kiss she in all
my life; and so far from court she, he use rather to be more
silent when she be in company than at any other time; and as for the
girl, she be always less civil to'n than to any young man that come
to the house. as to that matter, I be not more easy to be deceive
than another; I would not have you think I be, neighbour." Allworthy
could scarce refrain laughter at this; but he resolve to do a
violence to himself; for he perfectly well know mankind, and have too
much good-breeding and good-nature to offend the squire in his present
circumstance. he then ask Western what he would have he do upon
this occasion. to which the other answer, "that he would have he
keep the rascal away from his house, and that he would go and lock up
the wench; for he be resolve to make she marry Mr Blifil in spite of
her tooth." he then shake Blifil by the hand, and swear he would have
no other son-in-law. presently after which he take his leave; say
his house be in such disorder that it be necessary for he to make
haste home, to take care his daughter do not give he the slip; and
as for Jones, he swear if he catch he at his house, he would qualify
he to run for the gelding' plate.
when Allworthy and Blifil be again leave together, a long silence
ensue between they; all which interval the young gentleman fill up
with sigh, which proceed partly from disappointment, but more from
hatred; for the success of Jones be much more grievous to he than
the loss of Sophia.
at length his uncle ask he what he be determined to do, and he
answer in the follow words:--"Alas! sir, can it be a question
what step a lover will take, when reason and passion point different
way? I be afraid it be too certain he will, in that dilemma, always
follow the latter. reason dictate to I, to quit all thought of a
woman who place her affection on another; my passion bid I hope
she may in time change her inclination in my favour. here, however, I
conceive an objection may be raise, which, if it could not fully be
answer, would totally deter I from any further pursuit. I mean the
injustice of endeavour to supplant another in a heart of which he
seem already in possession; but the determined resolution of Mr
Western show that, in this case, I shall, by so do, promote the
happiness of every party; not only that of the parent, who will thus
be preserve from the high degree of misery, but of both the
other, who must be undo by this match. the lady, I be sure, will be
undo in every sense; for, besides the loss of most part of her own
fortune, she will be not only married to a beggar, but the little
fortune which her father cannot withhold from she will be squander
on that wench with whom I know he yet converse. Nay, that be a
trifle; for I know he to be one of the bad man in the world; for
have my dear uncle know what I have hitherto endeavour to conceal,
he must have long since abandon so profligate a wretch." "how!" say
Allworthy; "hath he do anything bad than I already know? tell I,
I beseech you?" "no," reply Blifil; "it be now past, and perhaps he
may have repent of it." "I command you, on your duty," say
Allworthy, "to tell I what you mean." "you know, sir," say Blifil,
"I never disobey you; but I be sorry I mention it, since it may
now look like revenge, whereas, I thank Heaven, no such motive ever
enter my heart; and if you oblige I to discover it, I must be his
petitioner to you for your forgiveness." "I will have no condition,"
answer Allworthy; "I think I have show tenderness enough towards
he, and more perhaps than you ought to thank I for." "More, indeed,
I fear, than he deserve," cry Blifil; "for in the very day of your
utmost danger, when myself and all the family be in tear, he fill
the house with riot and debauchery. he drank, and sung, and roar;
and when I give he a gentle hint of the indecency of his action, he
fall into a violent passion, swear many oath, call I rascal, and
strike I." "how!" cry allworthy; "do he dare to strike you?" "I be
sure," cry Blifil, "I have forgive he that long ago. I wish I
could so easily forget his ingratitude to the good of benefactor; and
yet even that I hope you will forgive he, since he must have
certainly be possess with the devil: for that very evening, as Mr
Thwackum and myself be take the air in the field, and exult in
the good symptom which then first begin to discover themselves, we
unluckily see he engage with a wench in a manner not fit to be
mention. Mr Thwackum, with more boldness than prudence, advance to
rebuke he, when (I be sorry to say it) he fall upon the worthy man,
and beat he so outrageously that I wish he may have yet recover the
bruise. nor be I without my share of the effect of his malice,
while I endeavour to protect my tutor; but that I have long
forgive; nay, I prevail with Mr Thwackum to forgive he too, and
not to inform you of a secret which I fear might be fatal to he.
and now, sir, since I have unadvisedly drop a hint of this matter,
and your command have oblige I to discover the whole, let I
intercede with you for he." "o child!" say Allworthy, "I know not
whether I should blame or applaud your goodness, in conceal such
villany a moment: but where be Mr Thwackum? not that I want any
confirmation of what you say; but I will examine all the evidence of
this matter, to justify to the world the example I be resolve to make
of such a monster."
Thwackum be now send for, and presently appear. he corroborate
every circumstance which the other have depose; nay, he produce the
record upon his breast, where the handwriting of Mr Jones remain
very legible in black and blue. he conclude with declare to Mr
Allworthy, that he should have long since inform he of this matter,
have not Mr Blifil, by the most earnest interposition, prevent he.
"he be," say he, "an excellent youth: though such forgiveness of
enemy be carry the matter too far."
in reality, Blifil have take some pain to prevail with the parson,
and to prevent the discovery at that time; for which he have many
reason. he know that the mind of man be apt to be soften and
relax from their usual severity by sickness. besides, he imagine
that if the story be tell when the fact be so recent, and the
physician about the house, who might have unravel the real truth,
he should never be able to give it the malicious turn which he
intend. again, he resolve to hoard up this business, till the
indiscretion of Jones should afford some additional complaint; for he
think the joint weight of many fact fall upon he together,
would be the most likely to crush he; and he watch, therefore, some
such opportunity as that with which fortune have now kindly present
he. lastly, by prevail with Thwackum to conceal the matter for a
time, he know he should confirm an opinion of his friendship to Jones,
which he have greatly labour to establish in Mr Allworthy.
Chapter xi.
a short chapter; but which contain sufficient matter to affect the
good-natured reader.
it be Mr Allworthy's custom never to punish any one, not even to turn
away a servant, in a passion. he resolve therefore to delay pass
sentence on Jones till the afternoon.
the poor young man attend at dinner, as usual; but his heart be too
much load to suffer he to eat. his grief too be a good deal
aggravate by the unkind look of Mr Allworthy; whence he conclude
that Western have discover the whole affair between he and Sophia;
but as to Mr Blifil's story, he have not the least apprehension; for of
much the great part he be entirely innocent; and for the residue,
as he have forgive and forget it himself, so he suspect no
remembrance on the other side. when dinner be over, and the servant
depart, Mr Allworthy begin to harangue. he set forth, in a long
speech, the many iniquity of which Jones have be guilty,
particularly those which this day have bring to light; and conclude
by tell he, "that unless he could clear himself of the charge, he
be resolve to banish he his sight for ever."
many disadvantage attend poor Jones in make his defence; nay,
indeed, he hardly know his accusation; for as Mr Allworthy, in
recount the drunkenness, &c., while he lie ill, out of modesty sunk
everything that relate particularly to himself, which indeed
principally constitute the crime; Jones could not deny the charge.
his heart be, besides, almost break already; and his spirit be so
sunk, that he could say nothing for himself; but acknowledge the
whole, and, like a criminal in despair, throw himself upon mercy;
conclude, "that though he must own himself guilty of many folly
and inadvertency, he hop he have do nothing to deserve what would
be to he the great punishment in the world."
Allworthy answer, "that he have forgive he too often already, in
compassion to his youth, and in hope of his amendment: that he now
find he be an abandon reprobate, and such as it would be criminal
in any one to support and encourage. Nay," say Mr Allworthy to he,
"your audacious attempt to steal away the young lady, call upon I to
justify my own character in punish you. the world who have already
censure the regard I have show for you may think, with some colour
at least of justice, that I connive at so base and barbarous an
action--an action of which you must have know my abhorrence: and
which, have you have any concern for my ease and honour, as well as for
my friendship, you would never have think of undertake. fie upon
it, young man! indeed there be scarce any punishment equal to your
crime, and I can scarce think myself justifiable in what I be now
go to bestow on you. however, as I have educate you like a child
of my own, I will not turn you naked into the world. when you open
this paper, therefore, you will find something which may enable you,
with industry, to get an honest livelihood; but if you employ it to
bad purpose, I shall not think myself oblige to supply you
far, be resolve, from this day forward, to converse no more
with you on any account. I cannot avoid say, there be no part of
your conduct which I resent more than your ill-treatment of that good
young man (mean Blifil) who hath behave with so much tenderness
and honour towards you."
these last word be a dose almost too bitter to be swallow. a
flood of tear now gush from the eye of Jones, and every faculty of
speech and motion seem to have desert he. it be some time before
he be able to obey Allworthy's peremptory command of depart;
which he at length do, have first kiss his hand with a passion
difficult to be affect, and as difficult to be describe.
the reader must be very weak, if, when he consider the light in which
Jones then appear to Mr Allworthy, he should blame the rigour of his
sentence. and yet all the neighbourhood, either from this weakness, or
from some bad motive, condemn this justice and severity as the
high cruelty. Nay, the very person who have before censure the
good man for the kindness and tenderness show to a bastard (his own,
accord to the general opinion), now cry out as loudly against
turn his own child out of door. the woman especially be
unanimous in take the part of Jones, and raise more story on the
occasion than I have room, in this chapter, to set down.
one thing must not be omit, that, in their censure on this
occasion, none ever mention the sum contain in the paper which
Allworthy give Jones, which be no less than five hundred pound; but
all agree that he be send away penniless, and some say naked, from
the house of his inhuman father.
Chapter xii.
contain love-letter, &c.
Jones be command to leave the house immediately, and tell, that his
clothe and everything else should be send to he whithersoever he
should order they.
he accordingly set out, and walk above a mile, not regard, and
indeed scarce knowing, whither he go. at length a little brook
obstruct his passage, he throw himself down by the side of it; nor
could he help mutter with some little indignation, "sure my father
will not deny I this place to rest in!"
here he presently fall into the most violent agony, tear his hair
from his head, and use most other action which generally accompany
fit of madness, rage, and despair.
when he have in this manner vent the first emotion of passion, he
begin to come a little to himself. his grief now take another turn,
and discharge itself in a gentle way, till he become at last cool
enough to reason with his passion, and to consider what step be
proper to be take in his deplorable condition.
and now the great doubt be, how to act with regard to Sophia. the
thought of leave she almost rent his heart asunder; but the
consideration of reduce she to ruin and beggary still rack he, if
possible, more; and if the violent desire of possess her person
could have induce he to listen one moment to this alternative, still
he be by no means certain of her resolution to indulge his wish at
so high an expense. the resentment of Mr Allworthy, and the injury he
must do to his quiet, argue strongly against this latter; and lastly,
the apparent impossibility of his success, even if he would sacrifice
all these consideration to it, come to his assistance; and thus
honour at last back with despair, with gratitude to his benefactor,
and with real love to his mistress, get the well of burn desire,
and he resolve rather to quit Sophia, than pursue she to her ruin.
it be difficult for any who have not feel it, to conceive the glowing
warmth which fill his breast on the first contemplation of this
victory over his passion. pride flatter he so agreeably, that his
mind perhaps enjoy perfect happiness; but this be only momentary:
Sophia soon return to his imagination, and allay the joy of his
triumph with no less bitter pang than a good-natured general must
feel, when he survey the bleed heap, at the price of whose blood
he hath purchase his laurel; for thousand of tender idea lie
murder before our conqueror.
be resolve, however, to pursue the path of this giant honour, as
the gigantic poet Lee call it, he determine to write a farewel
letter to Sophia; and accordingly proceed to a house not far off,
where, be furnish with proper material, he write as follows:--
"MADAM,
"when you reflect on the situation in which I write, I be sure your
good-nature will pardon any inconsistency or absurdity which my
letter contain; for everything here flow from a heart so full,
that no language can express its dictate.
"I have resolve, madam, to obey your command, in fly for ever
from your dear, your lovely sight. Cruel indeed those command be;
but it be a cruelty which proceed from fortune, not from my Sophia.
Fortune hath make it necessary, necessary to your preservation, to
forget there ever be such a wretch as I be.
"believe I, I would not hint all my suffering to you, if I
imagine they could possibly escape your ear. I know the goodness
and tenderness of your heart, and would avoid give you any of
those pain which you always feel for the miserable. o let nothing,
which you shall hear of my hard fortune, cause a moment's concern;
for, after the loss of you, everything be to I a trifle.
"o Sophia! it be hard to leave you; it be hard still to desire you
to forget I; yet the sincere love oblige I to both. Pardon my
conceiving that any remembrance of I can give you disquiet; but if
I be so gloriously wretched, sacrifice I every way to your relief.
think I never love you; or think truly how little I deserve you;
and learn to scorn I for a presumption which can never be too
severely punished.--i be unable to say more.--May guardian angel
protect you for ever!"
he be now search his pocket for his wax, but find none, nor
indeed anything else, therein; for in truth he have, in his frantic
disposition, toss everything from he, and amongst the rest, his
pocket-book, which he have receive from Mr Allworthy, which he have
never open, and which now first occur to his memory.
the house supply he with a wafer for his present purpose, with
which, have seal his letter, he return hastily towards the brook
side, in order to search for the thing which he have there lose. in
his way he meet his old friend Black George, who heartily condole with
he on his misfortune; for this have already reach his ear, and
indeed those of all the neighbourhood.
Jones acquaint the gamekeeper with his loss, and he as readily go
back with he to the brook, where they search every tuft of grass in
the meadow, as well where Jones have not be as where he have be; but
all to no purpose, for they find nothing; for, indeed, though the
thing be then in the meadow, they omit to search the only place
where they be deposit; to wit, in the pocket of the say George;
for he have just before find they, and be luckily apprize of their
value, have very carefully put they up for his own use.
the gamekeeper have exert as much diligence in quest of the lost
good, as if he have hop to find they, desire Mr Jones to recollect
if he have be in no other place: "for sure," say he, "if you have
lose they here so lately, the thing must have be here still; for
this be a very unlikely place for any one to pass by." and indeed it
be by great accident that he himself have pass through that field,
in order to lay wire for hare, with which he be to supply a
poulterer at Bath the next morning.
Jones now give over all hope of recover his loss, and almost all
thought concern it, and turn to Black George, ask he
earnestly if he would do he the great favour in the world?
George answer with some hesitation, "Sir, you know you may command
I whatever be in my power, and I heartily wish it be in my power to
do you any service." in fact, the question stagger he; for he have,
by sell game, amass a pretty good sum of money in Mr Western's
service, and be afraid that Jones want to borrow some small matter
of he; but he be presently relieve from his anxiety, by be
desire to convey a letter to Sophia, which with great pleasure he
promise to do. and indeed I believe there be few favour which he
would not have gladly confer on Mr Jones; for he bear as much
gratitude towards he as he could, and be as honest as man who love
money well than any other thing in the universe, generally be.
Mrs Honour be agree by both to be the proper mean by which this
letter should pass to Sophia. they then separate; the gamekeeper
return home to Mr Western's, and Jones walk to an alehouse at half
a mile's distance, to wait for his messenger's return.
George no soon come home to his master's house than he meet with Mrs
Honour; to whom, have first sound she with a few previous
question, he deliver the letter for her mistress, and receive at
the same time another from she, for Mr Jones; which Honour tell he
she have carry all that day in her bosom, and begin to despair of
find any mean of deliver it.
the gamekeeper return hastily and joyfully to Jones, who, have
receive Sophia's letter from he, instantly withdraw, and eagerly
break it open, read as follows:--
"SIR,
"it be impossible to express what I have feel since I see you. your
submitting, on my account, to such cruel insult from my father,
lay I under an obligation I shall ever own. as you know his
temper, I beg you will, for my sake, avoid he. I wish I have any
comfort to send you; but believe this, that nothing but the last
violence shall ever give my hand or heart where you would be sorry
to see they bestow."
Jones read this letter a hundred time over, and kiss it a hundred
time as often. his passion now bring all tender desire back into
his mind. he repent that he have writ to Sophia in the manner we have
see above; but he repent more that he have make use of the interval
of his messenger's absence to write and dispatch a letter to Mr
Allworthy, in which he have faithfully promise and bind himself to
quit all thought of his love. however, when his cool reflection
return, he plainly perceive that his case be neither mend nor
alter by Sophia's billet, unless to give he some little glimpse of
hope, from her constancy, of some favourable accident hereafter. he
therefore resume his resolution, and take leave of Black George,
set forward to a town about five mile distant, whither he have desire
Mr Allworthy, unless he please to revoke his sentence, to send his
thing after he.
Chapter xiii.
the behaviour of Sophia on the present occasion; which none of her sex
will blame, who be capable of behave in the same manner. and the
discussion of a knotty point in the court of conscience.
Sophia have pass the last twenty-four hour in no very desirable
manner. during a large part of they she have be entertain by her
aunt with lecture of prudence, recommend to she the example of the
polite world, where love (so the good lady say) be at present
entirely laugh at, and where woman consider matrimony, as man do
office of public trust, only as the mean of make their fortune,
and of advance themselves in the world. in comment on which text
Mrs Western have display her eloquence during several hour.
these sagacious lecture, though little suit either to the taste or
inclination of Sophia, be, however, less irksome to she than her own
thought, that form the entertainment of the night, during which she
never once close her eye.
but though she could neither sleep nor rest in her bed, yet, have no
avocation from it, she be find there by her father at his return
from Allworthy's, which be not till past ten o'clock in the morning.
he go directly up to her apartment, open the door, and see she
be not up, cry, "oh! you be safe then, and I be resolve to keep
you so." he then lock the door, and deliver the key to Honour,
have first give she the strict charge, with great promise of
reward for her fidelity, and most dreadful menace of punishment in
case she should betray her trust.
Honour's order be, not to suffer her mistress to come out of her
room without the authority of the squire himself, and to admit none to
she but he and her aunt; but she be herself to attend she with
whatever Sophia please, except only pen, ink, and paper, of which she
be forbid the use.
the squire order his daughter to dress herself and attend he at
dinner; which she obey; and have sit the usual time, be again
conduct to her prison.
in the evening the gaoler Honour bring she the letter which she
receive from the gamekeeper. Sophia read it very attentively twice or
thrice over, and then throw herself upon the bed, and burst into a
flood of tear. Mrs Honour express great astonishment at this
behaviour in her mistress; nor could she forbear very eagerly beg
to know the cause of this passion. Sophia make she no answer for some
time, and then, start suddenly up, catch she maid by the hand, and
cry, "o honour! I be undo." "Marry forbid," cry Honour: "I wish
the letter have be burn before I have bring it to your la'ship. Ibe
sure I think it would have comfort your la'ship, or I would have
see it at the devil before I would have touch it." "Honour," say
Sophia, "you be a good girl, and it be vain to attempt conceal
long my weakness from you; I have throw away my heart on a man who
hath forsake I." "and be Mr Jones," answer the maid, "such a
perfidy man?" "he hath take his leave of I," say Sophia, "for ever
in that letter. Nay, he hath desire I to forget he. could he have
desire that if he have love I? could he have bear such a thought?
could he have write such a word?" "no, certainly, ma'am," cry
Honour; "and to be sure, if the good man in England be to desire I
to forget he, Iwould take he at his word. Marry, come up! I be sure
your la'ship hath do he too much honour ever to think on him;--a
young lady who may take her choice of all the young man in the
country. and to be sure, if I may be so presumptuous as to offer my
poor opinion, there be young Mr Blifil, who, besides that he be come
of honest parent, and will be one of the great squire all
hereabouts, he be to be sure, in my poor opinion, a more handsomer and
a more politer man by half; and besides, he be a young gentleman of a
sober character, and who may defy any of the neighbour to say black
be his eye; he follow no dirty trollop, nor can any bastard be lay
at his door. forget he, indeed! I thank Heaven I myself be not so
much at my last prayer as to suffer any man to bid I forget he
twice. if the good he that wear a head be for to go for to offer to
say such an affront word to I, I would never give he my company
afterwards, if there be another young man in the kingdom. and as I
be a saying, to be sure, there be young Mr Blifil." "name not his
detest name," cry Sophia. "Nay, ma'am," say Honour, "if your
la'ship doth not like he, there be more jolly handsome young man that
would court your la'ship, if they have but the least encouragement. I
donot believe there be arrow young gentleman in this county, or in the
next to it, that if your la'ship be but to look as if you have a mind
to he, would not come about to make his offer directly." "what a
wretch dost thou imagine I," cry Sophia, "by affront my ear
with such stuff! I detest all mankind." "Nay, to be sure, ma'am,"
answer Honour, "your la'ship hath have enough to give you a surfeit
of they. to be use ill by such a poor, beggarly, bastardly
fellow."--"hold your blasphemous tongue," cry Sophia: "how dare you
mention his name with disrespect before I? he use I ill? no, his
poor bleeding heart suffer more when he writ the cruel word than
mine from read they. o! he be all heroic virtue and angelic
goodness. I be ashamed of the weakness of my own passion, for blame
what I ought to admire. o, Honour! it be my good only which he
consult. to my interest he sacrifice both himself and I. the
apprehension of ruin I hath drive he to despair." "I be very
glad," say Honour, "to hear your la'ship take that into your
consideration; for to be sure, it must be nothing less than ruin to
give your mind to one that be turn out of door, and be not worth a
farthing in the world." "turn out of door!" cry Sophia hastily:
"how! what dost thou mean?" "why, to be sure, ma'am, my master no
soon tell Squire Allworthy about Mr Jones have offer to make
love to your la'ship than the squire strip he stark naked, and
turn he out of door!" "ha!" say Sophia, "I have be the cursed,
wretched cause of his destruction! turn naked out of door! here,
Honour, take all the money I have; take the ring from my finger.
here, my watch: carry he all. go find he immediately." "for Heaven's
sake, ma'am," answer Mrs Honour, "do but consider, if my master
should miss any of these thing, I should be make to answer for they.
therefore let I beg your la'ship not to part with your watch and
jewel. besides, the money, I think, be enough of all conscience; and
as for that, my master can never know anything of the matter." "here,
then," cry Sophia, "take every farthing I be worth, find he out
immediately, and give it he. go, go, lose not a moment."
Mrs Honour depart accord to order, and find Black George
below-stair, deliver he the purse, which contain sixteen
guineas, being, indeed, the whole stock of Sophia; for though her
father be very liberal to she, she be much too generous to be rich.
Black George have receive the purse, set forward towards the
alehouse; but in the way a thought occur to he, whether he should
not detain this money likewise. his conscience, however, immediately
start at this suggestion, and begin to upbraid he with ingratitude
to his benefactor. to this his avarice answer, that his conscience
should have consider the matter before, when he deprive poor Jones
of his £500. that have quietly acquiesce in what be of so much
great importance, it be absurd, if not downright hypocrisy, to
affect any qualm at this trifle. in return to which, Conscience, like
a good lawyer, attempt to distinguish between an absolute breach of
trust, as here, where the good be deliver, and a bare concealment
of what be find, as in the former case. Avarice presently treat
this with ridicule, call it a distinction without a difference, and
absolutely insist that when once all pretension of honour and
virtue be give up in any one instance, that there be no precedent
for resort to they upon a second occasion. in short, poor
Conscience have certainly be defeat in the argument, have not fear
stept in to her assistance, and very strenuously urge that the real
distinction between the two action, do not lie in the different
degree of honour but of safety: for that the secrete the £500 be a
matter of very little hazard; whereas the detaining the sixteen
guineas be liable to the utmost danger of discovery.
by this friendly aid of fear, Conscience obtain a compleat victory
in the mind of Black George, and, after make he a few compliment
on his honesty, force he to deliver the money to Jones.
Chapter xiv.
a short chapter, contain a short dialogue between Squire Western
and his sister.
Mrs Western have be engage abroad all that day. the squire meet she
at her return home; and when she enquire after Sophia, he acquaint
she that he have secure she safe enough. "she be lock up in
chamber," cry he, "and Honour keep the key." as his look be full
of prodigious wisdom and sagacity when he give his sister this
information, it be probable he expect much applause from she for
what he have do; but how be he disappoint when, with a most
disdainful aspect, she cry, "sure, brother, you be the weak of
all man. why will you not confide in I for the management of my
niece? why will you interpose? you have now undo all that I have
be spend my breath in order to bring about. while I have be
endeavour to fill her mind with maxim of prudence, you have be
provoke she to reject they. english woman, brother, I thank heaven,
be no slave. we be not to be lock up like the spanish and italian
wife. we have as good a right to liberty as yourself. we be to be
convince by reason and persuasion only, and not govern by force. I
have see the world, brother, and know what argument to make use of;
and if your folly have not prevent I, should have prevail with she
to form her conduct by those rule of prudence and discretion which I
formerly teach she." "to be sure," say the squire, "I be always in
the wrong." "Brother," answer the lady, "you be not in the wrong,
unless when you meddle with matter beyond your knowledge. you must
agree that I have see most of the world; and happy have it be for my
niece if she have not be take from under my care. it be by live at
home with you that she hath learn romantic notion of love and
nonsense." "you donot imagine, I hope," cry the squire, "that I have
teach she any such thing." "your ignorance, brother," return she,
"as the great Milton say, almost subdue my patience."[*] "D--n
Milton!" answer the squire: "if he have the impudence to say so to my
face, Iwould lend he a douse, thof he be never so great a man.
Patience! an you come to that, sister, I have more occasion of
patience, to be use like an overgrown schoolboy, as I be by you. do
you think no one hath any understanding, unless he hath be about at
court. pox! the world be come to a fine pass indeed, if we be all
fool, except a parcel of round-head and Hanover rat. pox! I hope
the time be a coming when we shall make fool of they, and every man
shall enjoy his own. thatbe all, sister; and every man shall enjoy his
own. I hope to zee it, sister, before the Hanover rat have eat up all
our corn, and leave we nothing but turnep to feed upon."--"I protest,
brother," cry she, "you be now get beyond my understanding. your
jargon of turnep and Hanover rat be to I perfectly
unintelligible."--"I believe," cry he, "you donot care to hear o'em;
but the country interest may succeed one day or other for all
that."--"I wish," answer the lady, "you would think a little of your
daughter's interest; for, believe I, she be in great danger than
the nation."--"Just now," say he, "you chid I for think on she,
and would ha' she leave to you."--"and if you will promise to interpose
no more," answer she, "I will, out of my regard to my niece,
undertake the charge."--"Well, do then," say the squire, "for you
know I always agree, that woman be the proper to manage woman."
[*] the reader may, perhaps, subdue his own patience, if he search
for this in Milton.] 
Mrs Western then depart, mutter something with an air of disdain,
concern woman and management of the nation. she immediately
repair to Sophia's apartment, who be now, after a day's
confinement, release again from her captivity.
BOOK VII.
contain three day.
Chapter i.
a comparison between the world and the stage.
the world hath be often compare to the theatre; and many grave
writer, as well as the poet, have consider human life as a great
drama, resemble, in almost every particular, those scenical
representation which Thespis be first report to have invent, and
which have be since receive with so much approbation and delight in
all polite country.
this thought hath be carry so far, and be become so general, that
some word proper to the theatre, and which be at first
metaphorically apply to the world, be now indiscriminately and
literally speak of both; thus stage and scene be by common use grow
as familiar to we, when we speak of life in general, as when we
confine ourselves to dramatic performance: and when transaction
behind the curtain be mention, St James's be more likely to occur
to our thought than Drury-lane.
it may seem easy enough to account for all this, by reflect that
the theatrical stage be nothing more than a representation, or, as
Aristotle call it, an imitation of what really exist; and hence,
perhaps, we might fairly pay a very high compliment to those who by
their writing or action have be so capable of imitate life, as
to have their picture in a manner confound with, or mistaken for,
the original.
but, in reality, we be not so fond of pay compliment to these
people, whom we use as child frequently do the instrument of their
amusement; and have much more pleasure in hiss and buffet they,
than in admire their excellence. there be many other reason which
have induce we to see this analogy between the world and the stage.
some have consider the large part of mankind in the light of
actor, as personate character no more their own, and to which in
fact they have no well title, than the player hath to be in earnest
think the king or emperor whom he represent. thus the hypocrite may
be say to be a player; and indeed the Greeks call they both by one
and the same name.
the brevity of life hath likewise give occasion to this comparison.
so the immortal shakespear--
--Lifebe a poor player,
that strut and fret his hour upon the stage,
and then be hear no more.
for which hackneyed quotation I will make the reader amend by a very
noble one, which few, I believe, have read. it be take from a poem
call the deity, publish about nine year ago, and long since
bury in oblivion; a proof that good book, no more than good man, do
always survive the bad.
from Thee[*] all human action take their spring,
the rise of empire and the fall of king!
see the vast Theatre of Time display'd,
while o'er the scene succeed hero tread!
with pomp the shin image succeed,
what leader triumph, and what monarch bleed!
perform the part thy providence assign'd,
their pride, their passion, to thy end inclin'd:
awhile they glitter in the face of day,
then at thy nod the phantom pass away;
no trace leave of all the busy scene,
but that remembrance says--_the thing have be!_
[*] the deity.
in all these, however, and in every other similitude of life to the
theatre, the resemblance hath be always take from the stage only.
none, as I remember, have at all consider the audience at this great
drama.
but as Nature often exhibit some of her good performance to a very
full house, so will the behaviour of her spectator no less admit the
above-mention comparison than that of her actor. in this vast
theatre of time be seat the friend and the critic; here be clap
and shout, hiss and groan; in short, everything which be ever
see or hear at the Theatre-Royal.
let we examine this in one example; for instance, in the behaviour of
the great audience on that scene which nature be pleased to exhibit
in the twelfth chapter of the precede book, where she introduce
Black George run away with the £500 from his friend and
benefactor.
those who sit in the world's upper gallery treat that incident, I be
well convince, with their usual vociferation; and every term of
scurrilous reproach be most probably vent on that occasion.
if we have descend to the next order of spectator, we should have
find an equal degree of abhorrence, though less of noise and
scurrility; yet here the good woman give Black George to the devil,
and many of they expect every minute that the cloven-foot
gentleman would fetch his own.
the pit, as usual, be no doubt divide; those who delight in heroic
virtue and perfect character object to the produce such instance
of villany, without punish they very severely for the sake of
example. some of the author's friend cry, "Look'e, gentleman, the
man be a villain, but it be nature for all that." and all the young
critic of the age, the clerk, apprentice, &c., call it low, and
fall a groaning.
as for the box, they behave with their accustomed politeness. Most
of they be attend to something else. some of those few who
regard the scene at all, declare he be a bad kind of man; while
other refuse to give their opinion, till they have hear that of the
good judge.
now we, who be admit behind the scene of this great theatre of
Nature (and no author ought to write anything besides dictionary and
spelling-book who hath not this privilege), can censure the action,
without conceive any absolute detestation of the person, whom
perhaps Nature may not have design to act an ill part in all her
drama; for in this instance life most exactly resemble the stage,
since it be often the same person who represent the villain and the
heroe; and he who engage your admiration to-day will probably attract
your contempt to-morrow. as Garrick, whom I regard in tragedy to be
the great genius the world hath ever produce, sometimes
condescend to play the fool; so do Scipio the great, and Laelius the
Wise, accord to Horace, many year ago; nay, Cicero report they to
have be "incredibly childish." these, it be true, play the fool,
like my friend Garrick, in jest only; but several eminent character
have, in numberless instance of their life, play the fool
egregiously in earnest; so far as to render it a matter of some doubt
whether their wisdom or folly be predominant; or whether they be
well intitle to the applause or censure, the admiration or
contempt, the love or hatred, of mankind.
those person, indeed, who have pass any time behind the scene of
this great theatre, and be thoroughly acquaint not only with the
several disguise which be there put on, but also with the fantastic
and capricious behaviour of the Passions, who be the manager and
director of this theatre (for as to Reason, the patentee, he be know
to be a very idle fellow and seldom to exert himself), may most
probably have learn to understand the famous _nil admirari_ of
Horace, or in the english phrase, to stare at nothing.
a single bad act no more constitute a villain in life, than a single
bad part on the stage. the passion, like the manager of a playhouse,
often force man upon part without consult their judgment, and
sometimes without any regard to their talent. thus the man, as well
as the player, may condemn what he himself act; nay, it be common to
see vice sit as awkwardly on some man, as the character of Iago would
on the honest face of Mr William Mills.
upon the whole, then, the man of candour and of true understanding be
never hasty to condemn. he can censure an imperfection, or even a
vice, without rage against the guilty party. in a word, they be the
same folly, the same childishness, the same ill-breeding, and the same
ill-nature, which raise all the clamour and uproar both in life and
on the stage. the bad of man generally have the word rogue and
villain most in their mouth, as the low of all wretch be the
aptest to cry out low in the pit.
Chapter ii.
contain a conversation which Mr Jones have with himself.
Jones receive his effect from Mr Allworthy's early in the morning,
with the following answer to his letter:--
"SIR,
"I be command by my uncle to acquaint you, that as he do not
proceed to those measure he have take with you, without the
great deliberation, and after the full evidence of your
unworthiness, so will it be always out of your power to cause the
least alteration in his resolution. he express great surprize at
your presumption in say you have resign all pretension to a
young lady, to whom it be impossible you should ever have have any,
her birth and fortune have make she so infinitely your superior.
lastly, I be command to tell you, that the only instance of your
compliance with my uncle's inclination which he require, be, your
immediately quit this country. I cannot conclude this without
offer you my advice, as a Christian, that you would seriously
think of amend your life. that you may be assist with grace so
to do, will be always the prayer of
"your humble servant,
"W. BLIFIL."
many contend passion be raise in our heroe's mind by this
letter; but the tender prevail at last over the indignant and
irascible, and a flood of tear come seasonably to his assistance, and
possibly prevent his misfortune from either turn his head, or
burst his heart.
he grow, however, soon ashamed of indulge this remedy; and start
up, he cry, "well, then, I will give Mr Allworthy the only instance
he require of my obedience. I will go this moment--but whither?--why,
let Fortune direct; since there be no other who think it of any
consequence what become of this wretched person, it shall be a matter
of equal indifference to myself. shall I alone regard what no
other--ha! have I not reason to think there be another?--one whose
value be above that of the whole world!--i may, I must imagine my
Sophia be not indifferent to what become of I. shall I then leave
this only friend--and such a friend? shall I not stay with
her?--where--how can I stay with she? have I any hope of ever see
she, though she be as desirous as myself, without expose she to the
wrath of her father, and to what purpose? can I think of solicit
such a creature to consent to her own ruin? shall I indulge any
passion of mine at such a price? shall I lurk about this country like
a thief, with such intentions?--no, I disdain, I detest the thought.
Farewel, Sophia; farewel, most lovely, most beloved--" here passion
stop his mouth, and find a vent at his eye.
and now have take a resolution to leave the country, he begin to
debate with himself whither he should go. the world, as Milton phrase
it, lie all before he; and Jones, no more than Adam, have any man to
whom he might resort for comfort or assistance. all his acquaintance
be the acquaintance of Mr Allworthy; and he have no reason to expect
any countenance from they, as that gentleman have withdraw his favour
from he. man of great and good character should indeed be very
cautious how they discard their dependent; for the consequence to the
unhappy sufferer be be discard by all other.
what course of life to pursue, or to what business to apply himself,
be a second consideration: and here the prospect be all a melancholy
void. every profession, and every trade, require length of time, and
what be bad, money; for matter be so constituted, that "nothing
out of nothing" be not a truer maxim in physics than in politic; and
every man who be greatly destitute of money, be on that account
entirely exclude from all mean of acquire it.
at last the Ocean, that hospitable friend to the wretched, open she
capacious arm to receive he; and he instantly resolve to accept she
kind invitation. to express myself less figuratively, he determine to
go to sea.
this think indeed no soon suggest itself, than he eagerly
embrace it; and have presently hire horse, he set out for Bristol
to put it in execution.
but before we attend he on this expedition, we shall resort awhile to
Mr Western's, and see what far happen to the charming Sophia.
Chapter iii.
contain several dialogue.
the morning in which Mr Jones depart, Mrs Western summon Sophia
into her apartment; and have first acquaint she that she have
obtain her liberty of her father, she proceed to read she a long
lecture on the subject of matrimony; which she treat not as a
romantic scheme of happiness arise from love, as it hath be
describe by the poet; nor do she mention any of those purpose for
which we be teach by divine to regard it as institute by sacred
authority; she consider it rather as a fund in which prudent woman
deposit their fortune to the good advantage, in order to receive a
large interest for they than they could have elsewhere.
when Mrs Western have finish, Sophia answer, "that she be very
incapable of argue with a lady of her aunt's superior knowledge and
experience, especially on a subject which she have so very little
consider, as this of matrimony."
"argue with I, child!" reply the other; "I do not indeed expect it.
I should have see the world to very little purpose truly, if I be to
argue with one of your year. I have take this trouble, in order to
instruct you. the antient philosopher, such as Socrates, Alcibiades,
and other, do not use to argue with their scholar. you be to
consider I, child, as Socrates, not ask your opinion, but only
inform you of mine." from which last word the reader may possibly
imagine, that this lady have read no more of the philosophy of
Socrates, than she have of that of Alcibiades; and indeed we cannot
resolve his curiosity as to this point.
"Madam," cry Sophia, "I have never presume to controvert any
opinion of your; and this subject, as I say, I have never yet
think of, and perhaps never may."
"indeed, Sophy," reply the aunt, "this dissimulation with I be very
foolish. the french shall as soon persuade I that they take foreign
town in defence only of their own country, as you can impose on I to
believe you have never yet think seriously of matrimony. how can
you, child, affect to deny that you have consider of contract an
alliance, when you so well know I be acquaint with the party with
whom you desire to contract it?--an alliance as unnatural, and
contrary to your interest, as a separate league with the French would
be to the interest of the Dutch! but however, if you have not hitherto
consider of this matter, I promise you it be now high time, for my
brother be resolve immediately to conclude the treaty with Mr Blifil;
and indeed I be a sort of guarantee in the affair, and have promise
your concurrence."
"indeed, madam," cry Sophia, "this be the only instance in which I
must disobey both yourself and my father. for this be a match which
require very little consideration in I to refuse."
"if I be not as great a philosopher as Socrates himself," return
Mrs Western, "you would overcome my patience. what objection can you
have to the young gentleman?"
"a very solid objection, in my opinion," say sophia--"i hate he."
"will you never learn a proper use of word?" answer the aunt.
"indeed, child, you should consult Bailey's Dictionary. it be
impossible you should hate a man from whom you have receive no
injury. by hatred, therefore, you mean no more than dislike, which be
no sufficient objection against your marrying of he. I have know
many couple, who have entirely dislike each other, lead very
comfortable genteel life. believe I, child, I know these thing
well than you. you will allow I, I think, to have see the world,
in which I have not an acquaintance who would not rather be think to
dislike her husband than to like he. the contrary be such
out-of-fashion romantic nonsense, that the very imagination of it be
shocking."
"indeed, madam," reply Sophia, "I shall never marry a man I dislike.
if I promise my father never to consent to any marriage contrary to
his inclination, I think I may hope he will never force I into that
state contrary to my own."
"inclination!" cry the aunt, with some warmth. "inclination! I be
astonish at your assurance. a young woman of your age, and
unmarried, to talk of inclination! but whatever your inclination may
be, my brother be resolve; nay, since you talk of inclination, I
shall advise he to hasten the treaty. inclination!"
Sophia then fling herself upon her knee, and tear begin to trickle
from her shin eye. she entreat her aunt, "to have mercy upon
she, and not to resent so cruelly her unwillingness to make herself
miserable;" often urge, "that she alone be concern, and that her
happiness only be at stake."
as a bailiff, when well authorize by his writ, have possess
himself of the person of some unhappy debtor, view all his tear
without concern; in vain the wretched captive attempt to raise
compassion; in vain the tender wife bereft of her companion, the
little prattling boy, or fright girl, be mention as inducement
to reluctance. the noble bumtrap, blind and deaf to every circumstance
of distress, greatly rise above all the motif to humanity, and into
the hand of the gaoler resolve to deliver his miserable prey.
not less blind to the tear, or less deaf to every entreaty of Sophia
be the politic aunt, nor less determined be she to deliver over the
trembling maid into the arm of the gaoler Blifil. she answer with
great impetuosity, "so far, madam, from your being concern alone,
your concern be the least, or surely the least important. it be the
honour of your family which be concern in this alliance; you be
only the instrument. do you conceive, mistress, that in an
intermarriage between kingdom, as when a daughter of France be
marry into Spain, the princess herself be alone consider in the
match? no! it be a match between two kingdom, rather than between two
person. the same happen in great family such as ours. the alliance
between the family be the principal matter. you ought to have a
great regard for the honour of your family than for your own person;
and if the example of a princess cannot inspire you with these noble
thought, you cannot surely complain at be use no bad than all
princess be use."
"I hope, madam," cry Sophia, with a little elevation of voice, "I
shall never do anything to dishonour my family; but as for Mr Blifil,
whatever may be the consequence, I be resolve against he, and no
force shall prevail in his favour."
Western, who have be within hearing during the great part of the
precede dialogue, have now exhaust all his patience; he therefore
enter the room in a violent passion, crying, "D--n I then if
shatunt ha'un, d--n I if shatunt, thatbe all--thatbe all; d--n I if
shatunt."
Mrs Western have collect a sufficient quantity of wrath for the use
of Sophia; but she now transfer it all to the squire. "brother,"
say she, "it be astonishing that you will interfere in a matter
which you have totally leave to my negotiation. regard to my family
hath make I take upon myself to be the mediating power, in order to
rectify those mistake in policy which you have commit in your
daughter's education. for, brother, it be you--it be your
preposterous conduct which hath eradicate all the seed that I have
formerly sow in her tender mind. it be you yourself who have teach
her disobedience."--"blood!" cry the squire, foam at the mouth,
"you be enough to conquer the patience of the devil! have I ever
teach my daughter disobedience?--Here she stand; speak honestly,
girl, do ever I bid you be disobedient to I? have not I do
everything to humour and to gratify you, and to make you obedient to
I? and very obedient to I she be when a little child, before you
take she in hand and spoil she, by fill her head with a pack of
court notion. why--why--why--do I not overhear you tell she she
must behave like a princess? you have make a Whig of the girl; and how
should her father, or anybody else, expect any obedience from
her?"--"brother," answer Mrs Western, with an air of great disdain,
"I cannot express the contempt I have for your politic of all kind;
but I will appeal likewise to the young lady herself, whether I have
ever teach she any principle of disobedience. on the contrary,
niece, have I not endeavour to inspire you with a true idea of the
several relation in which a human creature stand in society? have I
not take infinite pain to show you, that the law of nature hath
enjoin a duty on child to their parent? have I not tell you what
Plato say on that subject?--a subject on which you be so notoriously
ignorant when you come first under my care, that I verily believe you
do not know the relation between a daughter and a father."--"'Tis a
lie," answer Western. "the girl be no such fool, as to live to
eleven year old without know that she be her father's
relation."--"O! more than gothic ignorance," answer the lady. "and
as for your manner, brother, I must tell you, they deserve a
cane."--"why then you may gi' it I, if you think you be able," cry
the squire; "nay, I suppose your niece there will be ready enough to
help you."--"brother," say Mrs Western, "though I despise you beyond
expression, yet I shall endure your insolence no long; so I desire
my coach may be get ready immediately, for I be resolve to leave your
house this very morning."--"and a good riddance too," answer he; "I
can bear your insolence no long, an you come to that. blood! it be
almost enough of itself to make my daughter undervalue my sense, when
she hear you tell I every minute you despise I."--"It be
impossible, it be impossible," cry the aunt; "no one can undervalue
such a boor."--"Boar," answer the squire, "I be no boar; no, nor
ass; no, nor rat neither, madam. remember that--I be no rat. I be a
true Englishman, and not of your Hanover breed, that have eat up the
nation."--"Thou art one of those wise man," cry she, "whose
nonsensical principle have undo the nation; by weaken the hand
of our government at home, and by discourage our friend and
encourage our enemy abroad."--"Ho! be you come back to your
politic?" cry the squire: "as for those I despise they as much as I
do a f--t." which last word he accompany and grace with the very
action, which, of all other, be the most proper to it. and whether
it be this word or the contempt expr for her politic, which most
affect Mrs Western, I will not determine; but she fly into the most
violent rage, utter phrase improper to be here relate, and
instantly burst out of the house. nor do her brother or her niece
think proper either to stop or to follow she; for the one be so much
possess by concern, and the other by anger, that they be render
almost motionless.
the squire, however, send after his sister the same holloa which
attend the departure of a hare, when she be first start before the
hound. he be indeed a great master of this kind of vociferation, and
have a holla proper for most occasion in life.
woman who, like Mrs Western, know the world, and have apply
themselves to philosophy and politic, would have immediately avail
themselves of the present disposition of Mr Western's mind, by
throw in a few artful compliment to his understanding at the
expense of his absent adversary; but poor Sophia be all simplicity.
by which word we do not intend to insinuate to the reader, that she
be silly, which be generally understand as a synonymous term with
simple; for she be indeed a most sensible girl, and her understanding
be of the first rate; but she want all that useful art which
female convert to so many good purpose in life, and which, as it
rather arise from the heart than from the head, be often the property
of the silliest of woman.
chapter iv.
a picture of a country gentlewoman take from the life.
Mr Western have finish his holla, and take a little breath, begin
to lament, in very pathetic term, the unfortunate condition of man,
who be, say he, "always whipt in by the humour of some d--n'd b--
or other. I think I be hard run enough by your mother for one man;
but after give she a dodge, herebe another b-- follow I upon the
foil; but curse my jacket if I will be run down in this manner by any
o'um."
Sophia never have a single dispute with her father, till this unlucky
affair of Blifil, on any account, except in defence of her mother,
whom she have love most tenderly, though she lose she in the eleventh
year of her age. the squire, to whom that poor woman have be a
faithful upper-servant all the time of their marriage, have return
that behaviour by make what the world call a good husband. he very
seldom swear at she (perhaps not above once a week) and never beat
she; she have not the least occasion for jealousy, and be perfect
mistress of her time; for she be never interrupt by her husband,
who be engage all the morning in his field exercise, and all the
evening with bottle companion. she scarce indeed ever see he but at
meal; where she have the pleasure of carve those dish which she
have before attend at the dressing. from these meal she retire
about five minute after the other servant, have only stay to
drink "the king over the water." such be, it seem, Mr Western's
order; for it be a maxim with he, that woman should come in with
the first dish, and go out after the first glass. obedience to these
order be perhaps no difficult task; for the conversation (if it may
be call so) be seldom such as could entertain a lady. it consist
chiefly of hallowing, singing, relation of sporting adventure,
b--d--y, and abuse of woman, and of the government.
these, however, be the only season when Mr Western see his wife;
for when he repair to her bed, he be generally so drunk that he
could not see; and in the sporting season he always rise from she
before it be light. thus be she perfect mistress of her time, and
have besides a coach and four usually at her command; though unhappily,
indeed, the badness of the neighbourhood, and of the road, make this
of little use; for none who have set much value on their neck would
have pass through the one, or who have set any value on their hour,
would have visit the other. now to deal honestly with the reader,
she do not make all the return expect to so much indulgence; for
she have be marry against her will by a fond father, the match
have be rather advantageous on her side; for the squire's estate
be upward of £3000 a year, and her fortune no more than a bare £8000.
hence perhaps she have contract a little gloominess of temper, for
she be rather a good servant than a good wife; nor have she always the
gratitude to return the extraordinary degree of roar mirth, with
which the squire receive she, even with a good-humour smile. she
would, moreover, sometimes interfere with matter which do not
concern she, as the violent drinking of her husband, which in the
gentle term she would take some of the few opportunity he give
she of remonstrate against. and once in her life she very earnestly
entreat he to carry she for two month to London, which he
peremptorily deny; nay, be angry with his wife for the request ever
after, be well assure that all the husband in London be
cuckold.
for this last, and many other good reason, western at length heartily
hat his wife; and as he never conceal this hatred before her
death, so he never forget it afterwards; but when anything in the
least sour he, as a bad scenting day, or a distemper among his
hound, or any other such misfortune, he constantly vent his spleen
by invective against the deceased, say, "if my wife be alive now,
she would be glad of this."
these invective he be especially desirous of throw forth before
Sophia; for as he love she more than he do any other, so he be
really jealous that she have love her mother well than he. and this
jealousy Sophia seldom fail of heighten on these occasion; for
he be not content with violate her ear with the abuse of her
mother, but endeavour to force an explicit approbation of all this
abuse; with which desire he never could prevail upon she by any
promise or threat to comply.
hence some of my reader will, perhaps, wonder that the squire have not
hat Sophia as much as he have hat her mother; but I must inform
they, that hatred be not the effect of love, even through the medium
of jealousy. it be, indeed, very possible for jealous person to kill
the object of their jealousy, but not to hate they. which sentiment
be a pretty hard morsel, and bear something of the air of a
paradox, we shall leave the reader to chew the cud upon it to the end
of the chapter.
Chapter v.
the generous behaviour of Sophia towards her aunt.
Sophia keep silence during the forego speech of her father, nor do
she once answer otherwise than with a sigh; but as he understand none
of the language, or, as he call it, lingo of the eye, so he be not
satisfied without some further approbation of his sentiment, which he
now demand of his daughter; tell she, in the usual way, "he
expect she be ready to take the part of everybody against he, as
she have always do that of the b-- her mother." Sophia remain
still silent, he cry out, "what, art dumb? why dost unt speak? be
not thy mother a d--d b-- to I? answer I that. what, I suppose you
despise your father too, and donot think he good enough to speak to?"
"for Heaven's sake, sir," answer Sophia, "do not give so cruel a
turn to my silence. I be sure I would soon die than be guilty of any
disrespect towards you; but how can I venture to speak, when every
word must either offend my dear papa, or convict I of the black
ingratitude as well as impiety to the memory of the good of mother;
for such, I be certain, my mamma be always to I?"
"and your aunt, I suppose, be the good of sister too!" reply the
squire. "will you be so kind as to allow that she be a b--? I may
fairly insist upon that, I think?"
"indeed, sir," say Sophia, "I have great obligation to my aunt. she
hath be a second mother to I."
"and a second wife to I too," return western; "so you will take she
part too! you willnot confess that she hath act the part of the vile
sister in the world?"
"upon my word, sir," cry Sophia, "I must belie my heart wickedly if
I do. I know my aunt and you differ very much in your way of
thinking; but I have hear she a thousand time express the great
affection for you; and I be convince, so far from she be the bad
sister in the world, there be very few who love a brother well."
"the English of all which be," answer the squire, "that I be in the
wrong. ay, certainly. ay, to be sure the woman be in the right, and
the man in the wrong always."
"pardon I, sir," cry Sophia. "I do not say so."
"what donot you say?" answer the father: "you have the impudence to
say shebe in the right: doth it not follow then of course that I be in
the wrong? and perhaps I be in the wrong to suffer such a Presbyterian
hanoverian b-- to come into my house. she may 'dite I of a plot for
anything I know, and give my estate to the government."
"so far, sir, from injure you or your estate," say Sophia, "if my
aunt have die yesterday, I be convinced she would have leave you her
whole fortune."
whether Sophia intend it or no, I shall not presume to assert; but
certain it be, these last word penetrate very deep into the ear of
her father, and produce a much more sensible effect than all she have
say before. he receive the sound with much the same action as a man
receive a bullet in his head. he start, stagger, and turn pale.
after which he remain silent above a minute, and then begin in the
follow hesitate manner: "yesterday! she would have leave I her
esteate yesterday! would she? why yesterday, of all the day in the
year? I suppose if she die to-morrow, she will leave it to somebody
else, and perhaps out of the vamily."--"My aunt, sir," cry Sophia,
"hath very violent passion, and I cannot answer what she may do under
their influence."
"you cannot!" return the father: "and pray who hath be the occasion
of put she into those violent passion? Nay, who hath actually put
she into they? be not you and she hard at it before I come into the
room? besides, be not all our quarrel about you? I have not
quarrel with sister this many year but upon your account; and now
you would throw the whole blame upon I, as thof I should be the
occasion of she leave the esteate out o' the vamily. I could have
expect no well indeed; this be like the return you make to all the
rest of my fondness."
"I beseech you then," cry Sophia, "upon my knee I beseech you, if I
have be the unhappy occasion of this difference, that you will
endeavour to make it up with my aunt, and not suffer she to leave your
house in this violent rage of anger: she be a very good-natured woman,
and a few civil word will satisfy she. let I entreat you, sir."
"so I must go and ask pardon for your fault, must I?" answer
Western. "you have lose the hare, and I must draw every way to find
she again? indeed, if I be certain"--here he stopt, and Sophia
throwing in more entreaty, at length prevail upon he; so that
after vent two or three bitter sarcastical expression against his
daughter, he depart as fast as he could to recover his sister,
before her equipage could be get ready.
Sophia then return to her chamber of mourning, where she indulge
herself (if the phrase may be allow I) in all the luxury of tender
grief. she read over more than once the letter which she have receive
from Jones; her muff too be use on this occasion; and she bath
both these, as well as herself, with her tear. in this situation the
friendly Mrs Honour exert her utmost ability to comfort she
afflict mistress. she run over the name of many young gentleman:
and have greatly commend their part and person, assure Sophia
that she might take her choice of any. these method must have
certainly be use with some success in disorder of the like kind,
or so skilful a practitioner as Mrs Honour would never have venture
to apply they; nay, I have hear that the college of chambermaid hold
they to be as sovereign remedy as any in the female dispensary; but
whether it be that Sophia's disease differ inwardly from those
case with which it agree in external symptom, I will not assert;
but, in fact, the good waiting-woman do more harm than good, and at
last so incense her mistress (which be no easy matter) that with an
angry voice she dismiss she from her presence.
Chapter vi.
contain great variety of matter.
the squire overtake his sister just as she be step into the
coach, and partly by force, and partly by solicitation, prevail
upon she to order her horse back into their quarter. he succeed in
this attempt without much difficulty; for the lady be, as we have
already hint, of a most placable disposition, and greatly love she
brother, though she despise his part, or rather his little knowledge
of the world.
Poor Sophia, who have first set on foot this reconciliation, be now
make the sacrifice to it. they both concur in their censure on her
conduct; jointly declare war against she, and directly proceed to
counsel, how to carry it on in the most vigorous manner. for this
purpose, Mrs Western propose not only an immediate conclusion of the
treaty with Allworthy, but as immediately to carry it into execution;
say, "that there be no other way to succeed with her niece, but by
violent method, which she be convince Sophia have not sufficient
resolution to resist. by violent," say she, "I mean rather, hasty
measure; for as to confinement or absolute force, no such thing must
or can be attempt. our plan must be concert for a surprize, and
not for a storm."
these matter be resolve on, when Mr Blifil come to pay a visit to
his mistress. the squire no soon hear of his arrival, than he stept
aside, by his sister's advice, to give his daughter order for the
proper reception of her lover: which he do with the most bitter
execration and denunciation of judgment on her refusal.
the impetuosity of the squire bear down all before he; and Sophia, as
her aunt very wisely foresaw, be not able to resist he. she agree,
therefore, to see Blifil, though she have scarce spirit or strength
sufficient to utter her assent. indeed, to give a peremptory denial to
a father whom she so tenderly love, be no easy task. have this
circumstance be out of the case, much less resolution than what she
be really mistress of, would, perhaps, have serve she; but it be no
unusual thing to ascribe those action entirely to fear, which be in
a great measure produce by love.
in pursuance, therefore, of her father's peremptory command, Sophia
now admit Mr Blifil's visit. scene like this, when paint at
large, afford, as we have observe, very little entertainment to the
reader. here, therefore, we shall strictly adhere to a rule of Horace;
by which writer be direct to pass over all those matter which
they despair of place in a shining light;--a rule, we conceive, of
excellent use as well to the historian as to the poet; and which, if
follow, must at least have this good effect, that many a great evil
(for so all great book be call) would thus be reduce to a small
one.
it be possible the great art use by Blifil at this interview would
have prevail on Sophia to have make another man in his circumstance
her confident, and to have reveal the whole secret of her heart to
he; but she have contract so ill an opinion of this young gentleman,
that she be resolve to place no confidence in he; for simplicity,
when set on its guard, be often a match for cunning. her behaviour to
he, therefore, be entirely force, and indeed such as be generally
prescribe to virgin upon the second formal visit from one who be
appoint for their husband.
but though Blifil declare himself to the squire perfectly satisfied
with his reception; yet that gentleman, who, in company with his
sister, have overhear all, be not so well pleased. he resolve, in
pursuance of the advice of the sage lady, to push matter as forward
as possible; and address himself to his intended son-in-law in the
hunting phrase, he cry, after a loud holla, "follow she, boy, follow
she; run in, run in; thatbe it, honey. dead, dead, dead. never be
bashful, nor stand shall I, shall I? allworthy and I can finish all
matter between we this afternoon, and let we ha' the wedding
to-morrow."
Blifil have convey the utmost satisfaction into his countenance,
answer, "as there be nothing, sir, in this world which I so eagerly
desire as an alliance with your family, except my union with the most
amiable and deserve Sophia, you may easily imagine how impatient I
must be to see myself in possession of my two high wish. if I
have not therefore importune you on this head, you will impute it
only to my fear of offend the lady, by endeavour to hurry on so
bless an event fast than a strict compliance with all the rule of
decency and decorum will permit. but if, by your interest, sir, she
might be induce to dispense with any formalities--"
"Formalities! with a pox!" answer the squire. "Pooh, all stuff and
nonsense! I tell thee, she shall ha' thee to-morrow: you will know the
world well hereafter, when you come to my age. woman never gi' their
consent, man, if they can help it, 'tis not the fashion. if I have
stay for her mother's consent, I might have be a batchelor to this
day.--To she, to she, co to she, thatbe it, you jolly dog. I tell thee
shat ha' her to-morrow morning."
Blifil suffer himself to be overpower by the forcible rhetoric of
the squire; and it be agree that Western should close with
allworthy that very afternoon, the lover depart home, have first
earnestly beg that no violence might be offer to the lady by this
haste, in the same manner as a popish inquisitor beg the lay power to
do no violence to the heretic deliver over to it, and against whom
the church hath pass sentence.
and, to say the truth, Blifil have pass sentence against Sophia; for,
however pleased he have declare himself to Western with his reception,
he be by no mean satisfied, unless it be that he be convince of
the hatred and scorn of his mistress: and this have produce no less
reciprocal hatred and scorn in he. it may, perhaps, be ask, why
then do he not put an immediate end to all further courtship? I
answer, for that very reason, as well as for several other equally
good, which we shall now proceed to open to the reader.
though Mr Blifil be not of the complexion of Jones, nor ready to eat
every woman he see; yet he be far from be destitute of that
appetite which be say to be the common property of all animal. with
this, he have likewise that distinguish taste, which serve to
direct man in their choice of the object or food of their several
appetite; and this teach he to consider Sophia as a most delicious
morsel, indeed to regard she with the same desire which an ortolan
inspire into the soul of an epicure. now the agony which affect
the mind of Sophia, rather augmented than impair her beauty; for she
tear add brightness to her eye, and her breast rise higher with
her sigh. indeed, no one hath see beauty in its high lustre who
hath never see it in distress. Blifil therefore look on this human
ortolan with great desire than when he view she last; nor be his
desire at all lessen by the aversion which he discover in she to
himself. on the contrary, this serve rather to heighten the pleasure
he propose in rifle her charm, as it add triumph to lust; nay,
he have some further view, from obtain the absolute possession of
her person, which we detest too much even to mention; and revenge
itself be not without its share in the gratification which he
promise himself. the rival poor Jones, and supplant he in her
affection, add another spur to his pursuit, and promise another
additional rapture to his enjoyment.
besides all these view, which to some scrupulous person may seem to
savour too much of malevolence, he have one prospect, which few reader
will regard with any great abhorrence. and this be the estate of Mr
Western; which be all to be settle on his daughter and her issue;
for so extravagant be the affection of that fond parent, that,
provide his child would but consent to be miserable with the husband
he choose, he care not at what price he purchase he.
for these reason Mr Blifil be so desirous of the match that he
intend to deceive Sophia, by pretend love to she; and to deceive
her father and his own uncle, by pretend he be belove by she. in
do this he avail himself of the piety of Thwackum, who hold, that
if the end propose be religious (as surely matrimony be), it
matter not how wicked be the mean. as to other occasion, he use
to apply the philosophy of Square, which teach, that the end be
immaterial, so that the mean be fair and consistent with moral
rectitude. to say truth, there be few occurrence in life on which
he could not draw advantage from the precept of one or other of those
great master.
little deceit be indeed necessary to be practise on Mr Western; who
think the inclination of his daughter of as little consequence as
Blifil himself conceive they to be; but as the sentiment of Mr
Allworthy be of a very different kind, so it be absolutely
necessary to impose on he. in this, however, Blifil be so well
assist by Western, that he succeed without difficulty; for as Mr
Allworthy have be assure by her father that Sophia have a proper
affection for Blifil, and that all which he have suspect concern
Jones be entirely false, Blifil have nothing more to do than to
confirm these assertion; which he do with such equivocation, that
he preserve a salvo for his conscience; and have the satisfaction of
convey a lie to his uncle, without the guilt of tell one. when
he be examine touch the inclination of Sophia by Allworthy, who
say, "he would on no account be accessary to force a young lady
into a marriage contrary to her own will;" he answer, "that the real
sentiment of young lady be very difficult to be understand; that
her behaviour to he be full as forward as he wish it, and that if
he could believe her father, she have all the affection for he which
any lover could desire. as for Jones," say he, "whom I be loth to
call villain, though his behaviour to you, sir, sufficiently justify
the appellation, his own vanity, or perhaps some wicked view, might
make he boast of a falsehood; for if there have be any reality in
Miss Western's love to he, the greatness of her fortune would never
have suffer he to desert she, as you be well informed he hath.
lastly, sir, I promise you I would not myself, for any consideration,
no, not for the whole world, consent to marry this young lady, if I
be not persuade she have all the passion for I which I desire she
should have."
this excellent method of convey a falsehood with the heart only,
without make the tongue guilty of an untruth, by the mean of
equivocation and imposture, hath quiet the conscience of many a
notable deceiver; and yet, when we consider that it be Omniscience on
which these endeavour to impose, it may possibly seem capable of
afford only a very superficial comfort; and that this artful and
refined distinction between communicate a lie, and tell one, be
hardly worth the pain it cost they.
Allworthy be pretty well satisfied with what Mr Western and Mr Blifil
tell he: and the treaty be now, at the end of two day, conclude.
nothing then remain previous to the office of the priest, but the
office of the lawyer, which threaten to take up so much time, that
Western offer to bind himself by all manner of covenant, rather
than defer the happiness of the young couple. indeed, he be so very
earnest and pressing, that an indifferent person might have conclude
he be more a principal in this match than he really be; but this
eagerness be natural to he on all occasion: and he conduct every
scheme he undertake in such a manner, as if the success of that alone
be sufficient to constitute the whole happiness of his life.
the joint importunity of both father and son-in-law would probably
have prevail on Mr Allworthy, who brook but ill any delay of
give happiness to other, have not Sophia herself prevent it, and
take measure to put a final end to the whole treaty, and to rob both
church and law of those taxis which these wise body have think
proper to receive from the propagation of the human specie in a
lawful manner. of which in the next chapter.
Chapter vii.
a strange resolution of Sophia, and a more strange stratagem of Mrs
Honour.
Though Mrs Honour be principally attach to her own interest, she
be not without some little attachment to Sophia. to say truth, it be
very difficult for any one to know that young lady without love she.
she no soon therefore hear a piece of news, which she imagine to
be of great importance to her mistress, than, quite forget the
anger which she have conceive two day before, at her unpleasant
dismission from Sophia's presence, she run hastily to inform she of
the news.
the beginning of her discourse be as abrupt as her entrance into the
room. "o dear ma'am!" say she, "what doth your la'ship think? to be
sure I be frightened out of my wit; and yet I think it my duty to
tell your la'ship, though perhaps it may make you angry, for we
servant donot always know what will make our lady angry; for, to be
sure, everything be always lay to the charge of a servant. when our
lady be out of humour, to be sure we must be scold; and to be
sure I should not wonder if your la'ship should be out of humour; nay,
it must surprize you certainly, ay, and shock you too."--"Good Honour,
let I know it without any long preface," say Sophia; "there be
few thing, I promise you, which will surprize, and few which will
shock I."--"dear ma'am," answer Honour, "to be sure, I overheard my
master talk to parson Supple about get a licence this very
afternoon; and to be sure I hear he say, your la'ship should be
married to-morrow morning." Sophia turn pale at these word, and
repeat eagerly, "to-morrow morning!"--"Yes, ma'am," reply the
trusty waiting-woman, "I will take my oath I hear my master say
so."--"honour," say Sophia, "you have both surprize and shock I
to such a degree that I have scarce any breath or spirit leave. what
be to be do in my dreadful situation?"--"i wish I be able to advise
your la'ship," say she. "do advise I," cry Sophia; "pray, dear
Honour, advise I. think what you would attempt if it be your own
case."--"Indeed, ma'am," cry Honour, "I wish your la'ship and I
could change situation; that be, I mean without hurt your la'ship;
for to be sure I donot wish you so bad as to be a servant; but because
that if so be it be my case, I should find no manner of difficulty in
it; for, in my poor opinion, young Squire Blifil be a charming, sweet,
handsome man."--"Don't mention such stuff," cry Sophia. "such
stuff!" repeat Honour; "why, there. well, to be sure, whatbe one
man's meat be another man's poison, and the same be altogether as true
of woman."--"honour," say Sophia, "rather than submit to be the wife
of that contemptible wretch, I would plunge a dagger into my
heart."--"O lud! ma'am!" answer the other, "I be sure you frighten
I out of my wit now. let I beseech your la'ship not to suffer such
wicked thought to come into your head. o lud! to be sure I tremble
every inch of I. dear ma'am, consider, that to be deny Christian
burial, and to have your corpse bury in the highway, and a stake
drive through you, as farmer Halfpenny be serve at Ox Cross; and, to
be sure, his ghost hath walk there ever since, for several people
have see he. to be sure it can be nothing but the devil which can
put such wicked thought into the head of anybody; for certainly it be
less wicked to hurt all the world than one's own dear self; and so I
have hear say by more parson than one. if your la'ship hath such a
violent aversion, and hat the young gentleman so very bad, that you
cannot bear to think of go into bed to he; for to be sure there may
be such antipathy in nature, and one have liever touch a toad than
the flesh of some people."--
Sophia have be too much wrapt in contemplation to pay any great
attention to the forego excellent discourse of she maid;
interrupt she therefore, without make any answer to it, she say,
"Honour, I be come to a resolution. I be determined to leave my
father's house this very night; and if you have the friendship for I
which you have often profess, you will keep I company."--"That I
will, ma'am, to the world's end," answer Honour; "but I beg your
la'ship to consider the consequence before you undertake any rash
action. where can your la'ship possibly go?"--"there be," reply
Sophia, "a lady of quality in London, a relation of mine, who spend
several month with my aunt in the country; during all which time she
treat I with great kindness, and express so much pleasure in my
company, that she earnestly desire my aunt to suffer I to go with
she to London. as she be a woman of very great note, I shall easily
find she out, and I make no doubt of be very well and kindly
receive by she."--"I would not have your la'ship too confident of
that," cry Honour; "for the first lady I live with use to invite
people very earnestly to her house; but if she hear afterwards they
be come, she use to get out of the way. besides, though this lady
would be very glad to see your la'ship, as to be sure anybody would be
glad to see your la'ship, yet when she hear your la'ship be run away
from my master--" "you be mistaken, Honour," say Sophia: "she look
upon the authority of a father in a much low light than I do; for
she press I violently to go to London with she, and when I refuse
to go without my father's consent, she laugh I to scorn, call I
silly country girl, and say, I should make a pure love wife, since
I could be so dutiful a daughter. so I have no doubt but she will both
receive I and protect I too, till my father, find I out of his
power, can be bring to some reason."
"well, but, ma'am," answer Honour, "how doth your la'ship think of
make your escape? where will you get any horse or conveyance? for
as for your own horse, as all the servant know a little how matter
stand between my master and your la'ship, Robin will be hang before
he will suffer it to go out of the stable without my master's express
order." "I intend to escape," say Sophia, "by walk out of the
door when they be open. I thank Heaven my leg be very able to
carry I. they have support I many a long evening"--"Yes, to be
sure," cry Honour, "I will follow your la'ship through the world;
but your la'ship have almost as good be alone: for I should not be able
to defend you, if any robber, or other villain, should meet with
you. Nay, I should be in as horrible a fright as your la'ship; for to
be certain, they would ravish we both. besides, ma'am, consider how
cold the night be now; we shall be freeze to death."--"a good brisk
pace," answer Sophia, "will preserve we from the cold; and if you
cannot defend I from a villain, Honour, I will defend you; for I will
take a pistol with I. there be two always charge in the
hall."--"dear ma'am, you frighten I more and more," cry Honour:
"sure your la'ship would not venture to fire it off! I have rather run
any chance than your la'ship should do that."--"Why so?" say Sophia,
smile; "would not you, Honour, fire a pistol at any one who should
attack your virtue?"--"To be sure, ma'am," cry Honour, "one's virtue
be a dear thing, especially to we poor servant; for it be our
livelihood, as a body may say: yet I mortally hate fire-arm; for so
many accident happen by they."--"Well, well," say Sophia, "I believe
I may ensure your virtue at a very cheap rate, without carry any
arm with we; for I intend to take horse at the very first town we
come to, and we shall hardly be attack in our way thither. Look'ee,
Honour, I be resolve to go; and if you will attend I, I promise you
I will reward you to the very utmost of my power."
this last argument have a strong effect on Honour than all the
precede. and since she see her mistress so determined, she desist
from any further dissuasion. they then enter into a debate on way
and mean of execute their project. here a very stubborn difficulty
occur, and this be the removal of their effect, which be much
more easily get over by the mistress than by the maid; for when a lady
hath once take a resolution to run to a lover, or to run from he,
all obstacle be consider as trifle. but Honour be inspire by no
such motive; she have no rapture to expect, nor any terror to shun;
and besides the real value of her clothe, in which consist a great
part of her fortune, she have a capricious fondness for several gown,
and other thing; either because they become she, or because they be
give she by such a particular person; because she have buy they
lately, or because she have have they long; or for some other reason
equally good; so that she could not endure the thought of leave the
poor thing behind she expose to the mercy of Western, who, she
doubt not, would in his rage make they suffer martyrdom.
the ingenious Mrs Honour have apply all her oratory to dissuade
her mistress from her purpose, when she find she positively
determine, at last start the following expedient to remove her
clothe, viz., to get herself turn out of door that very evening.
Sophia highly approve this method, but doubt how it might be
bring about. "o, ma'am," cry Honour, "your la'ship may trust that
to I; we servant very well know how to obtain this favour of our
master and mistress; though sometimes, indeed, where they owe we
more wage than they can readily pay, they will put up with all our
affront, and will hardly take any warning we can give they; but the
squire be none of those; and since your la'ship be resolve upon
set out to-night, I warrant I get discharge this afternoon." it
be then resolve that she should pack up some linen and a night-gown
for Sophia, with her own thing; and as for all her other clothe, the
young lady abandon they with no more remorse than the sailor feel
when he throw over the good of other, in order to save his own
life.
Chapter viii.
contain scene of altercation, of no very uncommon kind.
Mrs Honour have scarce soon part from her young lady, than
something (for I would not, like the old woman in Quevedo, injure the
devil by any false accusation, and possibly he might have no hand in
it)--but something, I say, suggest itself to she, that by
sacrifice Sophia and all her secret to Mr Western, she might
probably make her fortune. many consideration urge this discovery.
the fair prospect of a handsome reward for so great and acceptable a
service to the squire, tempt her avarice; and again, the danger of
the enterprize she have undertake; the uncertainty of its success;
night, cold, robber, ravisher, all alarm her fear. so forcibly
do all these operate upon she, that she be almost determined to go
directly to the squire, and to lay open the whole affair. she be,
however, too upright a judge to decree on one side, before she have
hear the other. and here, first, a journey to London appear very
strongly in support of Sophia. she eagerly long to see a place in
which she fancy charm short only of those which a raptured saint
imago in heaven. in the next place, as she know Sophia to have much
more generosity than her master, so her fidelity promise she a
great reward than she could gain by treachery. she then
cross-examine all the article which have raise her fear on the
other side, and find, on fairly sift the matter, that there be
very little in they. and now both scale be reduce to a pretty
even balance, her love to her mistress be throw into the scale of
her integrity, make that rather preponderate, when a circumstance
strike upon her imagination which might have have a dangerous effect,
have its whole weight be fairly put into the other scale. this be
the length of time which must intervene before Sophia would be able to
fulfil her promise; for though she be intitle to her mother's
fortune at the death of her father, and to the sum of £3000 leave she
by an uncle when she come of age; yet these be distant day, and
many accident might prevent the intend generosity of the young
lady; whereas the reward she might expect from Mr Western be
immediate. but while she be pursue this thought the good genius of
Sophia, or that which preside over the integrity of Mrs Honour, or
perhaps mere chance, send an accident in her way, which at once
preserve her fidelity, and even facilitate the intended business.
Mrs Western's maid claim great superiority over Mrs Honour on
several account. first, her birth be high; for her great-grandmother
by the mother's side be a cousin, not far remove, to an irish peer.
secondly, her wage be great. and lastly, she have be at London,
and have of consequence see more of the world. she have always behave,
therefore, to Mrs Honour with that reserve, and have always exact of
she those mark of distinction, which every order of female preserve
and require in conversation with those of an inferior order. now as
Honour do not at all time agree with this doctrine, but would
frequently break in upon the respect which the other demand, Mrs
Western's maid be not at all pleased with her company; indeed, she
earnestly long to return home to the house of her mistress, where
she domineer at will over all the other servant. she have be
greatly, therefore, disappoint in the morning, when Mrs Western have
change her mind on the very point of departure; and have be in what
be vulgarly call a glouting humour ever since.
in this humour, which be none of the sweetest, she come into the room
where Honour be debate with herself in the manner we have above
related. honour no soon see she, than she address she in the
follow oblige phrase: "Soh, madam, I find we be to have the
pleasure of your company long, which I be afraid the quarrel
between my master and your lady would have rob we of."--"i donot
know, madam," answer the other, "what you mean by we and we. I
assure you I do not look on any of the servant in this house to be
proper company for I. I be company, I hope, for their better every
day in the week. I do not speak on your account, Mrs Honour; for you
be a civilized young woman; and when you have see a little more of
the world, I should not be ashamed to walk with you in St James's
Park."--"hoity toity!" cry Honour, "madam be in her air, I protest.
Mrs Honour, forsooth! sure, madam, you might call I by my sir-name;
for though my lady call I Honour, I have a sir-name as well as other
folk. ashamed to walk with I, quotha! marry, as good as yourself, I
hope."--"Since you make such a return to my civility," say the other,
"I must acquaint you, Mrs Honour, that you be not so good as I. in
the country, indeed, one be oblige to take up with all kind of
trumpery; but in town I visit none but the woman of woman of quality.
indeed, Mrs Honour, there be some difference, I hope, between you and
I."--"I hope so too," answer Honour: "there be some difference in
our age, and--I think in our person." upon speak which last
word, she strut by Mrs Western's maid with the most provoking air
of contempt; turn up her nose, toss her head, and violently
brush the hoop of her competitor with her own. the other lady put
on one of her most malicious sneer, and say, "Creature! you be
below my anger; and it be beneath I to give ill word to such an
audacious saucy trollop; but, hussy, I must tell you, your breeding
show the meanness of your birth as well as of your education; and
both very properly qualify you to be the mean serve-woman of a
country girl."--"Don't abuse my lady," cry Honour: "I willnot take
that of you; shebe as much well than your as she be young, and
ten thousand time more handsomer."
here ill luck, or rather good luck, send Mrs Western to see she maid
in tear, which begin to flow plentifully at her approach; and of
which be ask the reason by her mistress, she presently acquaint
she that her tear be occasion by the rude treatment of that
creature there--mean Honour. "and, madam," continue she, "I could
have despise all she say to I; but she hath have the audacity to
affront your ladyship, and to call you ugly--yes, madam, she call
you ugly old cat to my face. I could not bear to hear your ladyship
call ugly."--"why do you repeat her impudence so often?" say Mrs
Western. and then turn to Mrs Honour, she ask she "how she have
the assurance to mention her name with disrespect?"--"disrespect,
madam!" answer Honour; "I never mention your name at all: I say
somebody be not as handsome as my mistress, and to be sure you know
that as well as i."--"hussy," reply the lady, "I will make such a
saucy trollop as yourself know that I be not a proper subject of your
discourse. and if my brother doth not discharge you this moment, I
will never sleep in his house again. I will find he out, and have you
discharge this moment."--"discharge!" cry Honour; "and suppose I
be: there be more place in the world than one. thank Heaven, good
servant need not want place; and if you turn away all who do not
think you handsome, you will want servant very soon; let I tell you
that."
Mrs Western speak, or rather thunder, in answer; but as she be
hardly articulate, we cannot be very certain of the identical word;
we shall therefore omit insert a speech which at well would not
greatly redound to her honour. she then depart in search of her
brother, with a countenance so full of rage, that she resemble one of
the fury rather than a human creature.
the two chambermaid be again leave alone, begin a second bout at
altercation, which soon produce a combat of a more active kind. in
this the victory belong to the lady of inferior rank, but not
without some loss of blood, of hair, and of lawn and muslin.
Chapter ix.
the wise demeanour of Mr Western in the character of a magistrate. a
hint to justice of peace, concern the necessary qualification of
a clerk; with extraordinary instance of paternal madness and filial
affection.
Logicians sometimes prove too much by an argument, and politician
often overreach themselves in a scheme. thus have it like to have
happen to Mrs Honour, who, instead of recover the rest of her
clothe, have like to have stop even those she have on she back from
escape; for the squire no soon hear of she have abuse his
sister, than he swear twenty oath he would send she to Bridewell.
Mrs Western be a very good-natured woman, and ordinarily of a
forgiving temper. she have lately remit the trespass of a
stage-coachman, who have overturn her post-chaise into a ditch; nay,
she have even break the law, in refuse to prosecute a highwayman who
have rob she, not only of a sum of money, but of her ear-ring; at
the same time d--ne she, and say, "such handsome b--s as you
donot want jewel to set they off, and be d--n'd to you." but now, so
uncertain be our temper, and so much do we at different time differ
from ourselves, she would hear of no mitigation; nor could all the
affect penitence of Honour, nor all the entreaty of Sophia for her
own servant, prevail with she to desist from earnestly desire her
brother to execute justiceship (for it be indeed a syllable more than
justice) on the wench.
but luckily the clerk have a qualification, which no clerk to a justice
of peace ought ever to be without, namely, some understanding in the
law of this realm. he therefore whisper in the ear of the justice
that he would exceed his authority by commit the girl to
Bridewell, as there have be no attempt to break the peace; "for I be
afraid, sir," say he, "you cannot legally commit any one to Bridewell
only for ill-breeding."
in matter of high importance, particularly in case relate to the
game, the justice be not always attentive to these admonition of his
clerk; for, indeed, in execute the law under that head, many
justice of peace suppose they have a large discretionary power, by
virtue of which, under the notion of search for and take away
engine for the destruction of the game, they often commit trespass,
and sometimes felony, at their pleasure.
but this offence be not of quite so high a nature, nor so dangerous
to the society. here, therefore, the justice behave with some
attention to the advice of his clerk; for, in fact, he have already have
two information exhibit against he in the King's Bench, and have no
curiosity to try a third.
the squire, therefore, put on a most wise and significant
countenance, after a preface of several hum and hah, tell his
sister, that upon more mature deliberation, he be of opinion, that
"as there be no breaking up of the peace, such as the law," say he,
"call break open a door, or break a hedge, or break a head,
or any such sort of breaking, the matter do not amount to a felonious
kind of a thing, nor trespass, nor damage, and, therefore, there
be no punishment in the law for it."
Mrs Western say, "she know the law much well; that she have know
servant very severely punish for affront their master;" and
then name a certain justice of the peace in London, "who," she say,
"would commit a servant to Bridewell at any time when a master or
mistress desire it."
"like enough," cry the squire; "it may be so in London; but the law
be different in the country." here follow a very learn dispute
between the brother and sister concern the law, which we would
insert, if we imagine many of our reader could understand it. this
be, however, at length refer by both party to the clerk, who
decide it in favour of the magistrate; and Mrs Western be, in the
end, oblige to content herself with the satisfaction of have Honour
turn away; to which Sophia herself very readily and cheerfully
consent.
thus Fortune, after have divert herself, accord to custom, with
two or three frolick, at last dispose all matter to the advantage
of our heroine; who indeed succeed admirably well in her deceit,
consider it be the first she have ever practise. and, to say the
truth, I have often conclude, that the honest part of mankind would
be much too hard for the knavish, if they could bring themselves to
incur the guilt, or think it worth their while to take the trouble.
Honour act her part to the utmost perfection. she no soon see
herself secure from all danger of Bridewell, a word which have raise
most horrible idea in her mind, than she resume those air which she
terror before have a little abate; and lay down her place, with as
much affectation of content, and indeed of contempt, as be ever
practise at the resignation of place of much great importance. if
the reader please, therefore, we chuse rather to say she
resign--which hath, indeed, be always hold a synonymous expression
with be turn out, or turn away.
Mr Western order she to be very expeditious in pack; for his
sister declare she would not sleep another night under the same roof
with so impudent a slut. to work therefore she go, and that so
earnestly, that everything be ready early in the evening; when,
have receive her wage, away pack bag and baggage, to the great
satisfaction of every one, but of none more than of Sophia; who,
have appoint she maid to meet she at a certain place not far from
the house, exactly at the dreadful and ghostly hour of twelve, begin
to prepare for her own departure.
but first she be oblige to give two painful audience, the one to
her aunt, and the other to her father. in these Mrs Western herself
begin to talk to she in a more peremptory stile than before: but her
father treat she in so violent and outrageous a manner, that he
frighten she into an affected compliance with his will; which so
highly please the good squire, that he change his frown into
smile, and his menace into promise: he vow his whole soul be
wrapt in her; that her consent (for so he construe the word, "you
know, sir, I must not, nor can, refuse to obey any absolute command of
your") have make he the happy of mankind. he then give she a large
bank-bill to dispose of in any trinket she please, and kiss and
embrace she in the fond manner, while tear of joy trickle from
those eye which a few moment before have dart fire and rage against
the dear object of all his affection.
instance of this behaviour in parent be so common, that the reader,
I doubt not, will be very little astonish at the whole conduct of Mr
Western. if he should, I own I be not able to account for it; since
that he love his daughter most tenderly, be, I think, beyond dispute.
so indeed have many other, who have render their child most
completely miserable by the same conduct; which, though it be almost
universal in parent, hath always appear to I to be the most
unaccountable of all the absurdity which ever enter into the brain
of that strange prodigious creature man.
the latter part of Mr Western's behaviour have so strong an effect on
the tender heart of Sophia, that it suggest a thought to she, which
not all the sophistry of her politic aunt, nor all the menace of her
father, have ever once bring into her head. she reverence her father
so piously, and love he so passionately, that she have scarce ever
feel more pleasing sensation, than what arise from the share she
frequently have of contribute to his amusement, and sometimes,
perhaps, to high gratification; for he never could contain the
delight of hear she commend, which he have the satisfaction of
hear almost every day of her life. the idea, therefore, of the
immense happiness she should convey to her father by her consent to
this match, make a strong impression on her mind. again, the extreme
piety of such an act of obedience work very forcibly, as she have a
very deep sense of religion. lastly, when she reflect how much she
herself be to suffer, be indeed to become little less than a
sacrifice, or a martyr, to filial love and duty, she feel an agreeable
tickling in a certain little passion, which though it bear no
immediate affinity either to religion or virtue, be often so kind as
to lend great assistance in execute the purpose of both.
Sophia be charm with the contemplation of so heroic an action, and
begin to compliment herself with much premature flattery, when Cupid,
who lie hid in her muff, suddenly creep out, and like Punchinello in a
puppet-show, kick all out before he. in truth (for we scorn to
deceive our reader, or to vindicate the character of our heroine by
ascribe her action to supernatural impulse) the thought of her
beloved Jones, and some hope (however distant) in which he be very
particularly concern, immediately destroy all which filial love,
piety, and pride have, with their joint endeavour, be labour to
bring about.
but before we proceed any far with Sophia, we must now look back
to Mr Jones.
Chapter x.
contain several matter, natural enough perhaps, but low.
the reader will be pleased to remember, that we leave Mr Jones, in the
beginning of this book, on his road to Bristol; be determined to
seek his fortune at sea, or rather, indeed, to fly away from his
fortune on shore.
it happen (a thing not very unusual), that the guide who undertake
to conduct he on his way, be unluckily unacquainted with the road;
so that have miss his right track, and be ashamed to ask
information, he ramble about backwards and forwards till night come
on, and it begin to grow dark. Jones suspect what have happen,
acquaint the guide with his apprehension; but he insist on it,
that they be in the right road, and add, it would be very strange
if he should not know the road to Bristol; though, in reality, it
would have be much strange if he have know it, have never past
through it in his life before.
Jones have not such implicit faith in his guide, but that on their
arrival at a village he inquire of the first fellow he see, whether
they be in the road to Bristol. "whence do you come?" cry the
fellow. "no matter," say Jones, a little hastily; "I want to know if
this be the road to Bristol?"--"The road to Bristol!" cry the
fellow, scratch his head: "why, measter, I believe you will hardly
get to Bristol this way to-night."--"prithee, friend, then," answer
Jones, "do tell we which be the way."--"Why, measter," cry the
fellow, "you must be come out of your road the Lord know whither; for
thick way goeth to Glocester."--"Well, and which way go to Bristol?"
say Jones. "why, you be go away from Bristol," answer the
fellow. "then," say Jones, "we must go back again?"--"ay, you must,"
say the fellow. "well, and when we come back to the top of the hill,
which way must we take?"--"why, you must keep the strait road."--"but
I remember there be two road, one to the right and the other to the
left."--"why, you must keep the right-hand road, and then gu strait
vorward; only remember to turn vurst to your right, and then to your
leave again, and then to your right, and that bring you to the
squire's; and then you must keep strait vorward, and turn to the
left."
another fellow now come up, and ask which way the gentleman be
go; of which be inform by Jones, he first scratch his head,
and then lean upon a pole he have in his hand, begin to tell he,
"that he must keep the right-hand road for about a mile, or a mile and
a half, or such a matter, and then he must turn short to the left,
which would bring he round by Measter Jin Bearnes's."--"But which be
Mr John Bearnes's?" say Jones. "o Lord!" cry the fellow, "why,
donot you know Measter Jin Bearnes? whence then do you come?"
these two fellow have almost conquer the patience of Jones, when a
plain well-look man (who be indeed a Quaker) accost he thus:
"Friend, I perceive thou hast lose thy way; and if thou wilt take my
advice, thou wilt not attempt to find it to-night. it be almost dark,
and the road be difficult to hit; besides, there have be several
robbery commit lately between this and Bristol. here be a very
creditable good house just by, where thou may'st find good
entertainment for thyself and thy cattle till morning." Jones, after a
little persuasion, agree to stay in this place till the morning, and
be conduct by his friend to the public-house.
the landlord, who be a very civil fellow, tell Jones, "he hop he
would excuse the badness of his accommodation; for that his wife be
go from home, and have lock up almost everything, and carry the
key along with she." indeed the fact be, that a favourite daughter
of hers be just married, and go that morning home with her husband;
and that she and her mother together have almost stript the poor man of
all his good, as well as money; for though he have several child,
this daughter only, who be the mother's favourite, be the object of
her consideration; and to the humour of this one child she would with
pleasure have sacrifice all the rest, and her husband into the
bargain.
Though Jones be very unfit for any kind of company, and would have
prefer be alone, yet he could not resist the importunity of
the honest Quaker; who be the more desirous of sit with he, from
have remark the melancholy which appear both in his countenance
and behaviour; and which the poor Quaker think his conversation
might in some measure relieve.
after they have past some time together, in such a manner that my
honest friend might have think himself at one of his silent
meeting, the Quaker begin to be move by some spirit or other,
probably that of curiosity, and say, "Friend, I perceive some sad
disaster hath befall thee; but pray be of comfort. perhaps thou hast
lose a friend. if so, thou must consider we be all mortal. and why
shouldst thou grieve, when thou know thy grief will do thy friend
no good? we be all bear to affliction. I myself have my sorrow as
well as thee, and most probably great sorrow. though I have a clear
estate of £100 a year, which be as much as I want, and I have a
conscience, I thank the Lord, void of offence; my constitution be
sound and strong, and there be no man can demand a debt of I, nor
accuse I of an injury; yet, friend, I should be concern to think
thee as miserable as myself."
here the Quaker end with a deep sigh; and Jones presently answer,
"I be very sorry, sir, for your unhappiness, whatever be the occasion
of it."--"Ah! friend," reply the Quaker, "one only daughter be the
occasion; one who be my great delight upon earth, and who within
this week be run away from I, and be married against my consent. I
have provide she a proper match, a sober man and one of substance; but
she, forsooth, would chuse for herself, and away she be go with a
young fellow not worth a groat. if she have be dead, as I suppose thy
friend be, I should have be happy."--"That be very strange, sir,"
say Jones. "why, would it not be well for she to be dead, than to
be a beggar?" reply the Quaker: "for, as I tell you, the fellow be
not worth a groat; and surely she cannot expect that I shall ever give
she a shilling. no, as she hath marry for love, let she live on love
if she can; let she carry her love to market, and see whether any one
will change it into silver, or even into halfpence."--"you know your
own concern good, sir," say Jones. "it must have be," continue
the Quaker, "a long premeditate scheme to cheat I: for they have
know one another from their infancy; and I always preach to she
against love, and tell she a thousand time over it be all folly and
wickedness. Nay, the cunning slut pretend to hearken to I, and to
despise all wantonness of the flesh; and yet at last break out at a
window two pair of stair: for I begin, indeed, a little to suspect
she, and have lock she up carefully, intend the very next morning
to have marry she up to my liking. but she disappoint I within a
few hour, and escape away to the lover of her own chusing; who lose
no time, for they be married and bedded and all within an hour. but
it shall be the bad hour's work for they both that ever they do;
for they may starve, or beg, or steal together, for I. I will never
give either of they a farthing." here Jones start up cry, "I
really must be excuse: I wish you would leave I."--"Come, come,
friend," say the Quaker, "donot give way to concern. you see there
be other people miserable besides yourself."--"i see there be
madman, and fool, and villain in the world," cry Jones. "but let
I give you a piece of advice: send for your daughter and son-in-law
home, and donot be yourself the only cause of misery to one you
pretend to love."--"send for she and her husband home!" cry the
Quaker loudly; "I would soon send for the two great enemy I
have in the world!"--"well, go home yourself, or where you please,"
say Jones, "for I will sit no long in such company."--"Nay,
friend," answer the Quaker, "I scorn to impose my company on any
one." he then offer to pull money from his pocket, but Jones push
he with some violence out of the room.
the subject of the Quaker's discourse have so deeply affected Jones,
that he star very wildly all the time he be speak. this the
Quaker have observe, and this, add to the rest of his behaviour,
inspire honest Broadbrim with a conceit, that his companion be in
reality out of his sens. instead of resent the affront,
therefore, the Quaker be move with compassion for his unhappy
circumstance; and have communicate his opinion to the landlord, he
desire he to take great care of his guest, and to treat he with the
high civility.
"indeed," say the landlord, "I shall use no such civility towards
he; for it seem, for all his laced waistcoat there, he be no more a
gentleman than myself, but a poor parish bastard, breed up at a great
squire's about thirty mile off, and now turn out of door (not for
any good to be sure). I shall get he out of my house as soon as
possible. if I do lose my reckoning, the first loss be always the
good. it be not above a year ago that I lose a silver spoon."
"what dost thou talk of a parish bastard, Robin?" answer the Quaker.
"Thou must certainly be mistake in thy man."
"not at all," reply Robin; "the guide, who know he very well, tell
it I." for, indeed, the guide have no soon take his place at the
kitchen fire, than he acquaint the whole company with all he know or
have ever hear concern Jones.
the Quaker be no soon assure by this fellow of the birth and low
fortune of Jones, than all compassion for he vanish; and the honest
plain man go home fire with no less indignation than a duke would
have feel at receive an affront from such a person.
the landlord himself conceive an equal disdain for his guest; so that
when Jones ring the bell in order to retire to bed, he be acquaint
that he could have no bed there. besides disdain of the mean condition
of his guest, Robin entertain violent suspicion of his intention,
which be, he suppose, to watch some favourable opportunity of
rob the house. in reality, he might have be very well ease of
these apprehension, by the prudent precaution of his wife and
daughter, who have already remove everything which be not fix to
the freehold; but he be by nature suspicious, and have be more
particularly so since the loss of his spoon. in short, the dread of
be rob totally absorb the comfortable consideration that he
have nothing to lose.
Jones be assure that he could have no bed, very contentedly betook
himself to a great chair make with rush, when sleep, which have
lately shun his company in much well apartment, generously pay
he a visit in his humble cell.
as for the landlord, he be prevent by his fear from retire to
rest. he return therefore to the kitchen fire, whence he could
survey the only door which open into the parlour, or rather hole,
where Jones be seat; and as for the window to that room, it be
impossible for any creature large than a cat to have make his escape
through it.
Chapter xi.
the adventure of a company of soldier.
the landlord have take his seat directly opposite to the door of
the parlour, determined to keep guard there the whole night. the guide
and another fellow remain long on duty with he, though they neither
know his suspicion, nor have any of their own. the true cause of their
watching do, indeed, at length, put an end to it; for this be no
other than the strength and goodness of the beer, of which have
tipple a very large quantity, they grow at first very noisy and
vociferous, and afterwards fall both asleep.
but it be not in the power of liquor to compose the fear of Robin.
he continue still wake in his chair, with his eye fix stedfastly
on the door which lead into the apartment of Mr Jones, till a violent
thundering at his outward gate call he from his seat, and oblige
he to open it; which he have no soon do, than his kitchen be
immediately full of gentleman in red coat, who all rush upon he in
as tumultuous a manner as if they intend to take his little castle
by storm.
the landlord be now force from his post to furnish his numerous
guest with beer, which they call for with great eagerness; and upon
his second or third return from the cellar, he see Mr Jones stand
before the fire in the midst of the soldier; for it may easily be
believe, that the arrival of so much good company should put an end
to any sleep, unless that from which we be to be awaken only by the
last trumpet.
the company have now pretty well satisfied their thirst, nothing
remain but to pay the reckoning, a circumstance often productive of
much mischief and discontent among the inferior rank of gentry, who
be apt to find great difficulty in assess the sum, with exact
regard to distributive justice, which direct that every man shall pay
accord to the quantity which he drink. this difficulty occur
upon the present occasion; and it be the great, as some gentleman
have, in their extreme hurry, march off, after their first draught,
and have entirely forget to contribute anything towards the said
reckoning.
a violent dispute now arise, in which every word may be say to have
be depose upon oath; for the oath be at least equal to all the
other word speak. in this controversy the whole company speak
together, and every man seem wholly bent to extenuate the sum which
fall to his share; so that the most probable conclusion which could be
foresee be, that a large portion of the reckoning would fall to the
landlord's share to pay, or (what be much the same thing) would remain
unpaid.
all this while Mr Jones be engage in conversation with the serjeant;
for that officer be entirely unconcerned in the present dispute,
be privilege by immemorial custom from all contribution.
the dispute now grow so very warm that it seem to draw towards a
military decision, when Jones, step forward, silence all their
clamour at once, by declare that he would pay the whole reckoning,
which indeed amount to no more than three shilling and fourpence.
this declaration procure Jones the thank and applause of the whole
company. the term honourable, noble, and worthy gentleman, resound
through the room; nay, my landlord himself begin to have a well
opinion of he, and almost to disbelieve the account which the guide
have give.
the serjeant have inform Mr Jones that they be march against the
rebel, and expect to be command by the glorious Duke of
Cumberland. by which the reader may perceive (a circumstance which we
have not think necessary to communicate before) that this be the
very time when the late rebellion be at the high; and indeed the
bandit be now march into England, intend, as it be think,
to fight the king's force, and to attempt push forward to the
metropolis.
Jones have some heroic ingredient in his composition, and be a hearty
well-wisher to the glorious cause of liberty, and of the protestant
religion. it be no wonder, therefore, that in circumstance which
would have warrant a much more romantic and wild undertaking, it
should occur to he to serve as a volunteer in this expedition.
our command officer have say all in his power to encourage and
promote this good disposition, from the first moment he have be
acquaint with it. he now proclaim the noble resolution aloud,
which be receive with great pleasure by the whole company, who all
cry out, "God bless King George and your honour;" and then add,
with many oath, "we will stand by you both to the last drop of our
blood."
the gentleman who have be all night tipple at the alehouse, be
prevail on by some argument which a corporal have put into his
hand, to undertake the same expedition. and now the portmanteau
belong to Mr Jones be put up in the baggage-cart, the force
be about to move forwards; when the guide, step up to Jones,
say, "Sir, I hope you will consider that the horse have be keep
out all night, and we have travel a great way out of our way."
Jones be surprize at the impudence of this demand, and acquaint
the soldier with the merit of his cause, who be all unanimous in
condemn the guide for his endeavour to put upon a gentleman. some
say, he ought to be tie neck and heel; other that he deserve to
run the gantlope; and the serjeant shake his cane at he, and wish
he have he under his command, swear heartily he would make an
example of he.
Jones content himself however with a negative punishment, and walk
off with his new comrade, leave the guide to the poor revenge of
cursing and revile he; in which latter the landlord join, say,
"ay, ay, he be a pure one, I warrant you. a pretty gentleman, indeed,
to go for a soldier! he shall wear a laced wastecoat truly. it be an
old proverb and a true one, all be not gold that glister. I be glad
my house be well rid of he."
all that day the serjeant and the young soldier march together; and
the former, who be an arch fellow, tell the latter many entertaining
story of his campaign, though in reality he have never make any; for
he be but lately come into the service, and have, by his own
dexterity, so well ingratiate himself with his officer, that he have
promote himself to a halberd; chiefly indeed by his merit in
recruiting, in which he be most excellently well skilled.
much mirth and festivity pass among the soldier during their march.
in which the many occurrence that have pass at their last quarter
be remember, and every one, with great freedom, make what joke he
please on his officer, some of which be of the coarser kind, and
very near border on scandal. this bring to our heroe's mind the
custom which he have read of among the Greeks and Romans, of indulge,
on certain festival and solemn occasion, the liberty to slave, of
use an uncontrouled freedom of speech towards their master.
our little army, which consist of two company of foot, be now
arrive at the place where they be to halt that evening. the
serjeant then acquaint his lieutenant, who be the commanding
officer, that they have pick up two fellow in that day's march, one
of which, he say, be as fine a man as ever he see (mean the
tippler), for that he be near six foot, well proportion, and
strongly limbe; and the other (mean Jones) would do well enough
for the rear rank.
the new soldier be now produce before the officer, who have
examine the six-foot man, he be first produce, come next to
survey Jones: at the first sight of whom, the lieutenant could not
help show some surprize; for besides that he be very well dress,
and be naturally genteel, he have a remarkable air of dignity in his
look, which be rarely see among the vulgar, and be indeed not
inseparably annex to the feature of their superior.
"Sir," say the lieutenant, "my serjeant inform I that you be
desirous of enlist in the company I have at present under my
command; if so, sir, we shall very gladly receive a gentleman who
promise to do much honour to the company by bear arm in it."
Jones answer: "that he have not mention anything of enlist
himself; that he be most zealously attach to the glorious cause for
which they be go to fight, and be very desirous of serve as a
volunteer;" conclude with some compliment to the lieutenant, and
express the great satisfaction he should have in be under his
command.
the lieutenant return his civility, commend his resolution, shake
he by the hand, and invite he to dine with himself and the rest of
the officer.
Chapter xii.
the adventure of a company of officer.
the lieutenant, whom we mention in the precede chapter, and who
command this party, be now near sixty year of age. he have enter
very young into the army, and have serve in the capacity of an ensign
at the battle of tanniere; here he have receive two wound, and have
so well distinguish himself, that he be by the Duke of Marlborough
advance to be a lieutenant, immediately after that battle.
in this commission he have continue ever since, viz., near forty
year; during which time he have see vast number prefer over his
head, and have now the mortification to be command by boy, whose
father be at nurse when he first enter into the service.
nor be this ill success in his profession solely owe to his have
no friend among the man in power. he have the misfortune to incur the
displeasure of his colonel, who for many year continue in the
command of this regiment. nor do he owe the implacable ill-will which
this man bear he to any neglect or deficiency as an officer, nor
indeed to any fault in himself; but solely to the indiscretion of his
wife, who be a very beautiful woman, and who, though she be
remarkably fond of her husband, would not purchase his preferment at
the expense of certain favour which the colonel require of she.
the poor lieutenant be more peculiarly unhappy in this, that while he
feel the effect of the enmity of his colonel, he neither know, nor
suspect, that he really bear he any; for he could not suspect an
ill-will for which he be not conscious of give any cause; and his
wife, fear what her husband's nice regard to his honour might have
occasion, content herself with preserve her virtue without
enjoy the triumph of her conquest.
this unfortunate officer (for so I think he may be call) have many
good quality besides his merit in his profession; for he be a
religious, honest, good-natured man; and have behave so well in his
command, that he be highly esteemed and belove not only by the
soldier of his own company, but by the whole regiment.
the other officer who march with he be a french lieutenant, who
have be long enough out of France to forget his own language, but not
long enough in England to learn ours, so that he really speak no
language at all, and could barely make himself understand on the most
ordinary occasion. there be likewise two ensign, both very young
fellow; one of whom have be breed under an attorney, and the other
be son to the wife of a nobleman's butler.
as soon as dinner be end, Jones inform the company of the
merriment which have pass among the soldier upon their march; "and
yet," say he, "notwithstanding all their vociferation, I dare swear
they will behave more like Grecians than Trojans when they come to the
enemy."--"Grecians and Trojans!" say one of the ensign, "who the
devil be they? I have hear of all the troop in Europe, but never of
any such as these."
"donot pretend to more ignorance than you have, Mr Northerton," say
the worthy lieutenant. "I suppose you have hear of the Greeks and
Trojans, though perhaps you never read Pope's Homer; who, I remember,
now the gentleman mention it, compare the march of the Trojans to
the cackling of geese, and greatly commend the silence of the
Grecians. and upon my honour there be great justice in the cadet's
observation."
"Begar, I remember dem ver well," say the french lieutenant: "I ave
read they at school in dans Madam Daciere, des Greek, des Trojan, dey
fight for von woman--ouy, ouy, I ave read all dat."
"D--n Homo with all my heart," say Northerton; "I have the mark of
he on my a-- yet. there's Thomas, of our regiment, always carry a
Homo in his pocket; d--n I, if ever I come at it, if I donot burn it.
and therebe Corderius, another d--n'd son of a whore, that hath get I
many a flogging."
"then you have be at school, Mr Northerton?" say the lieutenant.
"ay, d--n I, have I," answer he; "the devil take my father for
send I thither! the old put want to make a parson of I, but
d--n I, think I to myself, Iwill nick you there, old cull; the devil
a smack of your nonsense shall you ever get into I. therebe Jemmy
Oliver, of our regiment, he narrowly escape be a pimp too, and
that would have be a thousand pity; for d--n I if he be not one
of the prettiest fellow in the whole world; but he go far than
I with the old cull, for Jimmey can neither write nor read."
"you give your friend a very good character," say the lieutenant,
"and a very deserved one, I dare say. but prithee, Northerton, leave
off that foolish as well as wicked custom of swearing; for you be
deceive, I promise you, if you think there be wit or politeness in
it. I wish, too, you would take my advice, and desist from abuse the
clergy. scandalous name, and reflection cast on any body of man,
must be always unjustifiable; but especially so, when throw on so
sacred a function; for to abuse the body be to abuse the function
itself; and I leave to you to judge how inconsistent such behaviour be
in man who be go to fight in defence of the protestant religion."
Mr Adderly, which be the name of the other ensign, have sit hitherto
kick his heel and hum a tune, without seem to listen to the
discourse; he now answer, "_O, Monsieur, on ne parle pas de la
religion dan la guerre_."--"Well say, Jack," cry Northerton: "if
_la religion_ be the only matter, the parson should fight their own
battle for I."
"I donot know, gentleman," say Jones, "what may be your opinion; but
I think no man can engage in a nobler cause than that of his religion;
and I have observe, in the little I have read of history, that no
soldier have fight so bravely as those who have be inspire with a
religious zeal: for my own part, though I love my king and country, I
hope, as well as any man in it, yet the protestant interest be no
small motive to my become a volunteer in the cause."
Northerton now wink on adderly, and whisper to he slily, "smoke
the prig, adderly, smoke he." then turn to Jones, say to he, "I
be very glad, sir, you have choose our regiment to be a volunteer in;
for if our parson should at any time take a cup too much, I find you
can supply his place. I presume, sir, you have be at the university;
may I crave the favour to know what college?"
"Sir," answer Jones, "so far from have be at the university, I
have even have the advantage of yourself, for I be never at school."
"I presume," cry the ensign, "only upon the information of your
great learning."--"Oh! sir," answer Jones, "it be as possible for a
man to know something without have be at school, as it be to have
be at school and to know nothing."
"well say, young volunteer," cry the lieutenant. "upon my word,
Northerton, you have well let he alone; for he will be too hard for
you."
Northerton do not very well relish the sarcasm of Jones; but he
think the provocation be scarce sufficient to justify a blow, or a
rascal, or scoundrel, which be the only repartee that suggest
themselves. he be, therefore, silent at present; but resolve to take
the first opportunity of return the jest by abuse.
it now come to the turn of Mr Jones to give a toast, as it be call;
who could not refrain from mention his dear Sophia. this he do the
more readily, as he imagine it utterly impossible that any one
present should guess the person he mean.
but the lieutenant, who be the toast-master, be not content with
Sophia only. he say, he must have her sir-name; upon which Jones
hesitate a little, and presently after name Miss Sophia Western.
Ensign Northerton declare he would not drink her health in the same
round with his own toast, unless somebody would vouch for she. "I know
one Sophy Western," say he, "that be lie with by half the young
fellow at Bath; and perhaps this be the same woman." Jones very
solemnly assure he of the contrary; assert that the young lady he
name be one of great fashion and fortune. "ay, ay," say the ensign,
"and so she be: d--n I, it be the same woman; and Iwill hold half a
dozen of Burgundy, Tom French of our regiment bring she into company
with we at any tavern in Bridges-street." he then proceed to
describe her person exactly (for he have see she with her aunt), and
conclude with say, "that her father have a great estate in
Somersetshire."
the tenderness of lover can ill brook the least jest with the
name of their mistress. however, Jones, though he have enough of the
lover and of the heroe too in his disposition, do not resent these
slander as hastily as, perhaps, he ought to have do. to say the
truth, have see but little of this kind of wit, he do not readily
understand it, and for a long time imagine Mr Northerton have really
mistaken his charmer for some other. but now, turn to the ensign
with a stern aspect, he say, "pray, sir, chuse some other subject for
your wit; for I promise you I will bear no jesting with this lady's
character." "jesting!" cry the other, "d--n I if ever I be more in
earnest in my life. Tom French of our regiment have both she and her
aunt at Bath." "then I must tell you in earnest," cry Jones, "that
you be one of the most impudent rascal upon earth."
he have no soon speak these word, than the ensign, together with a
volley of curse, discharge a bottle full at the head of Jones, which
hit he a little above the right temple, bring he instantly to
the ground.
the conqueror perceive the enemy to lie motionless before he, and
blood begin to flow pretty plentifully from his wound, begin now
to think of quit the field of battle, where no more honour be to
be get; but the lieutenant interpose, by step before the door,
and thus cut off his retreat.
Northerton be very importunate with the lieutenant for his liberty;
urge the ill consequence of his stay, ask he, what he could
have do less? "Zounds!" say he, "I be but in jest with the fellow.
I never hear any harm of Miss Western in my life." "have not you?"
say the lieutenant; "then you richly deserve to be hang, as well
for make such jest, as for use such a weapon: you be my
prisoner, sir; nor shall you stir from hence till a proper guard come
to secure you."
such an ascendant have our lieutenant over this ensign, that all that
fervency of courage which have level our poor heroe with the floor,
would scarce have animate the say ensign to have draw his sword
against the lieutenant, have he then have one dangle at his side: but
all the sword be hang up in the room, be, at the very beginning
of the fray, secure by the french officer. so that Mr Northerton be
oblige to attend the final issue of this affair.
the french gentleman and Mr Adderly, at the desire of their commanding
officer, have raise up the body of Jones, but as they could perceive
but little (if any) sign of life in he, they again let he fall,
adderly damn he for have blood his wastecoat; and the
Frenchman declare, "Begar, I no tush the Engliseman de mort: I
have hear de Englise ley, law, what you call, hang up de man dat tush
he last."
when the good lieutenant apply himself to the door, he apply
himself likewise to the bell; and the drawer immediately attend, he
dispatch he for a file of musqueteer and a surgeon. these
command, together with the drawer's report of what he have himself
see, not only produce the soldier, but presently draw up the
landlord of the house, his wife, and servant, and, indeed, every one
else who happen at that time to be in the inn.
to describe every particular, and to relate the whole conversation of
the ensue scene, be not within my power, unless I have forty pen,
and could, at once, write with they all together, as the company now
speak. the reader must, therefore, content himself with the most
remarkable incident, and perhaps he may very well excuse the rest.
the first thing do be secure the body of Northerton, who be
deliver into the custody of six man with a corporal at their head,
be by they conduct from a place which he be very willing to leave,
but it be unluckily to a place whither he be very unwilling to go.
to say the truth, so whimsical be the desire of ambition, the very
moment this youth have attain the above-mention honour, he would
have be well content to have retire to some corner of the world,
where the fame of it should never have reach his ear.
it surprize we, and so perhaps, it may the reader, that the
lieutenant, a worthy and good man, should have apply his chief care,
rather to secure the offender, than to preserve the life of the
wound person. we mention this observation, not with any view of
pretend to account for so odd a behaviour, but lest some critic
should hereafter plume himself on discover it. we would have these
gentleman know we can see what be odd in character as well as
themselves, but it be our business to relate fact as they be; which,
when we have do, it be the part of the learn and sagacious reader
to consult that original book of nature, whence every passage in our
work be transcribe, though we quote not always the particular page
for its authority.
the company which now arrive be of a different disposition. they
suspend their curiosity concern the person of the ensign, till
they should see he hereafter in a more engaging attitude. at present,
their whole concern and attention be employ about the bloody
object on the floor; which be place upright in a chair, soon begin
to discover some symptom of life and motion. these be no soon
perceive by the company (for Jones be at first generally conclude
to be dead) than they all fall at once to prescribe for he (for as
none of the physical order be present, every one there take that
office upon he).
Bleeding be the unanimous voice of the whole room; but unluckily
there be no operator at hand; every one then cry, "call the
barber;" but none stir a step. several cordial be likewise
prescribe in the same ineffective manner; till the landlord order
up a tankard of strong beer, with a toast, which he say be the good
cordial in England.
the person principally assistant on this occasion, indeed the only one
who do any service, or seem likely to do any, be the landlady: she
cut off some of her hair, and apply it to the wound to stop the
blood; she fall to chafe the youth's temple with her hand; and
have expr great contempt for her husband's prescription of beer,
she despatch one of her maid to her own closet for a bottle of
brandy, of which, as soon as it be bring, she prevail on Jones,
who be just return to his sens, to drink a very large and
plentiful draught.
soon afterwards arrive the surgeon, who have view the wound,
have shake his head, and blame everything which be do, order
his patient instantly to bed; in which place we think proper to leave
he some time to his repose, and shall here, therefore, put an end to
this chapter.
Chapter xiii.
contain the great address of the landlady, the great learning of a
surgeon, and the solid skill in casuistry of the worthy lieutenant.
when the wounded man be carry to his bed, and the house begin again
to clear up from the hurry which this accident have occasion, the
landlady thus address the command officer: "I be afraid, sir,"
say she, "this young man do not behave himself as well as he should
do to your honour; and if he have be kill, I suppose he have but
his desart: to be sure, when gentleman admit inferior parson into
their company, they oft to keep their distance; but, as my first
husband use to say, few of them know how to do it. for my own part, I
be sure I should not have suffer any fellow to _include_ themselves
into gentleman's company; but I thoft he have be an officer himself,
till the serjeant tell I he be but a recruit."
"Landlady," answer the lieutenant, "you mistake the whole matter.
the young man behave himself extremely well, and be, I believe, a
much well gentleman than the ensign who abuse he. if the young
fellow dy, the man who strike he will have most reason to be sorry
for it: for the regiment will get rid of a very troublesome fellow,
who be a scandal to the army; and if he escape from the hand of
justice, blame I, madam, thatbe all."
"ay! ay! good lack-a-day!" say the landlady; "who could have thoft
it? ay, ay, ay, I be satisfied your honour will see justice do; and
to be sure it oft to be to every one. gentleman oft not to kill poor
folk without answer for it. a poor man hath a soul to be save, as
well as his better."
"indeed, madam," say the lieutenant, "you do the volunteer wrong: I
dare swear he be more of a gentleman than the officer."
"ay!" cry the landlady; "why, look you there, now: well, my first
husband be a wise man; he use to say, you cannot always know the
inside by the outside. Nay, that might have be well enough too; for
I never _saw'd_ he till he be all over blood. who would have thoft
it? mayhap, some young gentleman cross in love. good lack-a-day, if
he should die, what a concern it will be to his parent! why, sure the
devil must possess the wicked wretch to do such an act. to be sure, he
be a scandal to the army, as your honour say; for most of the
gentleman of the army that ever I see, be quite different sort of
people, and look as if they would scorn to spill any christian blood
as much as any man: I mean, that is, in a civil way, as my first
husband use to say. to be sure, when they come into the war, there
must be bloodshe: but that they be not to be blame for. the more of
our enemy they kill there, the well: and I wish, with all my
heart, they could kill every mother's son of they."
"o fie, madam!" say the lieutenant, smile; "_all_ be rather too
bloody-minded a wish."
"not at all, sir," answer she; "I be not at all bloody-minded, only
to our enemy; and there be no harm in that. to be sure it be natural
for we to wish our enemy dead, that the war may be at an end, and
our taxis be lower; for it be a dreadful thing to pay as we do. why
now, there be above forty shilling for window-light, and yet we have
stopt up all we could; we have almost blind the house, I be sure.
say I to the exciseman, say I, I think you oft to favour we; I be
sure we be very good friend to the government: and so we be for
sartain, for we pay a mint of money to 'um. and yet I often think to
myself the government doth not imagine itself more obliged to we, than
to those that donot pay 'um a farthing. ay, ay, it be the way of the
world."
she be proceed in this manner when the surgeon enter the room.
the lieutenant immediately ask how his patient do. but he resolve
he only by say, "well, I believe, than he would have be by
this time, if I have not be call; and even as it be, perhaps it
would have be lucky if I could have be call soon."--"I hope,
sir," say the lieutenant, "the skull be not fractured."--"Hum," cry
the surgeon: "fracture be not always the most dangerous symptom.
contusion and laceration be often attend with bad phaenomena,
and with more fatal consequence, than fracture. People who know
nothing of the matter conclude, if the skull be not fractured, all be
well; whereas, I have rather see a man's skull break all to piece,
than some contusion I have meet with."--"I hope," say the lieutenant,
"there be no such symptom here."--"symptom," answer the surgeon,
"be not always regular nor constant. I have know very unfavourable
symptom in the morning change to favourable one at noon, and return
to unfavourable again at night. of wound, indeed, it be rightly and
truly say, _Nemo repente fuit turpissimus_. I be once, I remember,
call to a patient who have receive a violent contusion in his tibia,
by which the exterior cutis be lacerate, so that there be a profuse
sanguinary discharge; and the interior membrane be so divellicated,
that the os or bone very plainly appear through the aperture of the
vulnus or wound. some febrile symptom intervene at the same time
(for the pulse be exuberant and indicate much phlebotomy), I
apprehend an immediate mortification. to prevent which, I presently
make a large orifice in the vein of the left arm, whence I draw twenty
ounce of blood; which I expect to have find extremely sizy and
glutinous, or indeed coagulate, as it be in pleuretic complaint;
but, to my surprize, it appear rosy and florid, and its consistency
differ little from the blood of those in perfect health. I then
apply a fomentation to the part, which highly answer the
intention; and after three or four time dress, the wound begin to
discharge a thick pus or matter, by which mean the cohesion--but
perhaps I do not make myself perfectly well understood?"--"No,
really," answer the lieutenant, "I cannot say I understand a
syllable."--"Well, sir," say the surgeon, "then I shall not tire your
patience; in short, within six week my patient be able to walk upon
his leg as perfectly as he could have do before he receive the
contusion."--"I wish, sir," say the lieutenant, "you would be so kind
only to inform I, whether the wound this young gentleman hath have the
misfortune to receive, be likely to prove mortal."--"sir," answer
the surgeon, "to say whether a wound will prove mortal or not at first
dressing, would be very weak and foolish presumption: we be all
mortal, and symptom often occur in a cure which the great of our
profession could never foresee."--"But do you think he in danger?"
say the other.--"in danger! ay, surely," cry the doctor: "who be
there among we, who, in the most perfect health, can be say not to be
in danger? can a man, therefore, with so bad a wound as this be say
to be out of danger? all I can say at present be, that it be well I
be call as I be, and perhaps it would have be well if I have
be call soon. I will see he again early in the morning; and in
the meantime let he be keep extremely quiet, and drink liberally of
water-gruel."--"Won't you allow he sack-whey?" say the
landlady.--"Ay, ay, sack-whey," cry the doctor, "if you will,
provide it be very small."--"and a little chicken broth too?" add
she.--"Yes, yes, chicken broth," say the doctor, "be very
good."--"Mayn't I make he some jelly too?" say the landlady.--"Ay,
ay," answer the doctor, "jelly be very good for wound, for they
promote cohesion." and indeed it be lucky she have not name soup or
high sauce, for the doctor would have comply, rather than have lose
the custom of the house.
the doctor be no soon go, than the landlady begin to trumpet
forth his fame to the lieutenant, who have not, from their short
acquaintance, conceive quite so favourable an opinion of his physical
ability as the good woman, and all the neighbourhood, entertain
(and perhaps very rightly); for though I be afraid the doctor be a
little of a coxcomb, he might be nevertheless very much of a surgeon.
the lieutenant have collect from the learn discourse of the
surgeon that Mr Jones be in great danger, give order for keep Mr
Northerton under a very strict guard, design in the morning to
attend he to a justice of peace, and to commit the conducting the
troop to Gloucester to the french lieutenant, who, though he could
neither read, write, nor speak any language, be, however, a good
officer.
in the evening, our commander send a message to Mr Jones, that if a
visit would not be troublesome, he would wait on he. this civility
be very kindly and thankfully receive by Jones, and the lieutenant
accordingly go up to his room, where he find the wounded man much
well than he expect; nay, Jones assure his friend, that if he have
not receive express order to the contrary from the surgeon, he
should have get up long ago; for he appear to himself to be as well
as ever, and feel no other inconvenience from his wound but an extreme
soreness on that side of his head.
"I should be very glad," quoth the lieutenant, "if you be as well as
you fancy yourself, for then you could be able to do yourself justice
immediately; for when a matter cannot be make up, as in case of a blow,
the soon you take he out the well; but I be afraid you think
yourself well than you be, and he would have too much advantage
over you."
"Iwill try, however," answer Jones, "if you please, and will be so
kind to lend I a sword, for I have none here of my own."
"my sword be heartily at your service, my dear boy," cry the
lieutenant, kiss he; "you be a brave lad, and I love your spirit;
but I fear your strength; for such a blow, and so much loss of blood,
must have very much weaken you; and though you feel no want of
strength in your bed, yet you most probably would after a thrust or
two. I cannot consent to your take he out tonight; but I hope you
will be able to come up with we before we get many day' march
advance; and I give you my honour you shall have satisfaction, or the
man who hath injure you shallnot stay in our regiment."
"I wish," say Jones, "it be possible to decide this matter to-night:
now you have mention it to I, I shall not be able to rest."
"oh, never think of it," return the other: "a few day will make no
difference. the wound of honour be not like those in your body: they
suffer nothing by the delay of cure. it will be altogether as well for
you to receive satisfaction a week hence as now."
"but suppose," say Jones, "I should grow bad, and die of the
consequence of my present wound?"
"then your honour," answer the lieutenant, "will require no
reparation at all. I myself will do justice to your character, and
testify to the world your intention to have act properly, if you have
recover."
"still," reply Jones, "I be concern at the delay. I be almost
afraid to mention it to you who be a soldier; but though I have be
a very wild young fellow, still in my most serious moment, and at the
bottom, I be really a Christian."
"so be I too, I assure you," say the officer; "and so zealous a one,
that I be pleased with you at dinner for take up the cause of your
religion; and I be a little offended with you now, young gentleman,
that you should express a fear of declare your faith before any
one."
"but how terrible must it be," cry Jones, "to any one who be really
a Christian, to cherish malice in his breast, in opposition to the
command of he who hath expressly forbid it? how can I bear to do this
on a sick-bed? or how shall I make up my account, with such an article
as this in my bosom against I?"
"why, I believe there be such a command," cry the lieutenant; "but a
man of honour cannot keep it. and you must be a man of honour, if you
will be in the army. I remember I once put the case to our chaplain
over a bowl of punch, and he confess there be much difficulty in
it; but he say, he hop there might be a latitude grant to
soldier in this one instance; and to be sure it be our duty to hope
so; for who would bear to live without his honour? no, no, my dear
boy, be a good Christian as long as you live; but be a man of honour
too, and never put up an affront; not all the book, nor all the
parson in the world, shall ever persuade I to that. I love my
religion very well, but I love my honour more. there must be some
mistake in the wording the text, or in the translation, or in the
understanding it, or somewhere or other. but however that be, a man
must run the risque, for he must preserve his honour. so compose
yourself to-night, and I promise you you shall have an opportunity of
do yourself justice." here he give Jones a hearty buss, shake he
by the hand, and take his leave.
but though the lieutenant's reasoning be very satisfactory to
himself, it be not entirely so to his friend. Jones therefore, have
revolve this matter much in his thought, at last come to a
resolution, which the reader will find in the next chapter.
Chapter xiv.
a most dreadful chapter indeed; and which few reader ought to venture
upon in an evening, especially when alone.
Jones swallow a large mess of chicken, or rather cock, broth, with a
very good appetite, as indeed he would have do the cock it be make
of, with a pound of bacon into the bargain; and now, find in
himself no deficiency of either health or spirit, he resolve to get
up and seek his enemy.
but first he send for the serjeant, who be his first acquaintance
among these military gentleman. unluckily that worthy officer have,
in a literal sense, take his fill of liquor, have be some time
retire to his bolster, where he be snore so loud that it be not
easy to convey a noise in at his ear capable of drown that which
issue from his nostril.
however, as Jones persist in his desire of see he, a vociferous
drawer at length find mean to disturb his slumber, and to acquaint
he with the message. of which the serjeant be no soon make
sensible, than he arise from his bed, and have his clothe already
on, immediately attend. Jones do not think fit to acquaint the
serjeant with his design; though he might have do it with great
safety, for the halberdier be himself a man of honour, and have kill
his man. he would therefore have faithfully keep this secret, or
indeed any other which no reward be publish for discover. but as
Jones know not those virtue in so short an acquaintance, his caution
be perhaps prudent and commendable enough.
he begin therefore by acquaint the serjeant, that as he be now
enter into the army, he be ashamed of be without what be
perhaps the most necessary implement of a soldier; namely, a sword;
add, that he should be infinitely oblige to he, if he could
procure one. "for which," say he, "I will give you any reasonable
price; nor do I insist upon its be silver-hilte; only a good
blade, and such as may become a soldier's thigh."
the serjeant, who well know what have happen, and have hear that
Jones be in a very dangerous condition, immediately conclude, from
such a message, at such a time of night, and from a man in such a
situation, that he be light-headed. now as he have his wit (to use
that word in its common signification) always ready, he bethink
himself of make his advantage of this humour in the sick man. "Sir,"
say he, "I believe I can fit you. I have a most excellent piece of
stuff by I. it be not indeed silver-hilte, which, as you say, doth
not become a soldier; but the handle be decent enough, and the blade
one of the good in Europe. it be a blade that--a blade that--in short,
I will fetch it you this instant, and you shall see it and handle it.
I be glad to see your honour so well with all my heart."
be instantly return with the sword, he deliver it to Jones, who
take it and draw it; and then tell the serjeant it would do very well,
and bid he name his price.
the serjeant now begin to harangue in praise of his good. he say
(nay he swear very heartily), "that the blade be take from a french
officer, of very high rank, at the battle of Dettingen. I take it
myself," say he, "from his side, after I have knock he o' the head.
the hilt be a golden one. that I sell to one of our fine gentleman;
for there be some of they, an't please your honour, who value the
hilt of a sword more than the blade."
here the other stop he, and beg he to name a price. the
serjeant, who think Jones absolutely out of his sens, and very
near his end, be afraid lest he should injure his family by ask
too little. however, after a moment's hesitation, he content himself
with name twenty guineas, and swear he would not sell it for less to
his own brother.
"twenty guineas!" say Jones, in the utmost surprize: "sure you think
I be mad, or that I never see a sword in my life. twenty guineas,
indeed! I do not imagine you would endeavour to impose upon I. here,
take the sword--no, now I think on't, I will keep it myself, and show
it your officer in the morning, acquaint he, at the same time,
what a price you ask I for it."
the serjeant, as we have say, have always his wit (_in sensu
praedicto_) about he, and now plainly see that Jones be not in the
condition he have apprehend he to be; he now, therefore,
counterfeit as great surprize as the other have show, and say, "I
be certain, sir, I have not ask you so much out of the way. besides,
you be to consider, it be the only sword I have, and I must run the
risque of my officer's displeasure, by go without one myself. and
truly, put all this together, I donot think twenty shilling be
so much out of the way."
"twenty shilling!" cry Jones; "why, you just now ask I twenty
guineas."--"How!" cry the serjeant, "sure your honour must have
mistake I: or else I mistake myself--and indeed I be but half awake.
twenty guineas, indeed! no wonder your honour fly into such a
passion. I say twenty guineas too. no, no, I mean twenty shilling, I
assure you. and when your honour come to consider everything, I hope
you will not think that so extravagant a price. it be indeed true, you
may buy a weapon which look as well for less money. but----"
here Jones interrupt he, say, "I will be so far from make any
word with you, that I will give you a shilling more than your
demand." he then give he a guinea, bid he return to his bed, and
wish he a good march; add, he hop to overtake they before the
division reach Worcester.
the serjeant very civilly take his leave, fully satisfied with his
merchandize, and not a little pleased with his dexterous recovery from
that false step into which his opinion of the sick man's
light-headedness have betray he.
as soon as the serjeant be depart, Jones rise from his bed, and
dress himself entirely, put on even his coat, which, as its
colour be white, show very visibly the stream of blood which have
flow down it; and now, have grasp his new-purchase sword in his
hand, he be go to issue forth, when the thought of what he be
about to undertake lay suddenly hold of he, and he begin to reflect
that in a few minute he might possibly deprive a human being of life,
or might lose his own. "very well," say he, "and in what cause do I
venture my life? why, in that of my honour. and who be this human
be? a rascal who hath injure and insult I without provocation.
but be not revenge forbid by Heaven? yes, but it be enjoin by the
world. well, but shall I obey the world in opposition to the express
command of Heaven? shall I incur the divine displeasure rather than
be call--ha--coward--scoundrel?--i'll think no more; I be resolve,
and must fight he."
the clock have now strike twelve, and every one in the house be in
their bed, except the centinel who stand to guard Northerton, when
Jones softly open his door, issue forth in pursuit of his enemy,
of whose place of confinement he have receive a perfect description
from the drawer. it be not easy to conceive a much more tremendous
figure than he now exhibit. he have on, as we have say, a
light-colour coat, cover with stream of blood. his face, which
miss that very blood, as well as twenty ounce more draw from he
by the surgeon, be pallid. round his head be a quantity of bandage,
not unlike a turban. in the right hand he carry a sword, and in the
leave a candle. so that the bloody Banquo be not worthy to be compare
to he. in fact, I believe a more dreadful apparition be never raise
in a church-yard, nor in the imagination of any good people meet in a
winter evening over a Christmas fire in Somersetshire.
when the centinel first see our heroe approach, his hair begin gently
to lift up his grenadi cap; and in the same instant his knee fall
to blow with each other. presently his whole body be seize with
bad than an ague fit. he then fire his piece, and fall flat on his
face.
whether fear or courage be the occasion of his firing, or whether he
take aim at the object of his terror, I cannot say. if he do,
however, he have the good fortune to miss his man.
Jones see the fellow fall, guess the cause of his fright, at
which he could not forbear smile, not in the least reflect on the
danger from which he have just escape. he then pass by the fellow,
who still continue in the posture in which he fall, and enter the
room where Northerton, as he have hear, be confine. here, in a
solitary situation, he find--an empty quart pot stand on the
table, on which some beer be spill, it look as if the room have
lately be inhabit; but at present it be entirely vacant.
Jones then apprehend it might lead to some other apartment; but upon
search all round it, he could perceive no other door than that at
which he enter, and where the centinel have be post. he then
proceed to call Northerton several time by his name; but no one
answer; nor do this serve to any other purpose than to confirm the
centinel in his terror, who be now convince that the volunteer be
dead of his wound, and that his ghost be come in search of the
murderer: he now lie in all the agony of horror; and I wish, with
all my heart, some of those actor who be hereafter to represent a
man fright out of his wit have see he, that they might be teach
to copy nature, instead of perform several antic trick and
gesture, for the entertainment and applause of the gallery.
perceive the bird be fly, at least despair to find he, and
rightly apprehend that the report of the firelock would alarm the
whole house, our heroe now blow out his candle, and gently steal back
again to his chamber, and to his bed; whither he would not have be
able to have get undiscovered, have any other person be on the
same staircase, save only one gentleman who be confine to his bed by
the gout; for before he could reach the door to his chamber, the hall
where the centinel have be post be half full of people, some in
their shirt, and other not half drest, all very earnestly enquiring
of each other what be the matter.
the soldier be now find lie in the same place and posture in which
we just now leave he. several immediately apply themselves to raise
he, and some conclude he dead; but they presently see their
mistake, for he not only struggle with those who lay their hand on
he, but fall a roaring like a bull. in reality, he imagine so many
spirit or devil be handle he; for his imagination be
possess with the horror of an apparition, convert every object he
see or feel into nothing but ghost and spectre.
at length he be overpower by number, and get upon his leg; when
candle be bring, and see two or three of his comrade
present, he come a little to himself; but when they ask he what be
the matter? he answer, "I be a dead man, thatbe all, I be a dead
man, I cannot recover it, I have see he." "what hast thou see,
Jack?" say one of the soldier. "why, I have see the young volunteer
that be kill yesterday." he then imprecate the most heavy curse
on himself, if he have not see the volunteer, all over blood, vomit
fire out of his mouth and nostril, pass by he into the chamber where
Ensign Northerton be, and then seize the ensign by the throat, fly
away with he in a clap of thunder.
this relation meet with a gracious reception from the audience. all the
woman present believe it firmly, and pray Heaven to defend they
from murder. amongst the man too, many have faith in the story; but
other turn it into derision and ridicule; and a serjeant who be
present answer very coolly, "young man, you will hear more of this,
for go to sleep and dream on your post."
the soldier reply, "you may punish I if you please; but I be as
broad awake as I be now; and the devil carry I away, as he hath the
ensign, if I do not see the dead man, as I tell you, with eye as big
and as fiery as two large flambeaux."
the commander of the force, and the commander of the house, be now
both arrive; for the former be awake at the time, and hear the
centinel fire his piece, think it his duty to rise immediately,
though he have no great apprehension of any mischief; whereas the
apprehension of the latter be much great, lest her spoon and
tankard should be upon the march, without have receive any such
order from she.
our poor centinel, to whom the sight of this officer be not much more
welcome than the apparition, as he think it, which he have see
before, again relate the dreadful story, and with many addition of
blood and fire; but he have the misfortune to gain no credit with
either of the last-mention person: for the officer, though a very
religious man, be free from all terror of this kind; besides, have
so lately leave Jones in the condition we have see, he have no
suspicion of his be dead. as for the landlady, though not over
religious, she have no kind of aversion to the doctrine of spirit; but
there be a circumstance in the tale which she well know to be false,
as we shall inform the reader presently.
but whether Northerton be carry away in thunder or fire, or in
whatever other manner he be go, it be now certain that his body
be no long in custody. upon this occasion the lieutenant form a
conclusion not very different from what the serjeant be just mention
to have make before, and immediately order the centinel to be take
prisoner. so that, by a strange reverse of fortune (though not very
uncommon in a military life), the guard become the guard.
Chapter xv.
the conclusion of the foregoing adventure.
besides the suspicion of sleep, the lieutenant harbour another and
bad doubt against the poor centinel, and this be, that of
treachery; for as he believe not one syllable of the apparition, so
he imagine the whole to be an invention form only to impose upon
he, and that the fellow have in reality be bribe by Northerton to
let he escape. and this he imagine the rather, as the fright
appear to he the more unnatural in one who have the character of as
brave and bold a man as any in the regiment, have be in several
action, have receive several wound, and, in a word, have
behave himself always like a good and valiant soldier.
that the reader, therefore, may not conceive the least ill opinion of
such a person, we shall not delay a moment in rescue his character
from the imputation of this guilt.
Mr Northerton then, as we have before observe, be fully satisfied
with the glory which he have obtain from this action. he have perhaps
see, or hear, or guess, that envy be apt to attend fame. not that
I would here insinuate that he be heathenishly inclined to believe in
or to worship the goddess Nemesis; for, in fact, I be convinced he
never hear of her name. he be, besides, of an active disposition,
and have a great antipathy to those close quarter in the castle of
Gloucester, for which a justice of peace might possibly give he a
billet. nor be he moreover free from some uneasy meditation on a
certain wooden edifice, which I forbear to name, in conformity to the
opinion of mankind, who, I think, rather ought to honour than to be
ashamed of this building, as it be, or at least might be make, of more
benefit to society than almost any other public erection. in a word,
to hint at no more reason for his conduct, Mr Northerton be desirous
of depart that evening, and nothing remain for he but to
contrive the quomodo, which appear to be a matter of some
difficulty.
now this young gentleman, though somewhat crooked in his moral, be
perfectly straight in his person, which be extremely strong and well
make. his face too be account handsome by the generality of woman,
for it be broad and ruddy, with tolerably good tooth. such charm do
not fail make an impression on my landlady, who have no little relish
for this kind of beauty. she have, indeed, a real compassion for the
young man; and hear from the surgeon that affair be like to go
ill with the volunteer, she suspect they might hereafter wear no
benign aspect with the ensign. have obtain, therefore, leave to
make he a visit, and find he in a very melancholy mood, which she
considerably heighten by tell he there be scarce any hope of
the volunteer's life, she proceed to throw forth some hint, which
the other readily and eagerly take up, they soon come to a right
understanding; and it be at length agree that the ensign should, at
a certain signal, ascend the chimney, which communicate very soon
with that of the kitchen, he might there again let himself down; for
which she would give he an opportunity by keep the coast clear.
but lest our reader, of a different complexion, should take this
occasion of too hastily condemn all compassion as a folly, and
pernicious to society, we think proper to mention another particular
which might possibly have some little share in this action. the ensign
happen to be at this time possess of the sum of fifty pound,
which do indeed belong to the whole company; for the captain have
quarrel with his lieutenant, have entrust the payment of his
company to the ensign. this money, however, he think proper to
deposit in my landlady's hand, possibly by way of bail or security
that he would hereafter appear and answer to the charge against he;
but whatever be the condition, certain it be, that she have the
money and the ensign his liberty.
the reader may perhaps expect, from the compassionate temper of this
good woman, that when she see the poor centinel take prisoner for a
fact of which she know he innocent, she should immediately have
interpose in his behalf; but whether it be that she have already
exhaust all her compassion in the above-mention instance, or that
the feature of this fellow, though not very different from those of
the ensign, could not raise it, I will not determine; but, far from
be an advocate for the present prisoner, she urge his guilt to his
officer, declare, with uplifted eye and hand, that she would not
have have any concern in the escape of a murderer for all the world.
everything be now once more quiet, and most of the company return
again to their bed; but the landlady, either from the natural
activity of her disposition, or from her fear for her plate, have no
propensity to sleep, prevail with the officer, as they be to
march within little more than an hour, to spend that time with she
over a bowl of punch.
Jones have lie awake all this while, and have hear great part of the
hurry and bustle that have pass, of which he have now some curiosity
to know the particular. he therefore apply to his bell, which he
ring at least twenty time without any effect: for my landlady be in
such high mirth with her company, that no clapper could be hear there
but her own; and the drawer and chambermaid, who be sit together
in the kitchen (for neither durst he sit up nor she lie in bed alone),
the more they hear the bell ring the more they be frightened, and
as it be nail down in their place.
at last, at a lucky interval of chat, the sound reach the ear of
our good landlady, who presently send forth her summon, which both
her servant instantly obey. "Joe," say the mistress, "donot you
hear the gentleman's bell ring? why donot you go up?"--"It be not my
business," answer the drawer, "to wait upon the chamber--it be
Betty Chambermaid's."--"If you come to that," answer the maid, "it
be not my business to wait upon gentleman. I have do it indeed
sometimes; but the devil fetch I if ever I do again, since you make
your preamble about it." the bell still ring violently, their
mistress fall into a passion, and swore, if the drawer do not go up
immediately, she would turn he away that very morning. "if you do,
madam," say he, "I cannot help it. I willnot do another servant's
business." she then apply herself to the maid, and endeavour to
prevail by gentle mean; but all in vain: Betty be as inflexible as
Joe. both insist it be not their business, and they would not do
it.
the lieutenant then fall a laughing, and say, "come, I will put an
end to this contention;" and then turn to the servant, commend
they for their resolution in not give up the point; but add, he
be sure, if one would consent to go the other would. to which
proposal they both agree in an instant, and accordingly go up very
lovingly and close together. when they be go, the lieutenant
appease the wrath of the landlady, by satisfy she why they be
both so unwilling to go alone.
they return soon after, and acquaint their mistress, that the sick
gentleman be so far from be dead, that he speak as heartily as if
he be well; and that he give his service to the captain, and should
be very glad of the favour of see he before he march.
the good lieutenant immediately comply with his desire, and sit
down by his bed-side, acquaint he with the scene which have happen
below, conclude with his intention to make an example of the
centinel.
upon this Jones relate to he the whole truth, and earnestly beg
he not to punish the poor soldier, "who, I be confident," say he,
"be as innocent of the ensign's escape, as he be of forge any lie,
or of endeavour to impose on you."
the lieutenant hesitate a few moment, and then answer: "why, as
you have clear the fellow of one part of the charge, so it will be
impossible to prove the other, because he be not the only centinel.
but I have a good mind to punish the rascal for be a coward. yet
who know what effect the terror of such an apprehension may have?
and, to say the truth, he hath always behave well against an enemy.
come, it be a good thing to see any sign of religion in these fellow;
so I promise you he shall be set at liberty when we march. but hark,
the general beat. my dear boy, give I another buss. donot discompose
nor hurry yourself; but remember the christian doctrine of patience,
and I warrant you will soon be able to do yourself justice, and to
take an honourable revenge on the fellow who hath injure you." the
lieutenant then depart, and Jones endeavour to compose himself to
rest.
BOOK VIII.
contain about two day.
Chapter i.
a wonderful long chapter concern the marvellous; be much the
long of all our introductory chapter.
as we be now enter upon a book in which the course of our history
will oblige we to relate some matter of a more strange and surprize
kind than any which have hitherto occur, it may not be amiss, in
the prolegomenous or introductory chapter, to say something of that
specie of writing which be call the marvellous. to this we shall,
as well for the sake of ourselves as of other, endeavour to set some
certain bound, and indeed nothing can be more necessary, as
critic[*] of different complexion be here apt to run into very
different extreme; for while some be, with M. Dacier, ready to
allow, that the same thing which be impossible may be yet
probable,[**] other have so little historic or poetic faith, that they
believe nothing to be either possible or probable, the like to which
hath not occur to their own observation.
[*] by this word here, and in most other part of our work, we mean
every reader in the world.
[**] it be happy for M. Dacier that he be not an Irishman.
first, then, I think it may very reasonably be require of every
writer, that he keep within the bound of possibility; and still
remember that what it be not possible for man to perform, it be
scarce possible for man to believe he do perform. this conviction
perhaps give birth to many story of the antient heathen deity (for
most of they be of poetical original). the poet, be desirous to
indulge a wanton and extravagant imagination, take refuge in that
power, of the extent of which his reader be no judge, or rather
which they imagine to be infinite, and consequently they could not be
shock at any prodigy relate of it. this hath be strongly urge
in defence of Homer's miracle; and it be perhaps a defence; not, as
Mr Pope would have it, because Ulysses tell a set of foolish lie to
the Phaeacians, who be a very dull nation; but because the poet
himself write to heathens, to whom poetical fable be article of
faith. for my own part, I must confess, so compassionate be my temper,
I wish Polypheme have confine himself to his milk diet, and preserve
his eye; nor could Ulysses be much more concerned than myself, when
his companion be turn into swine by Circe, who show, I think,
afterwards, too much regard for man's flesh to be suppose capable of
convert it into bacon. I wish, likewise, with all my heart, that
Homer could have know the rule prescribe by Horace, to introduce
supernatural agent as seldom as possible. we should not then have
see his god come on trivial errand, and often behave themselves
so as not only to forfeit all title to respect, but to become the
object of scorn and derision. a conduct which must have shock the
credulity of a pious and sagacious heathen; and which could never have
be defend, unless by agree with a supposition to which I have
be sometimes almost inclined, that this most glorious poet, as he
certainly be, have an intent to burlesque the superstitious faith of
his own age and country.
but I have rest too long on a doctrine which can be of no use to a
christian writer; for as he cannot introduce into his work any of
that heavenly host which make a part of his creed, so it be horrid
puerility to search the heathen theology for any of those deity who
have be long since dethrone from their immortality. Lord
Shaftesbury observe, that nothing be more cold than the invocation of
a muse by a modern; he might have add, that nothing can be more
absurd. a modern may with much more elegance invoke a ballad, as some
have think Homer do, or a mug of ale, with the author of Hudibras;
which latter may perhaps have inspire much more poetry, as well as
prose, than all the liquor of Hippocrene or Helicon.
the only supernatural agent which can in any manner be allow to we
modern, be ghost; but of these I would advise an author to be
extremely sparing. these be indeed, like arsenic, and other dangerous
drug in physic, to be use with the utmost caution; nor would I
advise the introduction of they at all in those work, or by those
author, to which, or to whom, a horse-laugh in the reader would be
any great prejudice or mortification.
as for elf and fairy, and other such mummery, I purposely omit the
mention of they, as I should be very unwilling to confine within any
bound those surprizing imagination, for whose vast capacity the
limit of human nature be too narrow; whose work be to be
consider as a new creation; and who have consequently just right to
do what they will with their own.
Man therefore be the high subject (unless on very extraordinary
occasion indeed) which present itself to the pen of our historian,
or of our poet; and, in relate his action, great care be to be
take that we do not exceed the capacity of the agent we describe.
nor be possibility alone sufficient to justify we; we must keep
likewise within the rule of probability. it be, I think, the opinion
of Aristotle; or if not, it be the opinion of some wise man, whose
authority will be as weighty when it be as old, "that it be no excuse
for a poet who relate what be incredible, that the thing relate be
really matter of fact." this may perhaps be allow true with regard
to poetry, but it may be think impracticable to extend it to the
historian; for he be oblige to record matter as he find they,
though they may be of so extraordinary a nature as will require no
small degree of historical faith to swallow they. such be the
successless armament of Xerxes describe by Herodotus, or the
successful expedition of Alexander relate by Arrian. such of later
year be the victory of Agincourt obtain by Harry the Fifth, or
that of Narva win by Charles the Twelfth of Sweden. all which
instance, the more we reflect on they, appear still the more
astonishing.
such fact, however, as they occur in the thread of the story, nay,
indeed, as they constitute the essential part of it, the historian be
not only justifiable in recording as they really happen, but indeed
would be unpardonable should he omit or alter they. but there be
other fact not of such consequence nor so necessary, which, though
ever so well attest, may nevertheless be sacrifice to oblivion in
complacence to the scepticism of a reader. such be that memorable
story of the ghost of George Villiers, which might with more propriety
have be make a present of to Dr Drelincourt, to have keep the ghost
of Mrs Veale company, at the head of his Discourse upon death, than
have be introduce into so solemn a work as the history of the
Rebellion.
to say the truth, if the historian will confine himself to what really
happen, and utterly reject any circumstance, which, though never so
well attest, he must be well assured be false, he will sometimes
fall into the marvellous, but never into the incredible. he will often
raise the wonder and surprize of his reader, but never that
incredulous hatred mention by Horace. it be by fall into fiction,
therefore, that we generally offend against this rule, of deserting
probability, which the historian seldom, if ever, quit, till he
forsake his character and commence a writer of romance. in this,
however, those historian who relate public transaction, have the
advantage of we who confine ourselves to scene of private life. the
credit of the former be by common notoriety support for a long time;
and public record, with the concurrent testimony of many author,
bear evidence to their truth in future age. thus a Trajan and an
Antoninus, a Nero and a Caligula, have all meet with the belief of
posterity; and no one doubt but that man so very good, and so very
bad, be once the master of mankind.
but we who deal in private character, who search into the most retire
recess, and draw forth example of virtue and vice from hole and
corner of the world, be in a more dangerous situation. as we have no
public notoriety, no concurrent testimony, no record to support and
corroborate what we deliver, it become we to keep within the limit
not only of possibility, but of probability too; and this more
especially in paint what be greatly good and amiable. knavery and
folly, though never so exorbitant, will more easily meet with assent;
for ill-nature add great support and strength to faith.
thus we may, perhaps, with little danger, relate the history of
Fisher; who have long owe his bread to the generosity of Mr Derby,
and have one morning receive a considerable bounty from his hand,
yet, in order to possess himself of what remain in his friend's
scrutore, conceal himself in a public office of the Temple, through
which there be a passage into Mr Derby's chamber. here he overhear
Mr Derby for many hour solace himself at an entertainment which he
that evening give his friend, and to which Fisher have be invite.
during all this time, no tender, no grateful reflection arise to
restrain his purpose; but when the poor gentleman have let his company
out through the office, Fisher come suddenly from his lurking-place,
and walk softly behind his friend into his chamber, discharge a
pistol-ball into his head. this may be believe when the bone of
Fisher be as rotten as his heart. Nay, perhaps, it will be credit,
that the villain go two day afterwards with some young lady to
the play of Hamlet; and with an unaltered countenance hear one of the
lady, who little suspect how near she be to the person, cry out,
"Good God! if the man that murder Mr Derby be now present!"
manifest in this a more seared and callous conscience than even
Nero himself; of whom we be tell by Suetonius, "that the
consciousness of his guilt, after the death of his mother, become
immediately intolerable, and so continue; nor could all the
congratulation of the soldier, of the senate, and the people, allay
the horror of his conscience."
but now, on the other hand, should I tell my reader, that I have know
a man whose penetrate genius have enable he to raise a large
fortune in a way where no beginning be chaulke out to he; that he
have do this with the most perfect preservation of his integrity, and
not only without the least injustice or injury to any one individual
person, but with the high advantage to trade, and a vast increase
of the public revenue; that he have expend one part of the income of
this fortune in discover a taste superior to most, by work where
the high dignity be unite with the pure simplicity, and another
part in display a degree of goodness superior to all man, by act
of charity to object whose only recommendation be their merit, or
their want; that he be most industrious in search after merit in
distress, most eager to relieve it, and then as careful (perhaps too
careful) to conceal what he have do; that his house, his furniture,
his garden, his table, his private hospitality, and his public
beneficence, all denote the mind from which they flow, and be all
intrinsically rich and noble, without tinsel, or external ostentation;
that he fill every relation in life with the most adequate virtue;
that he be most piously religious to his creator, most zealously
loyal to his sovereign; a most tender husband to his wife, a kind
relation, a munificent patron, a warm and firm friend, a knowing and a
chearful companion, indulgent to his servant, hospitable to his
neighbour, charitable to the poor, and benevolent to all mankind.
should I add to these the epithet of wise, brave, elegant, and indeed
every other amiable epithet in our language, I might surely say,
_--Quis credet? nemo Hercule! nemo;
Vel duo, vel nemo;_
and yet I know a man who be all I have here describe. but a single
instance (and I really know not such another) be not sufficient to
justify we, while we be write to thousand who never hear of the
person, nor of anything like he. such _rarae ave_ should be remit
to the epitaph writer, or to some poet who may condescend to hitch he
in a distich, or to slide he into a rhime with an air of carelessness
and neglect, without give any offence to the reader.
in the last place, the action should be such as may not only be
within the compass of human agency, and which human agent may
probably be suppose to do; but they should be likely for the very
actor and character themselves to have perform; for what may be
only wonderful and surprize in one man, may become improbable, or
indeed impossible, when relate of another.
this last requisite be what the dramatic critic call conversation of
character; and it require a very extraordinary degree of judgment,
and a most exact knowledge of human nature.
it be admirably remark by a most excellent writer, that zeal can no
more hurry a man to act in direct opposition to itself, than a rapid
stream can carry a boat against its own current. I will venture to
say, that for a man to act in direct contradiction to the dictate of
his nature, be, if not impossible, as improbable and as miraculous as
anything which can well be conceive. should the good part of the
story of M. Antoninus be ascribe to Nero, or should the bad
incident of Nero's life be impute to Antoninus, what would be more
shocking to belief than either instance? whereas both these be
relate of their proper agent, constitute the truly marvellous.
our modern author of comedy have fall almost universally into the
error here hint at; their hero generally be notorious rogue, and
their heroine abandon jade, during the first four act; but in the
fifth, the former become very worthy gentleman, and the latter woman
of virtue and discretion: nor be the writer often so kind as to give
himself the least trouble to reconcile or account for this monstrous
change and incongruity. there be, indeed, no other reason to be
assign for it, than because the play be draw to a conclusion; as
if it be no less natural in a rogue to repent in the last act of a
play, than in the last of his life; which we perceive to be generally
the case at Tyburn, a place which might indeed close the scene of some
comedy with much propriety, as the hero in these be most commonly
eminent for those very talent which not only bring man to the
gallow, but enable they to make an heroic figure when they be there.
within these few restriction, I think, every writer may be permit
to deal as much in the wonderful as he please; nay, if he thus keep
within the rule of credibility, the more he can surprize the reader
the more he will engage his attention, and the more he will charm he.
as a genius of the high rank observe in his fifth chapter of the
Bathos, "the great art of all poetry be to mix truth with fiction, in
order to join the credible with the surprizing."
for though every good author will confine himself within the bound of
probability, it be by no mean necessary that his character, or his
incident, should be trite, common, or vulgar; such as happen in every
street, or in every house, or which may be meet with in the home
article of a newspaper. nor must he be inhibit from show many
person and thing, which may possibly have never fall within the
knowledge of great part of his reader. if the writer strictly
observe the rule above-mention, he hath discharge his part; and
be then intitle to some faith from his reader, who be indeed guilty
of critical infidelity if he disbelieve he.
for want of a portion of such faith, I remember the character of a
young lady of quality, which be condemn on the stage for be
unnatural, by the unanimous voice of a very large assembly of clerk
and apprentice; though it have the previous suffrage of many lady
of the first rank; one of whom, very eminent for her understanding,
declare it be the picture of half the young people of her
acquaintance.
Chapter ii.
in which the landlady pay a visit to Mr Jones.
when Jones have take leave of his friend the lieutenant, he
endeavour to close his eye, but all in vain; his spirit be too
lively and wakeful to be lull to sleep. so have amuse, or rather
torment, himself with the thought of his Sophia till it be open
daylight, he call for some tea; upon which occasion my landlady
herself vouchsafe to pay he a visit.
this be indeed the first time she have see he, or at least have take
any notice of he; but as the lieutenant have assure she that he be
certainly some young gentleman of fashion, she now determine to show
he all the respect in her power; for, to speak truly, this be one of
those house where gentleman, to use the language of advertisement,
meet with civil treatment for their money.
she have no soon begin to make his tea, than she likewise begin to
discourse:--"La! sir," say she, "I think it be great pity that such a
pretty young gentleman should under-value himself so, as to go about
with these soldier fellow. they call themselves gentleman, I warrant
you; but, as my first husband use to say, they should remember it be
we that pay they. and to be sure it be very hard upon we to be oblige
to pay they, and to keep 'um too, as we publican be. I have twenty of
'um last night, besides officer: nay, for matter o' that, I have
rather have the soldier than officer: for nothing be ever good
enough for those spark; and I be sure, if you be to see the bill;
la! sir, it be nothing. I have have less trouble, I warrant you, with a
good squire's family, where we take forty or fifty shilling of a
night, besides horse. and yet I warrant I, there be narrow a one of
those officer fellow but look upon himself to be as good as arrow a
squire of £500 a year. to be sure it doth I good to hear their man
run about after 'um, cry your honour, and your honour. Marry come
up with such honour, and an ordinary at a shill a head. then
therebe such swearing among 'um, to be sure it frighten I out o' my
wit: I think nothing can ever prosper with such wicked people. and
here one of 'um have use you in so barbarous a manner. I think
indeed how well the rest would secure he; they all hang together; for
if you have be in danger of death, which I be glad to see you be
not, it would have be all as one to such wicked people. they would
have let the murderer go. laud have mercy upon 'um; I would not have
such a sin to answer for, for the whole world. but though you be
likely, with the blessing, to recover, there be laa for he yet; and
if you will employ lawyer Small, I darest be swear hewill make the
fellow fly the country for he; though perhaps hewill have flee the
country before; for it be here to-day and go to-morrow with such
chap. I hope, however, you will learn more wit for the future, and
return back to your friend; I warrant they be all miserable for your
loss; and if they be but to know what have happen--La, my seeming! I
would not for the world they should. come, come, we know very well
what all the matter be; but if one willnot, another will; so pretty a
gentleman need never want a lady. I be sure, if I be you, I would see
the fine she that ever wear a head hang, before I would go for a
soldier for her.--Nay, donot blush so" (for indeed he do to a violent
degree). "why, you think, sir, I know nothing of the matter, I
warrant you, about Madam Sophia."--"how," say Jones, start up, "do
you know my Sophia?"--"Do I! ay marry," cry the landlady; "manybe
the time hath she lain in this house."--"With her aunt, I suppose,"
say Jones. "why, there it be now," cry the landlady. "ay, ay, ay, I
know the old lady very well. and a sweet young creature be Madam
Sophia, thatbe the truth on't."--"a sweet creature," cry Jones; "O
heaven!"
Angels be paint fair to look like she.
therebe in she all that we believe of heav'n,
amazing brightness, purity, and truth,
eternal joy and everlaste love.
"and could I ever have imagine that you have know my sophia!"--"i
wish," say the landlady, "you know half so much of she. what would
you have give to have sit by her bed-side? what a delicious neck she
hath! her lovely limb have stretch themselves in that very bed you
now lie in."--"here!" cry Jones: "hath Sophia ever lay here?"--"Ay,
ay, here; there, in that very bed," say the landlady; "where I wish
you have she this moment; and she may wish so too for anything I know
to the contrary, for she hath mention your name to I."--"ha!" cry
he; "do she ever mention her poor Jones? you flatter I now: I can
never believe so much."--"why, then," answer she, "as I hope to be
save, and may the devil fetch I if I speak a syllable more than the
truth, I have hear she mention Mr Jones; but in a civil and modest
way, I confess; yet I could perceive she think a great deal more
than she say."--"O my dear woman!" cry Jones, "her thought of I I
shall never be worthy of. oh, she be all gentleness, kindness,
goodness! why be such a rascal as I bear, ever to give her soft bosom
a moment's uneasiness? why be I curse? I, who would undergo all the
plague and misery which any daemon ever invent for mankind, to
procure she any good; nay, torture itself could not be misery to I,
do I but know that she be happy."--"why, look you there now," say
the landlady; "I tell she you be a constant lovier."--"But pray,
madam, tell I when or where you know anything of I; for I never be
here before, nor do I remember ever to have see you."--"Nor be it
possible you should," answer she; "for you be a little thing when I
have you in my lap at the squire's."--"How, the squire's?" say Jones:
"what, do you know that great and good Mr Allworthy then?"--"Yes,
marry, do I," say she: "who in the country doth not?"--"the fame of
his goodness indeed," answer Jones, "must have extend far than
this; but heaven only can know he--can know that benevolence which it
copy from itself, and send upon earth as its own pattern. mankind
be as ignorant of such divine goodness, as they be unworthy of it;
but none so unworthy of it as myself. I, who be raise by he to such
a height; take in, as you must well know, a poor base-bear child,
adopt by he, and treat as his own son, to dare by my folly to
disoblige he, to draw his vengeance upon I. yes, I deserve it all;
for I will never be so ungrateful as ever to think he hath do an act
of injustice by I. no, I deserve to be turn out of door, as I be.
and now, madam," say he, "I believe you will not blame I for turn
soldier, especially with such a fortune as this in my pocket." at
which word he shake a purse, which have but very little in it, and
which still appear to the landlady to have less.
my good landlady be (accord to vulgar phrase) strike all of a heap
by this relation. she answer coldly, "that to be sure people be
the good judge what be most proper for their circumstance. but
hark," say she, "I think I hear somebody call. come! come! the
devil's in all our volk; nobody hath any ear. I must go down-stair;
if you want any more breakfast the maid will come up. come!" at
which word, without take any leave, she fling out of the room; for
the low sort of people be very tenacious of respect; and though
they be content to give this gratis to person of quality, yet they
never confer it on those of their own order without take care to be
well pay for their pain.
Chapter iii.
in which the surgeon make his second appearance.
before we proceed any far, that the reader may not be mistake in
imagine the landlady know more than she do, nor surprize that she
know so much, it may be necessary to inform he that the lieutenant
have acquaint she that the name of Sophia have be the occasion of
the quarrel; and as for the rest of her knowledge, the sagacious
reader will observe how she come by it in the precede scene. great
curiosity be indeed mix with her virtue; and she never willingly
suffer any one to depart from her house, without enquire as much
as possible into their name, family, and fortune.
she be no soon go than Jones, instead of animadvert on her
behaviour, reflect that he be in the same bed which he be inform
have hold his dear Sophia. this occasion a thousand fond and tender
thought, which we would dwell long upon, do we not consider that
such kind of lover will make a very inconsiderable part of our
reader. in this situation the surgeon find he, when he come to
dress his wound. the doctor perceive, upon examination, that his
pulse be disorder, and hear that he have not sleep, declare that
he be in great danger; for he apprehend a fever be come on,
which he would have prevent by bleed, but Jones would not submit,
declare he would lose no more blood; "and, doctor," say he, "if you
will be so kind only to dress my head, I have no doubt of be well
in a day or two."
"I wish," answer the surgeon, "I could assure your being well in a
month or two. well, indeed! no, no, people be not so soon well of
such contusion; but, sir, I be not at this time of day to be
instruct in my operation by a patient, and I insist on make a
revulsion before I dress you."
Jones persist obstinately in his refusal, and the doctor at last
yield; tell he at the same time that he would not be answerable
for the ill consequence, and hop he would do he the justice to
acknowledge that he have give he a contrary advice; which the patient
promise he would.
the doctor retire into the kitchen, where, address himself to the
landlady, he complain bitterly of the undutiful behaviour of his
patient, who would not be blood, though he be in a fever.
"it be an eat fever then," say the landlady; "for he hath devour
two swing butter toast this morning for breakfast."
"very likely," say the doctor: "I have know people eat in a fever;
and it be very easily account for; because the acidity occasion by
the febrile matter may stimulate the nerve of the diaphragm, and
thereby occasion a craving which will not be easily distinguishable
from a natural appetite; but the aliment will not be concrete, nor
assimilate into chyle, and so will corrode the vascular orifice, and
thus will aggravate the febrific symptom. indeed, I think the
gentleman in a very dangerous way, and, if he be not blood, I be
afraid will die."
"every man must die some time or other," answer the good woman; "it
be no business of mine. I hope, doctor, you would not have I hold he
while you bleed he. but, hark'ee, a word in your ear; I would advise
you, before you proceed too far, to take care who be to be your
paymaster."
"Paymaster!" say the doctor, star; "why, Ihave a gentleman under my
hand, have I not?"
"I imagine so as well as you," say the landlady; "but, as my first
husband use to say, everything be not what it look to be. he be an
arrant scrub, I assure you. however, take no notice that I mention
anything to you of the matter; but I think people in business oft
always to let one another know such thing."
"and have I suffer such a fellow as this," cry the doctor, in a
passion, "to instruct I? shall I hear my practice insult by one who
will not pay I? I be glad I have make this discovery in time. I will
see now whether he will be blood or no." he then immediately go
upstairs, and fling open the door of the chamber with much
violence, awake poor Jones from a very sound nap, into which he be
fall, and, what be still bad, from a delicious dream concern
Sophia.
"will you be blood or no?" cry the doctor, in a rage. "I have tell
you my resolution already," answer Jones, "and I wish with all my
heart you have take my answer; for you have awake I out of the
sweetest sleep which I ever have in my life."
"ay, ay," cry the doctor; "many a man hath doze away his life.
Sleep be not always good, no more than food; but remember, I demand of
you for the last time, will you be blooded?"--"i answer you for the
last time," say Jones, "I will not."--"Then I wash my hand of you,"
cry the doctor; "and I desire you to pay I for the trouble I have
have already. two journey at 5s. each, two dressing at 5s. more, and
half a crown for phlebotomy."--"I hope," say Jones, "you donot intend
to leave I in this condition."--"Indeed but I shall," say the other.
"then," say Jones, "you have use I rascally, and I will not pay you
a farthing."--"very well," cry the doctor; "the first loss be the
good. what a pox do my landlady mean by send for I to such
vagabond!" at which word he fling out of the room, and his patient
turn himself about soon recover his sleep; but his dream be
unfortunately go.
chapter iv.
in which be introduce one of the pleasant barber that be ever
record in history, the barber of Bagdad, or he in Don Quixote, not
excepted.
the clock have now strike five when Jones awake from a nap of seven
hour, so much refresh, and in such perfect health and spirit, that
he resolve to get up and dress himself; for which purpose he unlock
his portmanteau, and take out clean linen, and a suit of cloath; but
first he slipt on a frock, and go down into the kitchen to bespeak
something that might pacify certain tumult he find rise within his
stomach.
meet the landlady, he accost she with great civility, and ask,
"what he could have for dinner?"--"For dinner!" say she; "it be an
odd time a day to think about dinner. there be nothing drest in the
house, and the fire be almost out."--"Well, but," say he, "I must
have something to eat, and it be almost indifferent to I what; for,
to tell you the truth, I be never more hungry in my life."--"then,"
say she, "I believe there be a piece of cold buttock and carrot,
which will fit you."--"nothe well," answer Jones; "but I should
be oblige to you, if you would let it be fry." to which the
landlady consent, and say, smile, "she be glad to see he so
well recover;" for the sweetness of our heroe's temper be almost
irresistible; besides, she be really no ill-humour woman at the
bottom; but she love money so much, that she hat everything which
have the semblance of poverty.
Jones now return in order to dress himself, while his dinner be
prepare, and be, accord to his order, attend by the barber.
this barber, who go by the name of Little Benjamin, be a fellow of
great oddity and humour, which have frequently let he into small
inconveniencie, such as slap in the face, kick in the breech,
broken bone, &c. for every one doth not understand a jest; and those
who do be often displeased with be themselves the subject of it.
this vice be, however, incurable in he; and though he have often
smart for it, yet if ever he conceive a joke, he be certain to be
deliver of it, without the least respect of person, time, or place.
he have a great many other particularity in his character, which I
shall not mention, as the reader will himself very easily perceive
they, on his farth acquaintance with this extraordinary person.
Jones be impatient to be drest, for a reason which may be easily
imagine, think the shaver be very tedious in prepare his sud,
and beg he to make haste; to which the other answer with much
gravity, for he never discompose his muscle on any account,
"_Festina lente_, be a proverb which I learn long before I ever
touch a razor."--"I find, friend, you be a scholar," reply Jones.
"a poor one," say the barber, "_non omnia possumus omnes._"--"Again!"
say Jones; "I fancy you be good at cap verse."--"excuse I,
sir," say the barber, "_non tanto I dignor honore_." and then
proceed to his operation, "Sir," say he, "since I have deal in
sud, I could never discover more than two reason for shaving; the
one be to get a beard, and the other to get rid of one. I conjecture,
sir, it may not be long since you shave from the former of these
motif. upon my word, you have have good success; for one may say of
your beard, that it be _tondenti gravior_."--"i conjecture," say
Jones, "that thou art a very comical fellow."--"you mistake I widely,
sir," say the barber: "I be too much addicted to the study of
philosophy; _hinc illae lacrymae_, sir; thatbe my misfortune. too much
learning hath be my ruin."--"Indeed," say Jones, "I confess,
friend, you have more learning than generally belong to your trade;
but I cannot see how it can have injure you."--"Alas! sir," answer
the shaver, "my father disinherit I for it. he be a
dancing-master; and because I could read before I could dance, he take
an aversion to I, and leave every farthing among his other
children.--will you please to have your temple--o la! I ask your
pardon, I fancy there be _hiatus in manuscriptis_. I hear you be
go to the war; but I find it be a mistake."--"why do you conclude
so?" say Jones. "sure, sir," answer the barber, "you be too wise a
man to carry a broken head thither; for that would be carry coal
to Newcastle."
"upon my word," cry Jones, "thou art a very odd fellow, and I like
thy humour extremely; I shall be very glad if thou wilt come to I
after dinner, and drink a glass with I; I long to be well
acquaint with thee."
"o dear sir!" say the barber, "I can do you twenty time as great a
favour, if you will accept of it."--"what be that, my friend?" cry
Jones. "why, I will drink a bottle with you if you please; for I
dearly love good-nature; and as you have find I out to be a comical
fellow, so I have no skill in physiognomy, if you be not one of the
well-natured gentleman in the universe." Jones now walk downstairs
neatly dr, and perhaps the fair Adonis be not a lovelier figure;
and yet he have no charm for my landlady; for as that good woman do
not resemble Venus at all in her person, so neither do she in her
taste. happy have it be for Nanny the chambermaid, if she have see
with the eye of her mistress, for that poor girl fall so violently in
love with Jones in five minute, that her passion afterwards cost she
many a sigh. this nanny be extremely pretty, and altogether as coy;
for she have refuse a drawer, and one or two young farmer in the
neighbourhood, but the bright eye of our heroe thaw all her ice in
a moment.
when Jones return to the kitchen, his cloth be not yet lay; nor
indeed be there any occasion it should, his dinner remain _in
statu quo_, as do the fire which be to dress it. this disappointment
might have put many a philosophical temper into a passion; but it have
no such effect on Jones. he only give the landlady a gentle rebuke,
say, "since it be so difficult to get it heated he would eat the
beef cold." but now the good woman, whether move by compassion, or by
shame, or by whatever other motive, I cannot tell, first give she
servant a round scold for disobey the order which she have never
give, and then bid the drawer lie a napkin in the Sun, she set
about the matter in good earnest, and soon accomplish it.
this Sun, into which Jones be now conduct, be truly name, as
_lucus a non lucendo_; for it be an apartment into which the sun have
scarce ever look. it be indeed the bad room in the house; and
happy be it for Jones that it be so. however, he be now too hungry
to find any fault; but have once satisfy his appetite, he order
the drawer to carry a bottle of wine into a well room, and express
some resentment at have be show into a dungeon.
the drawer have obey his command, he be, after some time,
attend by the barber, who would not indeed have suffer he to wait
so long for his company have he not be listen in the kitchen to
the landlady, who be entertain a circle that she have gather
round she with the history of poor Jones, part of which she have
extract from his own lip, and the other part be her own ingenious
composition; for she say "he be a poor parish boy, take into the
house of Squire Allworthy, where he be breed up as an apprentice, and
now turn out of door for his misdeed, particularly for make love
to his young mistress, and probably for rob the house; for how
else should he come by the little money he hath; and this," say she,
"be your gentleman, forsooth!"--"a servant of Squire Allworthy!" say
the barber; "whatbe his name?"--"why he tell I his name be Jones,"
say she: "perhaps he go by a wrong name. Nay, and he tell I, too,
that the squire have maintain he as his own son, thof he have
quarrel with he now."--"and if his name be Jones, he tell you the
truth," say the barber; "for I have relation who live in that
country; nay, and some people say he be his son."--"Why doth he not go
by the name of his father?"--"i cannot tell that," say the barber;
"many people's son donot go by the name of their father."--"Nay,"
say the landlady, "if I think he be a gentleman's son, thof he be
a bye-blow, I should behave to he in another guess manner; for many
of these bye-blow come to be great man, and, as my poor first husband
use to say, never affront any customer thatbe a gentleman."
Chapter v.
a dialogue between Mr Jones and the barber.
this conversation pass partly while Jones be at dinner in his
dungeon, and partly while he be expect the barber in the parlour.
and, as soon as it be end, Mr Benjamin, as we have say, attend
he, and be very kindly desire to sit down. Jones then fill out a
glass of wine, drink his health by the appellation of _doctissime
tonsorum_. "_ago tibi gratia, domine_" say the barber; and then
look very steadfastly at Jones, he say, with great gravity, and
with a seem surprize, as if he have recollect a face he have see
before, "Sir, may I crave the favour to know if your name be not
Jones?" to which the other answer, "that it be."--"_Proh deum atque
hominum fidem_!" say the barber; "how strangely thing come to pass!
Mr Jones, I be your most obedient servant. I find you do not know I,
which indeed be no wonder, since you never see I but once, and then
you be very young. pray, sir, how doth the good squire Allworthy? how
doth _ille optimus omnium patronus_?"--"I find," say Jones, "you do
indeed know I; but I have not the like happiness of recollect
you."--"i do not wonder at that," cry Benjamin; "but I be surprize
I do not know you soon, for you be not in the least alter. and
pray, sir, may I, without offence, enquire whither you be travel
this way?"--"fill the glass, Mr Barber," say Jones, "and ask no more
question."--"Nay, sir," answer Benjamin, "I would not be
troublesome; and I hope you donot think I a man of an impertinent
curiosity, for that be a vice which nobody can lay to my charge; but I
ask pardon; for when a gentleman of your figure travel without his
servant, we may suppose he to be, as we say, _in casu incognito_,
and perhaps I ought not to have mention your name."--"I own," say
Jones, "I do not expect to have be so well know in this country as
I find I be; yet, for particular reason, I shall be oblige to you if
you will not mention my name to any other person till I be go from
hence."--"_Pauca verba_," answer the barber;" and I wish no other
here know you but myself; for some people have tongue; but I promise
you I can keep a secret. my enemy will allow I that virtue."--"and
yet that be not the characteristic of your profession, Mr Barber,"
answer Jones. "alas! sir," reply Benjamin, "_non si male nunc et
olim sic erit_. I be not bear nor breed a barber, I assure you. I have
spend most of my time among gentleman, and though I say it, I
understand something of gentility. and if you have think I as worthy
of your confidence as you have some other people, I should have show
you I could have keep a secret well. I should not have degrade your
name in a public kitchen; for indeed, sir, some people have not use
you well; for besides make a public proclamation of what you tell
they of a quarrel between yourself and Squire Allworthy, they add
lie of their own, thing which I know to be lie."--"you surprize I
greatly," cry Jones. "upon my word, sir," answer Benjamin, "I tell
the truth, and I need not tell you my landlady be the person. I be
sure it move I to hear the story, and I hope it be all false; for I
have a great respect for you, I do assure you I have, and have have
ever since the good-nature you show to Black George, which be
talk of all over the country, and I receive more than one letter
about it. indeed, it make you belove by everybody. you will pardon
I, therefore; for it be real concern at what I hear make I ask
many question; for I have no impertinent curiosity about I: but I
love good-nature and thence become _amoris abundantia erga te_."
every profession of friendship easily gain credit with the miserable;
it be no wonder therefore, if Jones, who, besides his be miserable,
be extremely open-hearted, very readily believe all the profession
of Benjamin, and receive he into his bosom. the scrap of Latin,
some of which Benjamin apply properly enough, though it do not
savour of profound literature, seem yet to indicate something
superior to a common barber; and so indeed do his whole behaviour.
Jones therefore believe the truth of what he have say, as to his
original and education; and at length, after much entreaty, he say,
"since you have hear, my friend, so much of my affair, and seem so
desirous to know the truth, if you will have patience to hear it, I
will inform you of the whole."--"patience!" cry Benjamin, "that I
will, if the chapter be never so long; and I be very much oblige to
you for the honour you do I."
Jones now begin, and relate the whole history, forget only a
circumstance or two, namely, everything which pass on that day in
which he have fight with Thwackum; and end with his resolution to go
to sea, till the rebellion in the North have make he change his
purpose, and have bring he to the place where he then be.
Little Benjamin, who have be all attention, never once interrupt
the narrative; but when it be end he could not help observe, that
there must be surely something more invent by his enemy, and tell
Mr Allworthy against he, or so good a man would never have dismiss
one he have love so tenderly, in such a manner. to which Jones
answer, "he doubt not but such villanous art have be make use of
to destroy he."
and surely it be scarce possible for any one to have avoid make
the same remark with the barber, who have not indeed hear from Jones
one single circumstance upon which he be condemn; for his action
be not now place in those injurious light in which they have be
misrepresent to Allworthy; nor could he mention those many false
accusation which have be from time to time prefer against he to
Allworthy: for with none of these he be himself acquaint. he have
likewise, as we have observe, omit many material fact in his
present relation. upon the whole, indeed, everything now appear in
such favourable colour to Jones, that malice itself would have find
it no easy matter to fix any blame upon he.
not that Jones desire to conceal or to disguise the truth; nay, he
would have be more unwilling to have suffer any censure to fall on
Mr Allworthy for punish he, than on his own action for deserve
it; but, in reality, so it happen, and so it always will happen; for
let a man be never so honest, the account of his own conduct will, in
spite of himself, be so very favourable, that his vice will come
purify through his lip, and, like foul liquor well strained, will
leave all their foulness behind. for though the fact themselves may
appear, yet so different will be the motif, circumstance, and
consequence, when a man tell his own story, and when his enemy tell
it, that we scarce can recognise the fact to be one and the same.
though the barber have drink down this story with greedy ear, he be
not yet satisfied. there be a circumstance behind which his
curiosity, cold as it be, most eagerly long for. Jones have
mention the fact of his amour, and of his be the rival of Blifil,
but have cautiously conceal the name of the young lady. the barber,
therefore, after some hesitation, and many hum and hah, at last
begged leave to crave the name of the lady, who appear to be the
principal cause of all this mischief. Jones pause a moment, and then
say, "since I have trust you with so much, and since, I be afraid,
her name be become too publick already on this occasion, I will not
conceal it from you. her name be Sophia Western."
"_Proh deum atque hominum fidem_! squire Western hath a daughter grow
a woman!"--"ay, and such a woman," cry Jones, "that the world cannot
match. no eye ever see anything so beautiful; but that be her least
excellence. such sense! such goodness! oh, I could praise she for
ever, and yet should omit half her virtues!"--"mr Western a daughter
grow up!" cry the barber: "I remember the father a boy; well,
_Tempus edax rerum_."
the wine be now at an end, the barber press very eagerly to be
his bottle; but Jones absolutely refuse, say, "he have already
drank more than he ought: and that he now choose to retire to his room,
where he wish he could procure himself a book."--"a book!" cry
Benjamin; "what book would you have? latin or English? I have some
curious book in both language; such as _Erasmi Colloquia, Ovid de
Tristibus, Gradus ad Parnassum;_ and in English I have several of the
good book, though some of they be a little torn; but I have a great
part of Stowe's Chronicle; the sixth volume of Pope's Homer; the third
volume of the Spectator; the second volume of Echard's Roman history;
the Craftsman; Robinson Crusoe; Thomas a Kempis; and two volume of
Tom Brown's Works."
"those last," cry Jones, "be book I never see, so if you please
lend I one of those volume." the barber assure he he would be
highly entertain, for he look upon the author to have be one of
the great wit that ever the nation produce. he then step to
his house, which be hard by, and immediately return; after which,
the barber have receive very strict injunction of secrecy from
Jones, and have swear inviolably to maintain it, they separate; the
barber go home, and Jones retire to his chamber.
Chapter vi.
in which more of the talent of Mr Benjamin will appear, as well as
who this extraordinary person be.
in the morning Jones grow a little uneasy at the desertion of his
surgeon, as he apprehend some inconvenience, or even danger, might
attend the not dress his wound; he enquire of the drawer, what
other surgeon be to be meet with in that neighbourhood. the drawer
tell he, there be one not far off; but he have know he often refuse
to be concern after another have be send before he; "but, sir,"
say he, "if you will take my advice, there be not a man in the
kingdom can do your business well than the barber who be with you
last night. we look upon he to be one of the able man at a cut in
all this neighbourhood. for though he hath not be she above three
month, he hath do several great cure."
the drawer be presently dispatch for Little Benjamin, who be
acquaint in what capacity he be want, prepare himself
accordingly, and attend; but with so different an air and aspect
from that which he wear when his basin be under his arm, that he
could scarce be know to be the same person.
"so, tonsor," say Jones, "I find you have more trade than one; how
come you not to inform I of this last night?"--"a surgeon," answer
Benjamin, with great gravity, "be a profession, not a trade. the
reason why I do not acquaint you last night that I profess this
art, be, that I then conclude you be under the hand of another
gentleman, and I never love to interfere with my brother in their
business. _Ars omnibus communis_. but now, sir, if you please, I will
inspect your head, and when I see into your skull, I will give my
opinion of your case."
Jones have no great faith in this new professor; however, he suffer
he to open the bandage and to look at his wound; which as soon as he
have do, Benjamin begin to groan and shake his head violently. upon
which Jones, in a peevish manner, bid he not play the fool, but tell
he in what condition he find he. "shall I answer you as a surgeon,
or a friend?" say Benjamin. "as a friend, and seriously," say Jones.
"why then, upon my soul," cry Benjamin, "it would require a great
deal of art to keep you from be well after a very few dressing;
and if you will suffer I to apply some salve of mine, I will answer
for the success." Jones give his consent, and the plaister be apply
accordingly.
"there, sir," cry Benjamin: "now I will, if you please, resume my
former self; but a man be oblige to keep up some dignity in his
countenance whilst he be perform these operation, or the world
will not submit to be handle by he. you cannot imagine, sir, of how
much consequence a grave aspect be to a grave character. a barber may
make you laugh, but a surgeon ought rather to make you cry."
"Mr Barber, or Mr Surgeon, or Mr Barber-surgeon," say Jones. "o dear
sir!" answer Benjamin, interrupt he, "_Infandum, regina, jubes
renovare dolorem_. you recall to my mind that cruel separation of the
united fraternity, so much to the prejudice of both body, as all
separation must be, accord to the old adage, _vis unita fortior_;
which to be sure there be not want some of one or of the other
fraternity who be able to construe. what a blow be this to I, who
unite both in my own person!" "well, by whatever name you please to be
call," continue Jones, "you certainly be one of the oddest, most
comical fellow I ever meet with, and must have something very
surprize in your story, which you must confess I have a right to
hear."--"I do confess it," answer Benjamin, "and will very readily
acquaint you with it, when you have sufficient leisure, for I promise
you it will require a good deal of time." Jones tell he, he could
never be more at leisure than at present. "well, then," say Benjamin,
"I will obey you; but first I will fasten the door, that none may
interrupt we." he do so, and then advance with a solemn air to
Jones, say: "I must begin by tell you, sir, that you yourself have
be the great enemy I ever have." Jones be a little startled at
this sudden declaration. "I your enemy, sir!" say he, with much
amazement, and some sternness in his look. "Nay, be not angry," say
Benjamin, "for I promise you I be not. you be perfectly innocent of
have intend I any wrong; for you be then an infant: but I shall,
I believe, unriddle all this the moment I mention my name. do you
never hear, sir, of one Partridge, who have the honour of be repute
your father, and the misfortune of be ruin by that honour?" "I
have, indeed, hear of that Partridge," say Jones, "and have always
believe myself to be his son." "well, sir," answer Benjamin, "I be
that Partridge; but I here absolve you from all filial duty, for I do
assure you, you be no son of mine." "how!" reply Jones, "and be it
possible that a false suspicion should have draw all the ill
consequence upon you, with which I be too well acquaint?" "it be
possible," cry Benjamin, "for it be so: but though it be natural
enough for man to hate even the innocent cause of their suffering,
yet I be of a different temper. I have love you ever since I hear of
your behaviour to Black George, as I tell you; and I be convince,
from this extraordinary meeting, that you be bear to make I amend
for all I have suffer on that account. besides, I dream, the night
before I see you, that I stumble over a stool without hurt myself;
which plainly show I something good be towards I: and last night
I dream again, that I ride behind you on a milk-white mare, which be
a very excellent dream, and betoken much good fortune, which I be
resolve to pursue unless you have the cruelty to deny I."
"I should be very glad, Mr Partridge," answer Jones, "to have it in
my power to make you amend for your suffering on my account, though
at present I see no likelihood of it; however, I assure you I will
deny you nothing which be in my power to grant."
"it be in your power sure enough," reply Benjamin; "for I desire
nothing more than leave to attend you in this expedition. Nay, I have
so entirely set my heart upon it, that if you should refuse I, you
will kill both a barber and a surgeon in one breath."
Jones answer, smile, that he should be very sorry to be the
occasion of so much mischief to the public. he then advance many
prudential reason, in order to dissuade Benjamin (whom we shall
hereafter call Partridge) from his purpose; but all be in vain.
Partridge rely strongly on his dream of the milk-white mare.
"besides, sir," say he, "I promise you I have as good an inclination
to the cause as any man can possibly have; and go I will, whether you
admit I to go in your company or not."
Jones, who be as much pleased with Partridge as Partridge could be
with he, and who have not consult his own inclination but the good
of the other in desire he to stay behind, when he find his friend
so resolute, at last give his consent; but then recollect himself,
he say, "perhaps, Mr Partridge, you think I shall be able to support
you, but I really be not;" and then take out his purse, he tell out
nine guineas, which he declare be his whole fortune.
Partridge answer, "that his dependence be only on his future
favour; for he be thoroughly convinced he would shortly have enough
in his power. at present, sir," say he, "I believe I be rather the
rich man of the two; but all I have be at your service, and at your
disposal. I insist upon your take the whole, and I beg only to
attend you in the quality of your servant; _Nil desperandum est teucro
duce et auspice Teucro_": but to this generous proposal concern the
money, Jones would by no mean submit.
it be resolve to set out the next morning, when a difficulty arise
concern the baggage; for the portmanteau of Mr Jones be too large
to be carry without a horse.
"if I may presume to give my advice," say Partridge, "this
portmanteau, with everything in it, except a few shirt, should be
leave behind. those I shall be easily able to carry for you, and the
rest of your cloath will remain very safe lock up in my house."
this method be no soon propose than agree to; and then the barber
depart, in order to prepare everything for his intended expedition.
Chapter vii.
contain well reason than any which have yet appear for the
conduct of Partridge; an apology for the weakness of Jones; and some
further anecdote concern my landlady.
Though Partridge be one of the most superstitious of man, he would
hardly perhaps have desire to accompany Jones on his expedition
merely from the omen of the joint-stool and white mare, if his
prospect have be no well than to have share the plunder gain in
the field of battle. in fact, when Partridge come to ruminate on the
relation he have hear from Jones, he could not reconcile to himself
that Mr Allworthy should turn his son (for so he most firmly believe
he to be) out of door, for any reason which he have hear assign.
he conclude, therefore, that the whole be a fiction, and that Jones,
of whom he have often from his correspondent hear the wild
character, have in reality run away from his father. it come into his
head, therefore, that if he could prevail with the young gentleman to
return back to his father, he should by that mean render a service to
Allworthy, which would obliterate all his former anger; nay, indeed,
he conceive that very anger be counterfeit, and that Allworthy have
sacrifice he to his own reputation. and this suspicion indeed he
well account for, from the tender behaviour of that excellent man to
the foundling child; from his great severity to Partridge, who,
know himself to be innocent, could not conceive that any other
should think he guilty; lastly, from the allowance which he have
privately receive long after the annuity have be publickly take
from he, and which he look upon as a kind of smart-money, or rather
by way of atonement for injustice; for it be very uncommon, I believe,
for man to ascribe the benefaction they receive to pure charity, when
they can possibly impute they to any other motive. if he could by any
mean therefore persuade the young gentleman to return home, he
doubt not but that he should again be receive into the favour of
Allworthy, and well reward for his pain; nay, and should be again
restore to his native country; a restoration which Ulysses himself
never wish more heartily than poor Partridge.
as for Jones, he be well satisfied with the truth of what the other
have assert, and believe that Partridge have no other inducement but
love to he, and zeal for the cause; a blameable want of caution and
diffidence in the veracity of other, in which he be highly worthy of
censure. to say the truth, there be but two way by which man become
possess of this excellent quality. the one be from long experience,
and the other be from nature; which last, I presume, be often mean by
genius, or great natural part; and it be infinitely the well of the
two, not only as we be master of it much early in life, but as it
be much more infallible and conclusive; for a man who hath be
impose on by ever so many, may still hope to find other more honest;
whereas he who receive certain necessary admonition from within,
that this be impossible, must have very little understanding indeed,
if he ever render himself liable to be once deceive. as Jones have
not this gift from nature, he be too young to have gain it by
experience; for at the diffident wisdom which be to be acquire this
way, we seldom arrive till very late in life; which be perhaps the
reason why some old man be apt to despise the understanding of all
those who be a little young than themselves.
Jones spend most part of the day in the company of a new acquaintance.
this be no other than the landlord of the house, or rather the
husband of the landlady. he have but lately make his descent
downstair, after a long fit of the gout, in which distemper he be
generally confine to his room during one half of the year; and during
the rest, he walk about the house, smoake his pipe, and drink his
bottle with his friend, without concern himself in the least with
any kind of business. he have be breed, as they call it, a gentleman;
that be, breed up to do nothing; and have spend a very small fortune,
which he inherit from an industrious farmer his uncle, in hunting,
horse-racing, and cock-fighting, and have be marry by my landlady
for certain purpose, which he have long since desist from answer;
for which she hat he heartily. but as he be a surly kind of
fellow, so she content herself with frequently upbraid he by
disadvantageous comparison with her first husband, whose praise she
have eternally in her mouth; and as she be for the most part mistress
of the profit, so she be satisfied to take upon herself the care and
government of the family, and, after a long successless struggle, to
suffer her husband to be master of himself.
in the evening, when Jones retire to his room, a small dispute arise
between this fond couple concern him:--"what," say the wife, "you
have be tipple with the gentleman, I see?"--"yes," answer the
husband, "we have crack a bottle together, and a very gentlemanlike
man he be, and hath a very pretty notion of horse-flesh. indeed, he be
young, and hath not see much of the world; for I believe he hath be
at very few horse-race."--"Oho! he be one of your order, be he?"
reply the landlady: "he must be a gentleman to be sure, if he be a
horse-racer. the devil fetch such gentry! I be sure I wish I have never
see any of they. I have reason to love horse-racer truly!"--"that
you have," say the husband; "for I be one, you know."--"Yes,"
answer she, "you be a pure one indeed. as my first husband use to
say, I may put all the good I have ever get by you in my eye, and see
never the bad."--"D--n your first husband!" cry he. "donot d--n a
well man than yourself," answer the wife: "if he have be alive,
you durst not have do it."--"Then you think," say he, "I have not
so much courage as yourself; for you have d--n'd he often in my
hearing."--"If I do," say she, "I have repent of it manybe the
good time and oft. and if he be so good to forgive I a word speak
in haste or so, it doth not become such a one as you to twitter I. he
be a husband to I, he be; and if ever I do make use of an ill word
or so in a passion, I never call he rascal; I should have tell a
lie, if I have call he rascal." much more she say, but not in his
hearing; for have light his pipe, he stagger off as fast as he
could. we shall therefore transcribe no more of her speech, as it
approach still near and nearer to a subject too indelicate to find
any place in this history.
early in the morning Partridge appear at the bedside of Jones, ready
equipped for the journey, with his knapsack at his back. this be his
own workmanship; for besides his other trade, he be no indifferent
taylor. he have already put up his whole stock of linen in it,
consist of four shirt, to which he now add eight for Mr Jones;
and then pack up the portmanteau, he be depart with it towards
his own house, but be stopt in his way by the landlady, who refuse
to suffer any removal till after the payment of the reckoning.
the landlady be, as we have say, absolute governess in these
region; it be therefore necessary to comply with her rule; so the
bill be presently writ out, which amount to a much large sum than
might have be expect, from the entertainment which Jones have meet
with. but here we be oblige to disclose some maxim, which publican
hold to be the grand mystery of their trade. the first be, if they
have anything good in their house (which indeed very seldom happen)
to produce it only to person who travel with great equipage. 2dly,
to charge the same for the very bad provision, as if they be the
good. and lastly, if any of their guest call but for little, to make
they pay a double price for everything they have; so that the amount
by the head may be much the same.
the bill be make and discharge, Jones set forward with Partridge,
carry his knapsack; nor do the landlady condescend to wish he a
good journey; for this be, it seem, an inn frequent by people of
fashion; and I know not whence it be, but all those who get their
livelihood by people of fashion, contract as much insolence to the
rest of mankind, as if they really belong to that rank themselves.
Chapter viii.
Jones arrive at Gloucester, and go to the Bell; the character of
that house, and of a petty-fogger which he there meet with.
Mr Jones and Partridge, or Little Benjamin (which epithet of Little
be perhaps give he ironically, he be in reality near six foot
high), have leave their last quarter in the manner before describe,
travel on to Gloucester without meet any adventure worth
relate.
be arrive here, they choose for their house of entertainment the
sign of the Bell, an excellent house indeed, and which I do most
seriously recommend to every reader who shall visit this antient city.
the master of it be brother to the great preacher Whitefield; but be
absolutely untainted with the pernicious principle of methodism, or
of any other heretical sect. he be indeed a very honest plain man,
and, in my opinion, not likely to create any disturbance either in
church or state. his wife hath, I believe, have much pretension to
beauty, and be still a very fine woman. her person and deportment
might have make a shin figure in the polite assembly; but
though she must be conscious of this and many other perfection, she
seem perfectly content with, and resign to, that state of life to
which she be call; and this resignation be entirely owe to the
prudence and wisdom of her temper; for she be at present as free from
any methodistical notion as her husband: I say at present; for she
freely confess that her brother's document make at first some
impression upon she, and that she have put herself to the expense of a
long hood, in order to attend the extraordinary emotion of the
Spirit; but have find, during an experiment of three week, no
emotion, she say, worth a farthing, she very wisely lay by her
hood, and abandon the sect. to be concise, she be a very friendly
good-natured woman; and so industrious to oblige, that the guest must
be of a very morose disposition who be not extremely well satisfied
in her house.
Mrs Whitefield happen to be in the yard when Jones and his attendant
march in. her sagacity soon discover in the air of our heroe
something which distinguish he from the vulgar. she order she
servant, therefore, immediately to show he into a room, and
presently afterwards invite he to dinner with herself; which
invitation he very thankfully accept; for indeed much less agreeable
company than that of Mrs Whitefield, and a much bad entertainment
than she have provide, would have be welcome after so long fasting
and so long a walk.
besides Mr Jones and the good governess of the mansion, there sit down
at table an attorney of Salisbury, indeed the very same who have
bring the news of Mrs Blifil's death to Mr Allworthy, and whose
name, which I think we do not before mention, be dowle: there be
likewise present another person, who stile himself a lawyer, and who
live somewhere near Linlinch, in Somersetshire. this fellow, I say,
stile himself a lawyer, but be indeed a most vile petty-fogger,
without sense or knowledge of any kind; one of those who may be term
train-bearer to the law; a sort of supernumerary in the profession,
who be the hackney of attorney, and will ride more mile for
half-a-crown than a postboy.
during the time of dinner, the Somersetshire lawyer recollect the
face of Jones, which he have see at Mr Allworthy's; for he have often
visit in that gentleman's kitchen. he therefore take occasion to
enquire after the good family there with that familiarity which would
have become an intimate friend or acquaintance of Mr Allworthy; and
indeed he do all in his power to insinuate himself to be such, though
he have never have the honour of speak to any person in that family
high than the butler. Jones answer all his question with much
civility, though he never remember to have see the petty-fogger
before; and though he conclude, from the outward appearance and
behaviour of the man, that he usurp a freedom with his better, to
which he be by no mean intitle.
as the conversation of fellow of this kind be of all other the most
detestable to man of any sense, the cloth be no soon removed than
Mr Jones withdraw, and a little barbarously leave poor Mrs Whitefield
to do a penance, which I have often hear Mr Timothy Harris, and other
publican of good taste, lament, as the severe lot annex to their
calling, namely, that of be oblige to keep company with their
guest.
Jones have no soon quit the room, than the petty-fogger, in a
whispering tone, ask Mrs Whitefield, "if she know who that fine
spark be?" she answer, "she have never see the gentleman
before."--"the gentleman, indeed!" reply the petty-fogger; "a pretty
gentleman, truly! why, hebe the bastard of a fellow who be hang for
horse-stealing. he be dropt at Squire Allworthy's door, where one of
the servant find he in a box so full of rain-water, that he would
certainly have be drown, have he not be reserve for another
fate."--"Ay, ay, you need not mention it, I protest: we understand
what that fate be very well," cry dowle, with a most facetious
grin.--"well," continue the other, "the squire order he to be
take in; for he be a timbersome man everybody know, and be afraid
of draw himself into a scrape; and there the bastard be breed up,
and fed, and cloathifie all to the world like any gentleman; and
there he get one of the servant-maid with child, and persuade she to
swear it to the squire himself; and afterwards he break the arm of one
Mr Thwackum a clergyman, only because he reprimand he for follow
whore; and afterwards he snapt a pistol at Mr Blifil behind his back;
and once, when Squire Allworthy be sick, he get a drum, and beat it
all over the house to prevent he from sleep; and twenty other
prank he hath play, for all which, about four or five day ago,
just before I leave the country, the squire strip he stark naked,
and turn he out of door."
"and very justly too, I protest," cry dowle; "I would turn my own
son out of door, if he be guilty of half as much. and pray what be
the name of this pretty gentleman?"
"the name o' un?" answer Petty-fogger; "why, he be call Thomas
Jones."
"Jones!" answer dowle a little eagerly; "what, Mr Jones that live
at Mr Allworthy's? be that the gentleman that din with us?"--"the
very same," say the other. "I have hear of the gentleman," cry
dowling, "often; but I never hear any ill character of he."--"And I
be sure," say Mrs Whitefield, "if half what this gentleman hath say
be true, Mr Jones hath the most deceitful countenance I ever see; for
sure his look promise something very different; and I must say, for
the little I have see of he, he be as civil a well-breed man as you
would wish to converse with."
Petty-fogger calling to mind that he have not be swear, as he usually
be, before he give his evidence, now bind what he have declare with
so many oath and imprecation that the landlady's ear be shocked,
and she put a stop to his swearing, by assure he of her belief.
upon which he say, "I hope, madam, you imagine I would scorn to tell
such thing of any man, unless I know they to be true. what interest
have I in take away the reputation of a man who never injure I? I
promise you every syllable of what I have say be fact, and the whole
country know it."
as Mrs Whitefield have no reason to suspect that the petty-fogger have
any motive or temptation to abuse Jones, the reader cannot blame she
for believe what he so confidently affirm with many oath. she
accordingly give up her skill in physiognomy, and hence-forwards
conceive so ill an opinion of her guest, that she heartily wish he
out of her house.
this dislike be now far increase by a report which Mr Whitefield
make from the kitchen, where Partridge have inform the company, "that
though he carry the knapsack, and content himself with stay
among servant, while Tom Jones (as he call he) be regale in the
parlour, he be not his servant, but only a friend and companion, and
as good a gentleman as Mr Jones himself."
Dowling sit all this while silent, bite his finger, make face,
grinning, and look wonderfully arch; at last he open his lip,
and protest that the gentleman look like another sort of man. he
then call for his bill with the utmost haste, declare he must be at
Hereford that evening, lament his great hurry of business, and
wish he could divide himself into twenty piece, in order to be at
once in twenty place.
the petty-fogger now likewise depart, and then Jones desire the
favour of Mrs Whitefield's company to drink tea with he; but she
refuse, and with a manner so different from that with which she have
receive he at dinner, that it a little surprized he. and now he
soon perceive her behaviour totally change; for instead of that
natural affability which we have before celebrate, she wear a
constrain severity on her countenance, which be so disagreeable to
Mr Jones, that he resolve, however late, to quit the house that
evening.
he do indeed account somewhat unfairly for this sudden change; for
besides some hard and unjust surmise concern female fickleness and
mutability, he begin to suspect that he owe this want of civility to
his want of horse; a sort of animal which, as they dirty no sheet,
be think in inn to pay well for their bed than their rider,
and be therefore consider as the more desirable company; but Mrs
Whitefield, to do her justice, have a much more liberal way of
think. she be perfectly well-breed, and could be very civil to a
gentleman, though he walk on foot. in reality, she look on our
heroe as a sorry scoundrel, and therefore treat he as such, for
which not even Jones himself, have he know as much as the reader,
could have blame she; nay, on the contrary, he must have approve she
conduct, and have esteem she the more for the disrespect show
towards himself. this be indeed a most aggravating circumstance, which
attend deprive man unjustly of their reputation; for a man who be
conscious of have an ill character, cannot justly be angry with
those who neglect and slight he; but ought rather to despise such as
affect his conversation, unless where a perfect intimacy must have
convince they that their friend's character hath be falsely and
injuriously asperse.
this be not, however, the case of Jones; for as he be a perfect
stranger to the truth, so he be with good reason offend at the
treatment he receive. he therefore pay his reckoning and depart,
highly against the will of Mr Partridge, who have remonstrate much
against it to no purpose, at last condescend to take up his knapsack
and to attend his friend.
chapter ix.
contain several dialogue between Jones and Partridge, concern
love, cold, hunger, and other matter; with the lucky and narrow
escape of Partridge, as he be on the very brink of make a fatal
discovery to his friend.
the shadow begin now to descend large from the high mountain; the
feather creation have betake themselves to their rest. now the
high order of mortal be sit down to their dinner, and the
low order to their supper. in a word, the clock strike five just
as Mr Jones take his leave of Gloucester; an hour at which (as it be
now mid-winter) the dirty finger of Night would have draw her sable
curtain over the universe, have not the moon forbid she, who now, with
a face as broad and as red as those of some jolly mortal, who, like
she, turn night into day, begin to rise from her bed, where she have
slumber away the day, in order to sit up all night. Jones have not
travel far before he pay his compliment to that beautiful planet,
and, turn to his companion, ask he if he have ever beheld so
delicious an evening? partridge make no ready answer to his
question, he proceed to comment on the beauty of the moon, and
repeat some passage from Milton, who hath certainly excel all
other poet in his description of the heavenly luminary. he then
tell Partridge the story from the Spectator, of two lover who have
agree to entertain themselves when they be at a great distance from
each other, by repair, at a certain fix hour, to look at the
moon; thus please themselves with the thought that they be both
employ in contemplate the same object at the same time. "those
lover," add he, "must have have soul truly capable of feel all
the tenderness of the sublimest of all human passion."--"Very
probably," cry Partridge: "but I envy they more, if they have body
incapable of feel cold; for I be almost frozen to death, and be
very much afraid I shall lose a piece of my nose before we get to
another house of entertainment. Nay, truly, we may well expect some
judgment should happen to we for our folly in run away so by night
from one of the most excellent inn I ever set my foot into. I be sure
I never see more good thing in my life, and the great lord in the
land cannot live well in his own house than he may there. and to
forsake such a house, and go a rambling about the country, the Lord
know whither, _per devia rura viarum_, I say nothing for my part; but
some people might not have charity enough to conclude we be in our
sober sens."--"Fie upon it, Mr Partridge!" say Jones, "have a
well heart; consider you be go to face an enemy; and be you
afraid of face a little cold? I wish, indeed, we have a guide to
advise which of these road we should take."--"May I be so bold," say
Partridge, "to offer my advice? _Interdum stultus opportuna
loquitur_"--"why, which of they," cry Jones, "would you
recommend?"--"truly neither of they," answer Partridge. "the only
road we can be certain of find, be the road we come. a good hearty
pace will bring we back to Gloucester in an hour; but if we go
forward, the Lord Harry know when we shall arrive at any place; for I
see at least fifty mile before I, and no house in all the
way."--"you see, indeed, a very fair prospect," say Jones, "which
receive great additional beauty from the extreme lustre of the moon.
however, I will keep the left-hand track, as that seem to lead
directly to those hill, which we be inform lie not far from
Worcester. and here, if you be inclined to quit I, you may, and
return back again; but for my part, I be resolve to go forward."
"it be unkind in you, sir," say Partridge, "to suspect I of any such
intention. what I have advise hath be as much on your account as on
my own: but since you be determined to go on, I be as much determine
to follow. _I prae sequar te_."
they now travel some mile without speak to each other, during
which suspense of discourse Jones often sigh, and Benjamin groan
as bitterly, though from a very different reason. at length Jones make
a full stop, and turn about, cry, "who know, Partridge, but the
lovely creature in the universe may have her eye now fix on that
very moon which I behold at this instant?" "very likely, sir,"
answer Partridge; "and if my eye be fix on a good surloin of
roast beef, the devil might take the moon and her horn into the
bargain." "do ever tramontane make such an answer?" cry Jones.
"Prithee, Partridge, wast thou ever susceptible of love in thy life,
or hath time wear away all the trace of it from thy memory?"
"alack-a-day!" cry Partridge, "well would it have be for I if I
have never know what love be. _Infandum regina jubes renovare
dolorem_. I be sure I have taste all the tenderness, and sublimity,
and bitterness of the passion." "be your mistress unkind, then?"
say Jones. "very unkind, indeed, sir," answer Partridge; "for she
marry I, and make one of the most confound wife in the world.
however, heaven be praise, shebe go; and if I believe she be in
the moon, accord to a book I once read, which teach that to be
the receptacle of depart spirit, I would never look at it for fear
of see she; but I wish, sir, that the moon be a look-glass for
your sake, and that Miss Sophia Western be now place before it." "my
dear Partridge," cry Jones, "what a thought be there! a thought
which I be certain could never have enter into any mind but that of
a lover. O Partridge! could I hope once again to see that face; but,
alas! all those golden dream be vanish for ever, and my only
refuge from future misery be to forget the object of all my former
happiness." "and do you really despair of ever see Miss Western
again?" answer Partridge; "if you will follow my advice I will
engage you shall not only see she but have she in your arm." "ha! do
not awaken a thought of that nature," cry Jones: "I have struggle
sufficiently to conquer all such wish already." "Nay," answer
Partridge, "if you do not wish to have your mistress in your arm you
be a most extraordinary lover indeed." "well, well," say Jones, "let
we avoid this subject; but pray what be your advice?" "to give it you
in the military phrase, then," say Partridge, "as we be soldier,
`to the right about.' let we return the way we come; we may yet reach
Gloucester to-night, though late; whereas, if we proceed, we be
likely, for aught I see, to ramble about for ever without come
either to house or home." "I have already tell you my resolution be to
go on," answer Jones; "but I would have you go back. I be oblige to
you for your company hither; and I beg you to accept a guinea as a
small instance of my gratitude. Nay, it would be cruel in I to suffer
you to go any far; for, to deal plainly with you, my chief end and
desire be a glorious death in the service of my king and country." "as
for your money," reply Partridge, "I beg, sir, you will put it up; I
will receive none of you at this time; for at present I be, I believe,
the rich man of the two. and as your resolution be to go on, so mine
be to follow you if you do. Nay, now my presence appear absolutely
necessary to take care of you, since your intention be so desperate;
for I promise you my view be much more prudent; as you be resolve
to fall in battle if you can, so I be resolve as firmly to come to no
hurt if I can help it. and, indeed, I have the comfort to think there
will be but little danger; for a popish priest tell I the other day
the business would soon be over, and he believe without a battle." "A
popish priest!" cry Jones, "I have hear be not always to be
believe when he speak in behalf of his religion." "yes, but so far,"
answer the other, "from speak in behalf of his religion, he
assure I the Catholicks do not expect to be any gainer by the
change; for that Prince Charles be as good a protestant as any in
England; and that nothing but regard to right make he and the rest of
the popish party to be Jacobites."--"i believe he to be as much a
Protestant as I believe he hath any right," say Jones; "and I make no
doubt of our success, but not without a battle. so that I be not so
sanguine as your friend the popish priest." "Nay, to be sure, sir,"
answer Partridge, "all the prophecy I have ever read speak of a
great deal of blood to be spill in the quarrel, and the miller with
three thumb, who be now alive, be to hold the horse of three king,
up to his knee in blood. Lord, have mercy upon we all, and send
well time!" "with what stuff and nonsense hast thou fill thy
head!" answer Jones: "this too, I suppose, come from the popish
priest. monster and prodigy be the proper argument to support
monstrous and absurd doctrine. the cause of King George be the cause
of liberty and true religion. in other word, it be the cause of
common sense, my boy, and I warrant you will succeed, though Briarius
himself be to rise again with his hundred thumb, and to turn
miller." Partridge make no reply to this. he be, indeed, cast into
the utmost confusion by this declaration of Jones. for, to inform the
reader of a secret, which he have no proper opportunity of reveal
before, Partridge be in truth a Jacobite, and have conclude that
Jones be of the same party, and be now proceed to join the
rebel. an opinion which be not without foundation. for the tall,
long-sided dame, mention by hudibra--that many-eye, many-tongue,
many-mouthed, many-eared monster of Virgil, have relate the story of
the quarrel between Jones and the officer, with the usual regard to
truth. she have, indeed, change the name of Sophia into that of the
Pretender, and have report, that drink his health be the cause
for which Jones be knock down. this Partridge have hear, and most
firmly believe. 'tis no wonder, therefore, that he have thence
entertain the above-mention opinion of Jones; and which he have
almost discover to he before he find out his own mistake. and at
this the reader will be the less inclined to wonder, if he please to
recollect the doubtful phrase in which Jones first communicate his
resolution to Mr Partridge; and, indeed, have the word be less
ambiguous, Partridge might very well have construe they as he do;
be persuade as he be that the whole nation be of the same
inclination in their heart; nor do it stagger he that Jones have
travel in the company of soldier; for he have the same opinion of
the army which he have of the rest of the people.
but however well affect he might be to James or Charles, he be
still much more attach to Little Benjamin than to either; for which
reason he no soon discover the principle of his fellow-traveller
than he think proper to conceal and outwardly give up his own to the
man on whom he depend for the make his fortune, since he by no
mean believe the affair of Jones to be so desperate as they really
be with Mr Allworthy; for as he have keep a constant correspondence
with some of his neighbour since he leave that country, he have hear
much, indeed more than be true, of the great affection Mr Allworthy
bear this young man, who, as Partridge have be instruct, be to be
that gentleman's heir, and whom, as we have say, he do not in the
least doubt to be his son.
he imagine therefore that whatever quarrel be between they, it would
be certainly make up at the return of Mr Jones; an event from which he
promise great advantage, if he could take this opportunity of
ingratiate himself with that young gentleman; and if he could by any
mean be instrumental in procure his return, he doubt not, as we
have before say, but it would as highly advance he in the favour of
Mr Allworthy.
we have already observe, that he be a very good-natured fellow, and
he hath himself declare the violent attachment he have to the person
and character of Jones; but possibly the view which I have just
before mention, might likewise have some little share in prompt
he to undertake this expedition, at least in urge he to continue
it, after he have discover that his master and himself, like some
prudent father and son, though they travel together in great
friendship, have embrace opposite party. I be lead into this
conjecture, by have remark, that though love, friendship, esteem,
and such like, have very powerful operation in the human mind;
interest, however, be an ingredient seldom omit by wise man, when
they would work other to their own purpose. this be indeed a most
excellent medicine, and, like Ward's pill, fly at once to the
particular part of the body on which you desire to operate, whether it
be the tongue, the hand, or any other member, where it scarce ever
fail of immediately produce the desire effect.
Chapter x.
in which our traveller meet with a very extraordinary adventure.
just as Jones and his friend come to the end of their dialogue in the
precede chapter, they arrive at the bottom of a very steep hill.
here Jones stopt short, and direct his eye upwards, stand for a
while silent. at length he call to his companion, and say,
"Partridge, I wish I be at the top of this hill; it must certainly
afford a most charming prospect, especially by this light; for the
solemn gloom which the moon cast on all object, be beyond expression
beautiful, especially to an imagination which be desirous of
cultivate melancholy idea."--"very probably," answer Partridge;
"but if the top of the hill be proper to produce melancholy
thought, I suppose the bottom be the likeli to produce merry one,
and these I take to be much the well of the two. I protest you have
make my blood run cold with the very mentioning the top of that
mountain; which seem to I to be one of the high in the world. no,
no, if we look for anything, let it be for a place under ground, to
screen ourselves from the frost."--"Do so," say Jones; "let it be but
within hearing of this place, and I will hallow to you at my return
back."--"surely, sir, you be not mad," say Partridge.--"Indeed, I
be," answer Jones, "if ascend this hill be madness; but as you
complain so much of the cold already, I would have you stay below. I
will certainly return to you within an hour."--"Pardon me, sir," cry
Partridge; "I have determine to follow you wherever you go." indeed
he be now afraid to stay behind; for though he be coward enough in
all respect, yet his chief fear be that of ghost, with which the
present time of night, and the wildness of the place, extremely well
suit.
at this instant Partridge espy a glimmering light through some
tree, which seem very near to they. he immediately cry out in a
rapture, "oh, sir! Heaven hath at last hear my prayer, and hath
bring we to a house; perhaps it may be an inn. let I beseech you,
sir, if you have any compassion either for I or yourself, do not
despise the goodness of Providence, but let we go directly to yon
light. whether it be a public-house or no, I be sure if they be
Christians that dwell there, they will not refuse a little house-room
to person in our miserable condition." Jones at length yield to the
earnest supplication of Partridge, and both together make directly
towards the place whence the light issue.
they soon arrive at the door of this house, or cottage, for it might
be call either, without much impropriety. here Jones knock several
time without receive any answer from within; at which Partridge,
whose head be full of nothing but of ghost, devil, witch, and
such like, begin to tremble, cry, "Lord, have mercy upon we! surely
the people must be all dead. I can see no light neither now, and yet I
be certain I see a candle burning but a moment before.--Well! I have
hear of such thing."--"What hast thou hear of?" say Jones. "the
people be either fast asleep, or probably, as this be a lonely place,
be afraid to open their door." he then begin to vociferate pretty
loudly, and at last an old woman, open an upper casement, ask,
who they be, and what they want? Jones answer, they be
traveller who have lose their way, and have see a light in the
window, have be lead thither in hope of find some fire to warm
themselves. "whoever you be," cry the woman, "you have no business
here; nor shall I open the door to any one at this time of night."
Partridge, whom the sound of a human voice have recover from his
fright, fall to the most earnest supplication to be admit for a
few minute to the fire, say, he be almost dead with the cold; to
which fear have indeed contribute equally with the frost. he assure
she that the gentleman who speak to she be one of the great
squire in the country; and make use of every argument, save one,
which Jones afterwards effectually add; and this be, the promise of
half-a-crown;--a bribe too great to be resist by such a person,
especially as the genteel appearance of Jones, which the light of the
moon plainly discover to she, together with his affable behaviour,
have entirely subdue those apprehension of thief which she have at
first conceive. she agree, therefore, at last, to let they in; where
Partridge, to his infinite joy, find a good fire ready for his
reception.
the poor fellow, however, have no soon warm himself, than those
thought which be always uppermost in his mind, begin a little to
disturb his brain. there be no article of his creed in which he have a
strong faith than he have in witchcraft, nor can the reader conceive
a figure more adapt to inspire this idea, than the old woman who now
stand before he. she answer exactly to that picture draw by Otway
in his Orphan. indeed, if this woman have live in the reign of James
the first, her appearance alone would have hang she, almost without
any evidence.
many circumstance likewise conspire to confirm Partridge in his
opinion. her living, as he then imagine, by herself in so lonely a
place; and in a house, the outside of which seem much too good for
she, but its inside be furnish in the most neat and elegant manner.
to say the truth, Jones himself be not a little surprized at what he
see; for, besides the extraordinary neatness of the room, it be
adorn with a great number of nicknack and curiosity, which might
have engage the attention of a virtuoso.
while Jones be admire these thing, and Partridge sit tremble
with the firm belief that he be in the house of a witch, the old
woman say, "I hope, gentleman, you will make what haste you can; for
I expect my master presently, and I would not for double the money he
should find you here."--"Then you have a master?" cry Jones.
"indeed, you will excuse I, good woman, but I be surprize to see
all those fine thing in your house."--"Ah, sir," say she, "if the
twentieth part of these thing be mine, I should think myself a rich
woman. but pray, sir, do not stay much long, for I look for he in
every minute."--"why, sure he would not be angry with you," say
Jones, "for do a common act of charity?"--"alack-a-day, sir!" say
she, "he be a strange man, not at all like other people. he keep no
company with anybody, and seldom walk out but by night, for he doth
not care to be see; and all the country people be as much afraid of
meet he; for his dress be enough to frighten those who be not
use to it. they call he, the Man of the Hill (for there he walk by
night), and the country people be not, I believe, more afraid of the
devil himself. he would be terribly angry if he find you
here."--"Pray, sir," say Partridge, "donot let we offend the
gentleman; I be ready to walk, and be never warm in my life. do
pray, sir, let we go. here be pistol over the chimney: who know
whether they be charge or no, or what he may do with them?"--"fear
nothing, Partridge," cry Jones; "I will secure thee from
danger."--"Nay, for matter o' that, he never doth any mischief," say
the woman; "but to be sure it be necessary he should keep some arm
for his own safety; for his house hath be beset more than once; and
it be not many night ago that we think we hear thief about it:
for my own part, I have often wonder that he be not murder by some
villain or other, as he walk out by himself at such hour; but then,
as I say, the people be afraid of he; and besides, they think, I
suppose, he hath nothing about he worth take."--"I should imagine,
by this collection of rarity," cry Jones, "that your master have
be a traveller."--"Yes, sir," answer she, "he hath be a very
great one: there be few gentleman that know more of all matter than
he. I fancy he hath be crost in love, or whatever it be I know not;
but I have live with he above these thirty year, and in all that
time he hath hardly speak to six live people." she then again
solicit their departure, in which she be back by Partridge; but
Jones purposely protract the time, for his curiosity be greatly
raise to see this extraordinary person. though the old woman,
therefore, conclude every one of her answer with desire he to be
go, and Partridge proceed so far as to pull he by the sleeve, he
still continue to invent new question, till the old woman, with an
affright countenance, declare she hear her master's signal; and at
the same instant more than one voice be hear without the door,
cry, "D--n your blood, show we your money this instant. your money,
you villain, or we will blow your brain about your ear."
"o, good heaven!" cry the old woman, "some villain, to be sure,
have attack my master. o la! what shall I do? what shall I
do?"--"how!" cry Jones, "how!--are these pistol loaded?"--"o, good
sir, there be nothing in they, indeed. o pray donot murder we,
gentleman!" (for in reality she now have the same opinion of those
within as she have of those without). Jones make she no answer; but
snatch an old broad sword which hang in the room, he instantly
sally out, where he find the old gentleman struggle with two
ruffian, and beg for mercy. Jones ask no question, but fall so
briskly to work with his broad sword, that the fellow immediately
quit their hold; and without offer to attack our heroe, betook
themselves to their heel and make their escape; for he do not
attempt to pursue they, be content with have deliver the old
gentleman; and indeed he conclude he have pretty well do their
business, for both of they, as they run off, cry out with bitter
oath that they be dead man.
Jones presently run to lift up the old gentleman, who have be throw
down in the scuffle, express at the same time great concern lest he
should have receive any harm from the villain. the old man star a
moment at Jones, and then cry, "no, sir, no, I have very little
harm, I thank you. Lord have mercy upon me!"--"I see, sir," say
Jones, "you be not free from apprehension even of those who have have
the happiness to be your deliverer; nor can I blame any suspicion
which you may have; but indeed you have no real occasion for any; here
be none but your friend present. have mist our way this cold
night, we take the liberty of warm ourselves at your fire, whence
we be just depart when we hear you call for assistance, which, I
must say, Providence alone seem to have send you."--"Providence,
indeed," cry the old gentleman, "if it be so."--"So it be, I assure
you," cry Jones. "here be your own sword, sir; I have use it in
your defence, and I now return it into your hand." the old man have
receive the sword, which be stain with the blood of his enemy,
look stedfastly at Jones during some moment, and then with a sigh
cry out, "you will pardon I, young gentleman; I be not always of a
suspicious temper, nor be I a friend to ingratitude."
"be thankful then," cry Jones, "to that Providence to which you owe
your deliverance: as to my part, I have only discharge the common
duty of humanity, and what I would have do for any fellow-creature
in your situation."--"let I look at you a little long," cry the
old gentleman. "you be a human creature then? well, perhaps you be.
come pray walk into my little hutt. you have be my deliverer
indeed."
the old woman be distract between the fear which she have of her
master, and for he; and Partridge be, if possible, in a great
fright. the former of these, however, when she hear her master speak
kindly to Jones, and perceive what have happen, come again to
herself; but Partridge no soon see the gentleman, than the
strangeness of his dress infuse great terror into that poor fellow
than he have before feel, either from the strange description which he
have hear, or from the uproar which have happen at the door.
to say the truth, it be an appearance which might have affect a
more constant mind than that of Mr Partridge. this person be of the
tall size, with a long beard as white as snow. his body be
cloathe with the skin of an ass, make something into the form of a
coat. he wear likewise boot on his leg, and a cap on his head, both
compose of the skin of some other animal.
as soon as the old gentleman come into his house, the old woman begin
her congratulation on his happy escape from the ruffian. "yes,"
cry he, "I have escape, indeed, thank to my preserver."--"O the
blessing on he!" answer she: "he be a good gentleman, I warrant
he. I be afraid your worship would have be angry with I for
let he in; and to be certain I should not have do it, have not I
see by the moon-light, that he be a gentleman, and almost frozen to
death. and to be certain it must have be some good angel that send
he hither, and tempt I to do it."
"I be afraid, sir," say the old gentleman to Jones, "that I have
nothing in this house which you can either eat or drink, unless you
will accept a dram of brandy; of which I can give you some most
excellent, and which I have have by I these thirty year." Jones
decline this offer in a very civil and proper speech, and then the
other ask he, "whither he be travel when he mist his way?"
say, "I must own myself surprize to see such a person as you
appear to be, journey on foot at this time of night. I suppose,
sir, you be a gentleman of these part; for you do not look like one
who be use to travel far without horse?"
"appearance," cry Jones, "be often deceitful; man sometimes look
what they be not. I assure you I be not of this country; and whither
I be travel, in reality I scarce know myself."
"whoever you be, or whithersoever you be go," answer the old
man, "I have obligation to you which I can never return."
"I once more," reply Jones, "affirm that you have none; for there
can be no merit in have hazard that in your service on which I set
no value; and nothing be so contemptible in my eye as life."
"I be sorry, young gentleman," answer the stranger, "that you have
any reason to be so unhappy at your year."
"indeed I be, sir," answer Jones, "the most unhappy of
mankind."--"perhap you have have a friend, or a mistress?" reply the
other. "how could you," cry Jones, "mention two word sufficient to
drive I to distraction?"--"either of they be enough to drive any man
to distraction," answer the old man. "I enquire no far, sir;
perhaps my curiosity hath lead I too far already."
"indeed, sir," cry Jones, "I cannot censure a passion which I feel
at this instant in the high degree. you will pardon I when I
assure you, that everything which I have see or hear since I first
enter this house hath conspire to raise the great curiosity in
I. something very extraordinary must have determine you to this
course of life, and I have reason to fear your own history be not
without misfortune."
here the old gentleman again sigh, and remain silent for some
minute: at last, look earnestly on Jones, he say, "I have read
that a good countenance be a letter of recommendation; if so, none
ever can be more strongly recommend than yourself. if I do not feel
some yearning towards you from another consideration, I must be the
most ungrateful monster upon earth; and I be really concerned it be no
otherwise in my power than by word to convince you of my gratitude."
Jones, after a moment's hesitation, answer, "that it be in his
power by word to gratify he extremely. I have conf a curiosity,"
say he, "sir; need I say how much oblige I should be to you, if you
would condescend to gratify it? will you suffer I therefore to beg,
unless any consideration restrain you, that you would be pleased to
acquaint I what motif have induce you thus to withdraw from the
society of mankind, and to betake yourself to a course of life to
which it sufficiently appear you be not bear?"
"I scarce think myself at liberty to refuse you anything after what
hath happen," reply the old man. "if you desire therefore to hear
the story of an unhappy man, I will relate it to you. indeed you judge
rightly, in think there be commonly something extraordinary in the
fortune of those who fly from society; for however it may seem a
paradox, or even a contradiction, certain it be, that great
philanthropy chiefly incline we to avoid and det mankind; not on
account so much of their private and selfish vice, but for those of a
relative kind; such as envy, malice, treachery, cruelty, with every
other specie of malevolence. these be the vice which true
philanthropy abhor, and which rather than see and converse with, she
avoid society itself. however, without a compliment to you, you do
not appear to I one of those whom I should shun or det; nay, I
must say, in what little hath dropt from you, there appear some
parity in our fortune: I hope, however, yours will conclude more
successfully."
here some compliment pass between our heroe and his host, and then
the latter be go to begin his history, when Partridge interrupt
he. his apprehension have now pretty well leave he, but some effect
of his terror remain; he therefore remind the gentleman of that
excellent brandy which he have mention. this be presently bring,
and Partridge swallow a large bumper.
the gentleman then, without any farth preface, begin as you may read
in the next chapter.
Chapter xi.
in which the Man of the Hill begin to relate his history.
"I be bear in a village of Somersetshire, call Mark, in the year
1657. my father be one of those whom they call gentleman farmer. he
have a little estate of about £300 a year of his own, and rent
another estate of near the same value. he be prudent and industrious,
and so good a husbandman, that he might have lead a very easy and
comfortable life, have not an arrant vixen of a wife sour his
domestic quiet. but though this circumstance perhaps make he
miserable, it do not make he poor; for he confine she almost
entirely at home, and rather choose to bear eternal upbraiding in his
own house, than to injure his fortune by indulge she in the
extravagancy she desire abroad.
"by this Xanthippe" (so be the wife of Socrates call, say
Partridge)--"by this Xanthippe he have two son, of which I be the
young. he design to give we both good education; but my elder
brother, who, unhappily for he, be the favourite of my mother,
utterly neglect his learning; insomuch that, after have be five
or six year at school with little or no improvement, my father, be
tell by his master that it would be to no purpose to keep he long
there, at last comply with my mother in take he home from the
hand of that tyrant, as she call his master; though indeed he give
the lad much less correction than his idleness deserve, but much
more, it seem, than the young gentleman like, who constantly
complain to his mother of his severe treatment, and she as
constantly give he a hearing."
"yes, yes," cry Partridge, "I have see such mother; I have be
abuse myself by they, and very unjustly; such parent deserve
correction as much as their child."
Jones chid the pedagogue for his interruption, and then the stranger
proceed.
"my brother now, at the age of fifteen, bade adieu to all learning,
and to everything else but to his dog and gun; with which latter he
become so expert, that, though perhaps you may think it incredible, he
could not only hit a standing mark with great certainty, but hath
actually shoot a crow as it be fly in the air. he be likewise
excellent at find a hare sitting, and be soon repute one of the
good sportsman in the country; a reputation which both he and his
mother enjoy as much as if he have be think the fine scholar.
"the situation of my brother make I at first think my lot the hard,
in be continue at school: but I soon change my opinion; for as I
advance pretty fast in learn, my labour become easy, and my
exercise so delightful, that holiday be my most unpleasant time;
for my mother, who never love I, now apprehend that I have the
great share of my father's affection, and finding, or at least
thinking, that I be more take notice of by some gentleman of
learning, and particularly by the parson of the parish, than my
brother, she now hat my sight, and make home so disagreeable to I,
that what be call by school-boy Black Monday, be to I the whitest
in the whole year.
"have at length go through the school at Taunton, I be thence
remove to Exeter College in Oxford, where I remain four year; at
the end of which an accident take I off entirely from my study; and
hence, I may truly date the rise of all which happen to I
afterwards in life.
"there be at the same college with myself one Sir George Gresham, a
young fellow who be intitle to a very considerable fortune, which he
be not, by the will of his father, to come into full possession of
till he arrive at the age of twenty-five. however, the liberality of
his guardian give he little cause to regret the abundant caution of
his father; for they allow he five hundred pound a year while he
remain at the university, where he keep his horse and his whore,
and live as wicked and as profligate a life as he could have do have
he be never so entirely master of his fortune; for besides the five
hundred a year which he receive from his guardian, he find mean to
spend a thousand more. he be above the age of twenty-one, and have no
difficulty in gain what credit he please.
"this young fellow, among many other tolerable bad quality, have one
very diabolical. he have a great delight in destroy and ruin the
youth of inferior fortune, by draw they into expense which they
could not afford so well as himself; and the well, and worthy, and
soberer any young man be, the great pleasure and triumph have he in
his destruction. thus act the character which be record of the
devil, and go about seek whom he might devour.
"it be my misfortune to fall into an acquaintance and intimacy with
this gentleman. my reputation of diligence in my study make I a
desirable object of his mischievous intention; and my own inclination
make it sufficiently easy for he to effect his purpose; for though I
have apply myself with much industry to book, in which I take great
delight, there be other pleasure in which I be capable of take
much great; for I be high-mettle, have a violent flow of animal
spirit, be a little ambitious, and extremely amorous.
"I have not long contract an intimacy with Sir George before I become
a partaker of all his pleasure; and when I be once enter on that
scene, neither my inclination nor my spirit would suffer I to play an
under part. I be second to none of the company in any act of
debauchery; nay, I soon distinguish myself so notably in all riot
and disorder, that my name generally stand first in the roll of
delinquent; and instead of be lament as the unfortunate pupil of
Sir George, I be now accuse as the person who have mislead and
debauch that hopeful young gentleman; for though he be the
ringleader and promoter of all the mischief, he be never so
consider. I fall at last under the censure of the vice-chancellor,
and very narrowly escape expulsion.
"you will easily believe, sir, that such a life as I be now describe
must be incompatible with my further progress in learn; and that in
proportion as I addict myself more and more to loose pleasure, I
must grow more and more remiss in application to my study. this be
truly the consequence; but this be not all. my expense now greatly
exceed not only my former income, but those addition which I
extort from my poor generous father, on pretence of sum be
necessary for prepare for my approach degree of batchelor of
art. these demand, however, grow at last so frequent and exorbitant,
that my father by slow degree open his ear to the account which
he receive from many quarter of my present behaviour, and which my
mother fail not to echo very faithfully and loudly; add, `ay,
this be the fine gentleman, the scholar who doth so much honour to his
family, and be to be the making of it. I think what all this
learning would come to. he be to be the ruin of we all, I find, after
his eld brother hath be deny necessary for his sake, to
perfect his education forsooth, for which he be to pay we such
interest: I think what the interest would come to,' with much more
of the same kind; but I have, I believe, satisfy you with this
taste.
"my father, therefore, begin now to return remonstrance instead of
money to my demand, which bring my affair perhaps a little soon
to a crisis; but have he remit I his whole income, you will imagine
it could have suffice a very short time to support one who keep pace
with the expense of Sir George Gresham.
"it be more than possible that the distress I be now in for money,
and the impracticability of go on in this manner, might have
restore I at once to my sens and to my study, have I open my
eye before I become involved in debt from which I see no hope of
ever extricate myself. this be indeed the great art of Sir George,
and by which he accomplish the ruin of many, whom he afterwards
laugh at as fool and coxcomb, for vie, as he call it, with a
man of his fortune. to bring this about, he would now and then advance
a little money himself, in order to support the credit of the
unfortunate youth with other people; till, by mean of that very
credit, he be irretrievably undo.
"my mind be by these mean grow as desperate as my fortune, there
be scarce a wickedness which I do not meditate, in order for my
relief. self-murder itself become the subject of my serious
deliberation; and I have certainly resolve on it, have not a more
shameful, though perhaps less sinful, think expel it from my
head."--Here he hesitate a moment, and then cry out, "I protest, so
many year have not wash away the shame of this act, and I shall
blush while I relate it." Jones desire he to pass over anything that
might give he pain in the relation; but Partridge eagerly cry out,
"oh, pray, sir, let we hear this; I have rather hear this than all the
rest; as I hope to be save, I will never mention a word of it." Jones
be go to rebuke he, but the stranger prevent it by proceed
thus: "I have a chum, a very prudent, frugal young lad, who, though he
have no very large allowance, have by his parsimony heap up upwards of
forty guineas, which I know he keep in his escritore. I take therefore
an opportunity of purloin his key from his breech-pocket, while
he be asleep, and thus make myself master of all his riches: after
which I again convey his key into his pocket, and counterfeit
sleep--though I never once close my eye, lie in bed till after he
arise and go to prayer--an exercise to which I have long be
unaccustomed.
"timorous thief, by extreme caution, often subject themselves to
discovery, which those of a bold kind escape. thus it happen to
I; for have I boldly break open his escritore, I have, perhaps, escape
even his suspicion; but as it be plain that the person who rob he
have possess himself of his key, he have no doubt, when he first
miss his money, but that his chum be certainly the thief. now as he
be of a fearful disposition, and much my inferior in strength, and I
believe in courage, he do not dare to confront I with my guilt, for
fear of bad bodily consequence which might happen to he. he
repair therefore immediately to the vice-chancellor, and upon
swear to the robbery, and to the circumstance of it, very easily
obtain a warrant against one who have now so bad a character through
the whole university.
"luckily for I, I lay out of the college the next evening; for that
day I attend a young lady in a chaise to Witney, where we staid all
night, and in our return, the next morning, to Oxford, I meet one of my
crony, who acquaint I with sufficient news concern myself to
make I turn my horse another way."
"pray, sir, do he mention anything of the warrant?" say Partridge.
but Jones beg the gentleman to proceed without regard any
impertinent question; which he do as follows:--
"have now abandon all thought of return to Oxford, the next
thing which offer itself be a journey to London. I impart this
intention to my female companion, who at first remonstrate against
it; but upon produce my wealth, she immediately consent. we then
strike across the country, into the great Cirencester road, and make
such haste, that we spend the next evening, save one, in London.
"when you consider the place where I now be, and the company with
whom I be, you will, I fancy, conceive that a very short time bring
I to an end of that sum of which I have so iniquitously possess
myself.
"I be now reduce to a much high degree of distress than before:
the necessary of life begin to be number among my want; and what
make my case still the more grievous be, that my paramour, of whom I
be now grow immoderately fond, share the same distress with
myself. to see a woman you love in distress; to be unable to relieve
she, and at the same time to reflect that you have bring she into
this situation, be perhaps a curse of which no imagination can
represent the horror to those who have not feel it."--"i believe it
from my soul," cry Jones, "and I pity you from the bottom of my
heart:" he then take two or three disorderly turn about the room, and
at last beg pardon, and fling himself into his chair, cry, "I
thank Heaven, I have escape that!"
"this circumstance," continue the gentleman, "so severely aggravate
the horror of my present situation, that they become absolutely
intolerable. I could with less pain endure the rag in my own
natural unsatisfie appetite, even hunger or thirst, than I could
submit to leave ungratified the most whimsical desire of a woman on
whom I so extravagantly doate, that, though I know she have be the
mistress of half my acquaintance, I firmly intend to marry she. but
the good creature be unwilling to consent to an action which the
world might think so much to my disadvantage. and as, possibly, she
compassionate the daily anxiety which she must have perceive I
suffer on her account, she resolve to put an end to my distress. she
soon, indeed, find mean to relieve I from my troublesome and
perplexed situation; for while I be distract with various
invention to supply she with pleasure, she very kindly--betray I
to one of her former lover at Oxford, by whose care and diligence I
be immediately apprehend and commit to gaol.
"here I first begin seriously to reflect on the miscarriage of my
former life; on the error I have be guilty of; on the misfortune
which I have bring on myself; and on the grief which I must have
occasion to one of the good of father. when I add to all these
the perfidy of my mistress, such be the horror of my mind, that life,
instead of be long desirable, grow the object of my abhorrence;
and I could have gladly embrace death as my dear friend, if it have
offer itself to my choice unattended by shame.
"the time of the assize soon come, and I be remove by habeas corpus
to Oxford, where I expect certain conviction and condemnation; but,
to my great surprize, none appear against I, and I be, at the end
of the session, discharge for want of prosecution. in short, my chum
have leave Oxford, and whether from indolence, or from what other motive
I be ignorant, have decline concern himself any far in the
affair."
"perhaps," cry Partridge, "he do not care to have your blood upon
his hand; and he be in the right on't. if any person be to be
hang upon my evidence, I should never be able to lie alone
afterwards, for fear of see his ghost."
"I shall shortly doubt, Partridge," say Jones, "whether thou art more
brave or wise."--"you may laugh at I, sir, if you please," answer
Partridge; "but if you will hear a very short story which I can tell,
and which be most certainly true, perhaps you may change your opinion.
in the parish where I be born--" here Jones would have silence he;
but the stranger intercede that he might be permit to tell his
story, and in the meantime promise to recollect the remainder of his
own.
Partridge then proceed thus: "in the parish where I be bear, there
live a farmer whose name be Bridle, and he have a son name Francis,
a good hopeful young fellow: I be at the grammar-school with he,
where I remember he be get into Ovid's Epistles, and he could
construe you three line together sometimes without look into a
dictionary. besides all this, he be a very good lad, never miss
church o' Sundays, and be reckon one of the good psalm-singer in
the whole parish. he would indeed now and then take a cup too much,
and that be the only fault he have."--"Well, but come to the ghost,"
cry Jones. "never fear, sir; I shall come to he soon enough,"
answer Partridge. "you must know, then, that farmer Bridle lose a
mare, a sorrel one, to the good of my remembrance; and so it fall out
that this young Francis shortly afterward be at a fair at Hindon,
and as I think it be on--, I cannot remember the day; and be as he
be, what should he happen to meet but a man upon his father's mare.
Frank call out presently, stop thief; and it be in the middle of
the fair, it be impossible, you know, for the man to make his escape.
so they apprehend he and carry he before the justice: I remember
it be Justice Willoughby, of Noyle, a very worthy good gentleman; and
he commit he to prison, and bind Frank in a recognisance, I think
they call it--a hard word compound of _re_ and _cognosco_; but it
differ in its meaning from the use of the simple, as many other
compound do. well, at last down come my Lord Justice Page to hold the
assize; and so the fellow be have up, and Frank be have up for a
witness. to be sure, I shall never forget the face of the judge, when
he begin to ask he what he have to say against the prisoner. he make
poor Frank tremble and shake in his shoe. `well you, fellow,' say my
lord, `what have you to say? donot stand hum and hawing, but speak
out.' but, however, he soon turn altogether as civil to Frank, and
begin to thunder at the fellow; and when he ask he if he have
anything to say for himself, the fellow say, he have find the horse.
`ay!' answer the judge, `thou art a lucky fellow: I have travel
the circuit these forty year, and never find a horse in my life: but
Iwill tell thee what, friend, thou wast more lucky than thou didst know
of; for thou didst not only find a horse, but a halter too, I promise
thee.' to be sure, I shall never forget the word. upon which everybody
fall a laughing, as how could they help it? nay, and twenty other
jest he make, which I cannot remember now. there be something about
his skill in horse-flesh which make all the folk laugh. to be
certain, the judge must have be a very brave man, as well as a man
of much learning. it be indeed charming sport to hear trial upon life
and death. one thing I own I think a little hard, that the
prisoner's counsel be not suffer to speak for he, though he
desire only to be hear one very short word, but my lord would not
hearken to he, though he suffer a counsellor to talk against he
for above half-an-hour. I think it hard, I own, that there should be
so many of they; my lord, and the court, and the jury, and the
counsellor, and the witness, all upon one poor man, and he too in
chain. well, the fellow be hang, as to be sure it could be no
otherwise, and poor Frank could never be easy about it. he never be
in the dark alone, but he fancy he see the fellow's spirit."--"Well,
and be this thy story?" cry Jones. "no, no," answer Partridge. "o
Lord have mercy upon I! I be just now come to the matter; for one
night, come from the alehouse, in a long, narrow, dark lane, there
he run directly up against he; and the spirit be all in white, and
fall upon Frank; and Frank, who be a sturdy lad, fall upon the spirit
again, and there they have a tussel together, and poor Frank be
dreadfully beat: indeed he make a shift at last to crawl home; but
what with the beating, and what with the fright, he lie ill above a
fortnight; and all this be most certainly true, and the whole parish
will bear witness to it."
the stranger smile at this story, and Jones burst into a loud fit of
laughter; upon which Partridge cry, "ay, you may laugh, sir; and so
do some other, particularly a squire, who be think to be no well
than an atheist; who, forsooth, because there be a calf with a white
face find dead in the same lane the next morning, would fain have it
that the battle be between Frank and that, as if a calf would set
upon a man. besides, Frank tell I he know it to be a spirit, and
could swear to he in any court in Christendom; and he have not drank
above a quart or two or such a matter of liquor, at the time. Lud have
mercy upon we, and keep we all from dip our hand in blood, I
say!"
"well, sir," say Jones to the stranger, "Mr Partridge hath finish
his story, and I hope will give you no future interruption, if you
will be so kind to proceed." he then resume his narration; but as he
hath take breath for a while, we think proper to give it to our
reader, and shall therefore put an end to this chapter.
Chapter xii.
in which the Man of the Hill continue his history.
"I have now regain my liberty," say the stranger; "but I have lose my
reputation; for there be a wide difference between the case of a man
who be barely acquit of a crime in a court of justice, and of he
who be acquit in his own heart, and in the opinion of the people. I
be conscious of my guilt, and ashame to look any one in the face; so
resolve to leave Oxford the next morning, before the daylight
discover I to the eye of any beholder.
"when I have get clear of the city, it first enter into my head to
return home to my father, and endeavour to obtain his forgiveness; but
as I have no reason to doubt his knowledge of all which have past, and
as I be well assured of his great aversion to all act of dishonesty,
I could entertain no hope of be receive by he, especially since
I be too certain of all the good office in the power of my mother;
nay, have my father's pardon be as sure, as I conceive his
resentment to be, I yet question whether I could have have the
assurance to behold he, or whether I could, upon any term, have
submit to live and converse with those who, I be convince, know
I to have be guilty of so base an action.
"I hasten therefore back to London, the good retirement of either
grief or shame, unless for person of a very public character; for
here you have the advantage of solitude without its disadvantage,
since you may be alone and in company at the same time; and while you
walk or sit unobserved, noise, hurry, and a constant succession of
object, entertain the mind, and prevent the spirit from prey on
themselves, or rather on grief or shame, which be the most
unwholesome diet in the world; and on which (though there be many who
never taste either but in public) there be some who can feed very
plentifully and very fatally when alone.
"but as there be scarce any human good without its concomitant evil,
so there be people who find an inconvenience in this unobserving
temper of mankind; I mean person who have no money; for as you be
not put out of countenance, so neither be you cloathe or feed by
those who do not know you. and a man may be as easily starve in
leadenhall-market as in the desert of Arabia.
"it be at present my fortune to be destitute of that great evil, as
it be apprehend to be by several writer, who I suppose be
overburthene with it, namely, money."--"With submission, sir," say
Partridge, "I do not remember any writer who have call it
_malorum_; but _irritamenta malorum_. _Effodiuntur ope, irritamenta
malorum_"--"Well, sir," continue the stranger, "whether it be an
evil, or only the cause of evil, I be entirely void of it, and at the
same time of friend, and, as I think, of acquaintance; when one
evening, as I be pass through the Inner Temple, very hungry, and
very miserable, I hear a voice on a sudden hail I with great
familiarity by my christian name; and upon turn about, I presently
recollect the person who so salute I to have be my
fellow-collegiate; one who have leave the university above a year, and
long before any of my misfortune have befall I. this gentleman,
whose name be Watson, shake I heartily by the hand; and express
great joy at meet I, propose our immediately drink a bottle
together. I first decline the proposal, and pretend business, but
as he be very earnest and pressing, hunger at last overcame my pride,
and I fairly confess to he I have no money in my pocket; yet not
without frame a lie for an excuse, and impute it to my have
change my breech that morning. Mr Watson answer, `I think,
Jack, you and I have be too old acquaintance for you to mention such
a matter.' he then take I by the arm, and be pull I along; but I
give he very little trouble, for my own inclination pull I much
strong than he could do.
"we then go into the Friars, which you know be the scene of all
mirth and jollity. here, when we arrive at the tavern, Mr Watson
apply himself to the drawer only, without take the least notice of
the cook; for he have no suspicion but that I have din long since.
however, as the case be really otherwise, I forge another falsehood,
and tell my companion I have be at the further end of the city on
business of consequence, and have snapt up a mutton-chop in haste; so
that I be again hungry, and wish he would add a beef-steak to his
bottle."--"some people," cry Partridge, "ought to have good
memory; or do you find just money enough in your breech to pay
for the mutton-chop?"--"your observation be right," answer the
stranger, "and I believe such blunder be inseparable from all
deal in untruth.--but to proceed--I begin now to feel myself
extremely happy. the meat and wine soon revive my spirit to a high
pitch, and I enjoy much pleasure in the conversation of my old
acquaintance, the rather as I think he entirely ignorant of what
have happen at the university since his leave it.
"but he do not suffer I to remain long in this agreeable delusion;
for take a bumper in one hand, and hold I by the other, `here,
my boy,' cry he, `herebe wish you joy of your be so honourably
acquit of that affair lay to your charge.' I be thunderstruck
with confusion at those word, which Watson observe, proceed thus:
`Nay, never be ashamed, man; thou hast be acquit, and no one now
dare call thee guilty; but, prithee, do tell I, who be thy friend--I
hope thou didst really rob he? for rat I if it be not a meritorious
action to strip such a sneaking, pitiful rascal; and instead of the
two hundred guinea, I wish you have take as many thousand. come,
come, my boy, donot be shy of confess to I: you be not now
bring before one of the pimp. D--n I if I donot honour you for it;
for, as I hope for salvation, I would have make no manner of scruple
of do the same thing.'
"this declaration a little relieved my abashment; and as wine have now
somewhat open my heart, I very freely acknowledge the robbery, but
acquaint he that he have be misinformed as to the sum take, which
be little more than a fifth part of what he have mention.
"`I be sorry for it with all my heart,' quoth he, `and I wish thee
well success another time. though, if you will take my advice, you
shall have no occasion to run any such risque. here,' say he, take
some dice out of his pocket, `herebe the stuff. here be the
implement; here be the little doctor which cure the distemper of
the purse. follow but my counsel, and I will show you a way to empty
the pocket of a queer cull without any danger of the nubbe cheat.'"
"nubbe cheat!" cry Partridge: "pray, sir, what be that?"
"why that, sir," say the stranger, "be a cannot phrase for the gallow;
for as gamester differ little from highwayman in their moral, so do
they very much resemble they in their language.
"we have now each drank our bottle, when Mr Watson say, the board be
sit, and that he must attend, earnestly press I at the same
time to go with he and try my fortune. I answer he know that be at
present out of my power, as I have inform he of the emptiness of my
pocket. to say the truth, I doubt not from his many strong
expression of friendship, but that he would offer to lend I a small
sum for that purpose, but he answer, `never mind that, man; e'en
boldly run a levant' [Partridge be go to inquire the meaning of
that word, but Jones stop his mouth]: `but be circumspect as to the
man. I will tip you the proper person, which may be necessary, as you
do not know the town, nor can distinguish a rum cull from a queer
one."
"the bill be now bring, when Watson pay his share, and be
depart. I remind he, not without blushing, of my have no
money. he answer, `that signify nothing; score it behind the door,
or make a bold brush and take no notice.--or--stay,' say he; `I will
go down-stair first, and then do you take up my money, and score the
whole reckoning at the bar, and I will wait for you at the corner.' I
express some dislike at this, and hint my expectation that he
would have deposit the whole; but he swear he have not another
sixpence in his pocket.
"he then go down, and I be prevail on to take up the money and
follow he, which I do close enough to hear he tell the drawer the
reckoning be upon the table. the drawer past by I up-stair; but I
make such haste into the street, that I hear nothing of his
disappointment, nor do I mention a syllable at the bar, accord to
my instruction.
"we now go directly to the gaming-table, where Mr Watson, to my
surprize, pull out a large sum of money and place it before he, as
do many other; all of they, no doubt, consider their own heap as
so many decoy bird, which be to intice and draw over the heap of
their neighbour.
"here it would be tedious to relate all the freak which Fortune, or
rather the dice, play in this her temple. mountain of gold be in
a few moment reduce to nothing at one part of the table, and rise as
suddenly in another. the rich grow in a moment poor, and the poor as
suddenly become rich; so that it seem a philosopher could nowhere
have so well instruct his pupil in the contempt of rich, at least
he could nowhere have well inculcate the incertainty of their
duration.
"for my own part, after have considerably improve my small estate,
I at last entirely demolish it. Mr Watson too, after much variety of
luck, rise from the table in some heat, and declare he have lose a
cool hundred, and would play no long. then come up to I, he ask
I to return with he to the tavern; but I positively refuse, say,
I would not bring myself a second time into such a dilemma, and
especially as he have lose all his money and be now in my own
condition. `Pooh!' say he, `I have just borrow a couple of guineas
of a friend, and one of they be at your service.' he immediately put
one of they into my hand, and I no long resist his inclination.
"I be at first a little shocked at return to the same house whence
we have depart in so unhandsome a manner; but when the drawer, with
very civil address, tell we, `he believe we have forget to pay our
reckoning,' I become perfectly easy, and very readily give he a
guinea, bid he pay himself, and acquiesce in the unjust charge which
have be lay on my memory.
"Mr Watson now bespoke the most extravagant supper he could well think
of; and though he have content himself with simple claret before,
nothing now but the most precious Burgundy would serve his purpose.
"our company be soon encrease by the addition of several gentleman
from the gaming-table; most of whom, as I afterwards find, come not
to the tavern to drink, but in the way of business; for the true
gamester pretend to be ill, and refuse their glass, while they
ply heartily two young fellow, who be to be afterwards pillage,
as indeed they be without mercy. of this plunder I have the good
fortune to be a sharer, though I be not yet let into the secret.
"there be one remarkable accident attend this tavern play; for the
money by degree totally disappear; so that though at the beginning
the table be half cover with gold, yet before the play end, which
it do not till the next day, be Sunday, at noon, there be scarce
a single guinea to be see on the table; and this be the stranger as
every person present, except myself, declare he have lose; and what
be become of the money, unless the devil himself carry it away, be
difficult to determine."
"most certainly he do," say Partridge, "for evil spirit can carry
away anything without be see, though there be never so many folk
in the room; and I should not have be surprize if he have carry
away all the company of a set of wicked wretch, who be at play in
sermon time. and I could tell you a true story, if I would, where the
devil take a man out of bed from another man's wife, and carry he
away through the keyhole of the door. Ihave see the very house where
it be do, and nobody hath live in it these thirty year."
Though Jones be a little offend by the impertinence of Partridge,
he could not however avoid smile at his simplicity. the stranger do
the same, and then proceed with his story, as will be see in the
next chapter.
Chapter xiii.
in which the forego story be far continued.
"my fellow-collegiate have now enter I in a new scene of life. I
soon become acquaint with the whole fraternity of sharper, and be
let into their secret; I mean, into the knowledge of those gross
cheat which be proper to impose upon the raw and unexperienced; for
there be some trick of a fine kind, which be know only to a few
of the gang, who be at the head of their profession; a degree of
honour beyond my expectation; for drink, to which I be immoderately
addicted, and the natural warmth of my passion, prevent I from
arrive at any great success in an art which require as much
coolness as the most austere school of philosophy.
"Mr Watson, with whom I now live in the close amity, have unluckily
the former fail to a very great excess; so that instead of make a
fortune by his profession, as some other do, he be alternately rich
and poor, and be often oblige to surrender to his cool friend,
over a bottle which they never taste, that plunder that he have take
from cull at the public table.
"however, we both make a shift to pick up an uncomfortable livelihood;
and for two year I continue of the calling; during which time I
taste all the variety of fortune, sometimes flourish in
affluence, and at other be oblige to struggle with almost
incredible difficulty. to-day wallowing in luxury, and to-morrow
reduce to the coarse and most homely fare. my fine clothe be
often on my back in the evening, and at the pawn-shop the next
morning.
"one night, as I be return pennyless from the gaming-table, I
observe a very great disturbance, and a large mob gather together
in the street. as I be in no danger from pickpocket, I venture into
the croud, where upon enquiry I find that a man have be rob and
very ill use by some ruffian. the wounded man appear very bloody,
and seem scarce able to support himself on his leg. as I have not
therefore be deprive of my humanity by my present life and
conversation, though they have leave I very little of either honesty or
shame, I immediately offer my assistance to the unhappy person, who
thankfully accept it, and, put himself under my conduct, beg
I to convey he to some tavern, where he might send for a surgeon,
be, as he say, faint with loss of blood. he seem indeed highly
pleased at find one who appear in the dress of a gentleman; for
as to all the rest of the company present, their outside be such that
he could not wisely place any confidence in they.
"I take the poor man by the arm, and lead he to the tavern where we
keep our rendezvous, as it happen to be the near at hand. a
surgeon happen luckily to be in the house, immediately attend,
and apply himself to dress his wound, which I have the pleasure
to hear be not likely to be mortal.
"the surgeon have very expeditiously and dextrously finish his
business, begin to enquire in what part of the town the wound man
lodge; who answer, `that he be come to town that very morning;
that his horse be at an inn in Piccadilly, and that he have no other
lodging, and very little or no acquaintance in town.'
"this surgeon, whose name I have forget, though I remember it begin
with an r, have the first character in his profession, and be
serjeant-surgeon to the king. he have moreover many good quality, and
be a very generous good-natured man, and ready to do any service to
his fellow-creature. he offer his patient the use of his chariot to
carry he to his inn, and at the same time whisper in his ear, `that
if he want any money, he would furnish he.'
"the poor man be not now capable of return thank for this
generous offer; for have have his eye for some time stedfastly on
I, he throw himself back in his chair, cry, `oh, my son! my son!'
and then faint away.
"many of the people present imagine this accident have happen
through his loss of blood; but I, who at the same time begin to
recollect the feature of my father, be now confirm in my
suspicion, and satisfy that it be he himself who appear before
I. I presently run to he, raise he in my arm, and kiss his cold
lip with the utmost eagerness. here I must draw a curtain over a
scene which I cannot describe; for though I do not lose my being, as
my father for a while do, my sens be however so overpowered with
affright and surprize, that I be a stranger to what pass during some
minute, and indeed till my father have again recover from his swoon,
and I find myself in his arm, both tenderly embrace each other,
while the tear trickle a-pace down the cheek of each of we.
"Most of those present seem affect by this scene, which we, who
might be consider as the actor in it, be desirous of remove
from the eye of all spectator as fast as we could; my father
therefore accept the kind offer of the surgeon's chariot, and I
attend he in it to his inn.
"when we be alone together, he gently upbraid I with have
neglect to write to he during so long a time, but entirely omit
the mention of that crime which have occasion it. he then inform I
of my mother's death, and insist on my return home with he,
say, `that he have long suffer the great anxiety on my account;
that he know not whether he have most fear my death or wish it,
since he have so many more dreadful apprehension for I. at last, he
say, a neighbouring gentleman, who have just recover a son from the
same place, inform he where I be; and that to reclaim I from this
course of life be the sole cause of his journey to London.' he
thank Heaven he have succeed so far as to find I out by mean of
an accident which have like to have prove fatal to he; and have the
pleasure to think he partly owe his preservation to my humanity, with
which he profest himself to be more delighted than he should have be
with my filial piety, if I have know that the object of all my care
be my own father.
"Vice have not so deprave my heart as to excite in it an insensibility
of so much paternal affection, though so unworthily bestow. I
presently promise to obey his command in my return home with he, as
soon as he be able to travel, which indeed he be in a very few day,
by the assistance of that excellent surgeon who have undertake his
cure.
"the day precede my father's journey (before which time I scarce
ever leave he), I go to take my leave of some of my most intimate
acquaintance, particularly of Mr Watson, who dissuade I from bury
myself, as he call it, out of a simple compliance with the fond
desire of a foolish old fellow. such sollicitation, however, have no
effect, and I once more see my own home. my father now greatly
sollicite I to think of marriage; but my inclination be utterly
averse to any such thought. I have taste of love already, and perhaps
you know the extravagant excess of that most tender and most violent
passion."--Here the old gentleman pause, and look earnestly at
Jones; whose countenance, within a minute's space, display the
extremity of both red and white. upon which the old man, without
make any observation, renew his narrative.
"be now provide with all the necessary of life, I betook myself
once again to study, and that with a more inordinate application than
I have ever do formerly. the book which now employ my time solely
be those, as well antient as modern, which treat of true philosophy,
a word which be by many thought to be the subject only of farce and
ridicule. I now read over the work of Aristotle and Plato, with the
rest of those inestimable treasure which antient Greece have
bequeath to the world.
"these author, though they instruct I in no science by which man
may promise to themselves to acquire the least rich or worldly
power, teach I, however, the art of despise the high
acquisition of both. they elevate the mind, and steel and harden it
against the capricious invasion of fortune. they not only instruct in
the knowledge of Wisdom, but confirm man in her habit, and
demonstrate plainly, that this must be our guide, if we propose ever
to arrive at the great worldly happiness, or to defend ourselves,
with any tolerable security, against the misery which everywhere
surround and invest we.
"to this I add another study, compare to which, all the philosophy
teach by the wise heathen be little well than a dream, and be
indeed as full of vanity as the silly jester ever pleased to
represent it. this be that divine wisdom which be alone to be find in
the Holy Scriptures; for they impart to we the knowledge and assurance
of thing much more worthy our attention than all which this world can
offer to our acceptance; of thing which Heaven itself hath
condescend to reveal to we, and to the small knowledge of which
the high human wit unassisted could never ascend. I begin now to
think all the time I have spend with the good heathen writer be
little more than labour lose: for, however pleasant and delightful
their lesson may be, or however adequate to the right regulation of
our conduct with respect to this world only; yet, when compare with
the glory reveal in Scripture, their high document will appear
as trifling, and of as little consequence, as the rule by which
child regulate their childish little game and pastime. true it be,
that philosophy make we wise, but Christianity make we well man.
philosophy elevate and steel the mind, Christianity soften and
sweeten it. the former make we the object of human admiration, the
latter of Divine love. that insure we a temporal, but this an eternal
happiness.--But I be afraid I tire you with my rhapsody."
"not at all," cry Partridge; "Lud forbid we should be tired with
good thing!"
"I have spend," continue the stranger, "about four year in the most
delightful manner to myself, totally give up to contemplation, and
entirely unembarrassed with the affair of the world, when I lose the
good of father, and one whom I so entirely love, that my grief at
his loss exceed all description. I now abandon my book, and give
myself up for a whole month to the effect of melancholy and despair.
Time, however, the good physician of the mind, at length bring I
relief."--"Ay, ay; _Tempus edax rerum_" say partridge.--"i then,"
continue the strange, "betook myself again to my former study,
which I may say perfect my cure; for philosophy and religion may be
call the exercise of the mind, and when this be disorder, they
be as wholesome as exercise can be to a distempered body. they do
indeed produce similar effect with exercise; for they strengthen and
confirm the mind, till man become, in the noble strain of horace--
_Fortis, et in seipso totus tere atque rotundus,
Externi ne quid valeat per laeve morari;
in quem manca ruit semper Fortuna._"[*]
[*] firm in himself, who on himself rely,
polish'd and round, who run his proper course
and break misfortune with superior force.--mr francis.
here Jones smile at some conceit which intrude itself into his
imagination; but the stranger, I believe, perceive it not, and
proceed thus:--
"my circumstance be now greatly alter by the death of that good
of man; for my brother, who be now become master of the house,
differ so widely from I in his inclination, and our pursuit in
life have be so very various, that we be the bad of company to
each other: but what make our live together still more disagreeable,
be the little harmony which could subsist between the few who
resort to I, and the numerous train of sportsman who often attend
my brother from the field to the table; for such fellow, besides the
noise and nonsense with which they persecute the ear of sober man,
endeavour always to attack they with affront and contempt. this be so
much the case, that neither I myself, nor my friend, could ever sit
down to a meal with they without be treat with derision, because
we be unacquainted with the phrase of sportsman. for man of true
learning, and almost universal knowledge, always compassionate the
ignorance of other; but fellow who excel in some little, low,
contemptible art, be always certain to despise those who be
unacquainted with that art.
"in short, we soon separate, and I go, by the advice of a
physician, to drink the Bath water; for my violent affliction, add
to a sedentary life, have throw I into a kind of paralytic disorder,
for which those water be account an almost _certain_ cure. the
second day after my arrival, as I be walk by the river, the sun
shine so intensely hot (though it be early in the year), that I
retire to the shelter of some willow, and sit down by the river
side. here I have not be seat long before I hear a person on the
other side of the willow sigh and bemoan himself bitterly. on a
sudden, have utter a most impious oath, he cry, `I be resolve
to bear it no long,' and directly throw himself into the water. I
immediately start, and run towards the place, call at the same
time as loudly as I could for assistance. an angler happen luckily
to be a-fishing a little below I, though some very high sedge have hide
he from my sight. he immediately come up, and both of we together,
not without some hazard of our life, draw the body to the shore. at
first we perceive no sign of life remain; but have hold the body
up by the heel (for we soon have assistance enough), it discharge a
vast quantity of water at the mouth, and at length begin to discover
some symptom of breathing, and a little afterwards to move both its
hand and its leg.
"an apothecary, who happen to be present among other, advise that
the body, which seem now to have pretty well empty itself of
water, and which begin to have many convulsive motion, should be
directly take up, and carry into a warm bed. this be accordingly
perform, the apothecary and myself attend.
"as we be go towards an inn, for we know not the man's lodging,
luckily a woman meet we, who, after some violent screaming, tell we
that the gentleman lodge at her house.
"when I have see the man safely deposit there, I leave he to the
care of the apothecary; who, I suppose, use all the right method
with he, for the next morning I hear he have perfectly recover his
sens.
"I then go to visit he, intend to search out, as well as I
could, the cause of his have attempt so desperate an act, and to
prevent, as far as I be able, his pursue such wicked intention for
the future. I be no soon admit into his chamber, than we both
instantly know each other; for who should this person be but my good
friend Mr Watson! here I will not trouble you with what past at our
first interview; for I would avoid prolixity as much as
possible."--"Pray let we hear all," cry Partridge; "I want mightily
to know what bring he to Bath."
"you shall hear everything material," answer the stranger; and then
proceed to relate what we shall proceed to write, after we have
give a short breathing time to both ourselves and the reader.
Chapter xiv.
in which the Man of the Hill conclude his history.
"Mr Watson," continue the strange, "very freely acquaint I, that
the unhappy situation of his circumstance, occasion by a tide of
ill luck, have in a manner force he to a resolution of destroy
himself.
"I now begin to argue very seriously with he, in opposition to this
heathenish, or indeed diabolical, principle of the lawfulness of
self-murder; and say everything which occur to I on the subject;
but, to my great concern, it seem to have very little effect on he.
he seem not at all to repent of what he have do, and give I reason
to fear he would soon make a second attempt of the like horrible kind.
"when I have finish my discourse, instead of endeavour to answer
my argument, he look I stedfastly in the face, and with a smile
say, `you be strangely alter, my good friend, since I remember
you. I question whether any of our bishop could make a well
argument against suicide than you have entertain I with; but unless
you can find somebody who will lend I a cool hundred, I must either
hang, or drown, or starve; and, in my opinion, the last death be the
most terrible of the three.'
"I answer he very gravely that I be indeed alter since I have
see he last. that I have find leisure to look into my folly and to
repent of they. I then advise he to pursue the same step; and at
last conclude with an assurance that I myself would lend he a
hundred pound, if it would be of any service to his affair, and he
would not put it into the power of a die to deprive he of it.
"Mr Watson, who seem almost compose in slumber by the former part
of my discourse, be rouse by the latter. he seize my hand eagerly,
give I a thousand thank, and declare I be a friend indeed; add
that he hop I have a well opinion of he than to imagine he have
profit so little by experience, as to put any confidence in those
damned dice which have so often deceive he. `no, no,' cry he; `let
I but once handsomely be set up again, and if ever Fortune make a
break merchant of I afterwards, I will forgive she.'
"I very well understand the language of set up, and break
merchant. I therefore say to he, with a very grave face, Mr Watson,
you must endeavour to find out some business or employment, by which
you may procure yourself a livelihood; and I promise you, could I see
any probability of be repay hereafter, I would advance a much
large sum than what you have mention, to equip you in any fair and
honourable call; but as to gaming, besides the baseness and
wickedness of make it a profession, you be really, to my own
knowledge, unfit for it, and it will end in your certain ruin.
"`why now, thatbe strange,' answer he; `neither you, nor any of my
friend, would ever allow I to know anything of the matter, and yet I
believe I _be_ as good a hand at every game as any of you all; and I
heartily wish I be to play with you only for your whole fortune: I
should desire no well sport, and I would let you name your game into
the bargain: but come, my dear boy, have you the hundred in your
pocket?"
"I answer I have only a bill for £50, which I deliver he, and
promise to bring he the rest next morning; and after give he a
little more advice, take my leave.
"I be indeed well than my word; for I return to he that very
afternoon. when I enter the room, I find he sit up in his bed
at card with a notorious gamester. this sight, you will imagine,
shock I not a little; to which I may add the mortification of
see my bill deliver by he to his antagonist, and thirty guineas
only give in exchange for it.
"the other gamester presently quit the room, and then Watson
declare he be ashamed to see I; `but,' say he, `I find luck run
so damnably against I, that I will resolve to leave off play for
ever. I have think of the kind proposal you make I ever since, and
I promise you there shall be no fault in I, if I do not put it in
execution.'
"though I have no great faith in his promise, I produce he the
remainder of the hundred in consequence of my own; for which he give
I a note, which be all I ever expect to see in return for my
money.
"we be prevent from any further discourse at present by the
arrival of the apothecary; who, with much joy in his countenance, and
without even ask his patient how he do, proclaim there be great
news arrive in a letter to himself, which he say would shortly be
public, `that the Duke of Monmouth be land in the west with a vast
army of Dutch; and that another vast fleet hover over the coast of
Norfolk, and be to make a descent there, in order to favour the
duke's enterprize with a diversion on that side.'
"this apothecary be one of the great politician of his time. he
be more delighted with the most paultry packet, than with the good
patient, and the high joy he be capable of, he receive from
have a piece of news in his possession an hour or two soon than
any other person in the town. his advice, however, be seldom
authentic; for he would swallow almost anything as a truth--a humour
which many make use of to impose upon he.
"thus it happen with what he at present communicate; for it be
know within a short time afterwards that the duke be really land,
but that his army consist only of a few attendant; and as to the
diversion in Norfolk, it be entirely false.
"the apothecary staid no long in the room than while he acquaint
we with his news; and then, without say a syllable to his patient
on any other subject, depart to spread his advice all over the
town.
"event of this nature in the public be generally apt to eclipse all
private concern. our discourse therefore now become entirely
political.[*] for my own part, I have be for some time very seriously
affect with the danger to which the protestant religion be so
visibly expose under a popish prince, and think the apprehension of
it alone sufficient to justify that insurrection; for no real security
can ever be find against the persecuting spirit of Popery, when arm
with power, except the deprive it of that power, as woeful
experience presently show. you know how King James behave after
get the well of this attempt; how little he value either his
royal word, or coronation oath, or the liberty and right of his
people. but all have not the sense to foresee this at first; and
therefore the Duke of Monmouth be weakly support; yet all could
feel when the evil come upon they; and therefore all unite, at last,
to drive out that king, against whose exclusion a great party among we
have so warmly contend during the reign of his brother, and for whom
they now fight with such zeal and affection."
"what you say," interrupt Jones, "be very true; and it have often
strike I, as the most wonderful thing I ever read of in history, that
so soon after this convincing experience which bring our whole
nation to join so unanimously in expel King James, for the
preservation of our religion and liberty, there should be a party
among we mad enough to desire the place his family again on the
throne." "you be not in earnest!" answer the old man; "there can be
no such party. as bad an opinion as I have of mankind, I cannot
believe they infatuate to such a degree. there may be some hot-head
Papists lead by their priest to engage in this desperate cause, and
think it a holy war; but that protestant, that be member of the
Church of England, should be such apostate, such _felos de se_, I
cannot believe it; no, no, young man, unacquainted as I be with what
have past in the world for these last thirty year, I cannot be so
impose upon as to credit so foolish a tale; but I see you have a mind
to sport with my ignorance."--"can it be possible," reply Jones,
"that you have live so much out of the world as not to know that
during that time there have be two rebellion in favour of the son
of King James, one of which be now actually rag in the very heart
of the kingdom." at these word the old gentleman start up, and in a
most solemn tone of voice, conjure Jones by his Maker to tell he if
what he say be really true; which the other as solemnly affirm,
he walk several turn about the room in a profound silence, then
cry, then laugh, and at last fall down on his knee, and bless
God, in a loud thanksgive prayer, for have deliver he from all
society with human nature, which could be capable of such monstrous
extravagance. after which, be remind by Jones that he have break
off his story, he resume it again in this manner:--
"as mankind, in the day I be speak of, be not yet arrive at
that pitch of madness which I find they be capable of now, and which,
to be sure, I have only escape by live alone, and at a distance
from the contagion, there be a considerable rise in favour of
Monmouth; and my principle strongly incline I to take the same
part, I determine to join he; and Mr Watson, from different motif
concur in the same resolution (for the spirit of a gamester will
carry a man as far upon such an occasion as the spirit of patriotism),
we soon provide ourselves with all necessary, and go to the duke
at Bridgewater.
"the unfortunate event of this enterprize, you be, I conclude, as
well acquainted with as myself. I escape, together with Mr Watson,
from the battle at Sedgemore, in which action I receive a slight
wound. we ride near forty mile together on the Exeter road, and then
abandon our horse, scramble as well as we could through the
field and bye-road, till we arrive at a little wild hut on a
common, where a poor old woman take all the care of we she could, and
dress my wound with salve, which quickly heal it."
"pray, sir, where be the wound?" say Partridge. the stranger
satisfy he it be in his arm, and then continue his narrative.
"here, sir," say he, "Mr Watson leave I the next morning, in order,
as he pretend, to get we some provision from the town of Collumpton;
but--can I relate it, or can you believe it?--this Mr Watson, this
friend, this base, barbarous, treacherous villain, betray I to a
party of horse belong to King James, and at his return deliver I
into their hand.
"the soldier, be six in number, have now seize I, and be
conduct I to Taunton gaol; but neither my present situation, nor
the apprehension of what might happen to I, be half so irksome to
my mind as the company of my false friend, who, have surrender
himself, be likewise consider as a prisoner, though he be well
treat, as be to make his peace at my expense. he at first
endeavour to excuse his treachery; but when he receive nothing but
scorn and upbraid from I, he soon change his note, abuse I as
the most atrocious and malicious rebel, and lay all his own guilt to
my charge, who, as he declare, have solicit, and even threaten
he, to make he take up arm against his gracious as well as lawful
sovereign.
"this false evidence (for in reality he have be much the forwarder of
the two) sting I to the quick, and raise an indignation scarce
conceivable by those who have not feel it. however, fortune at length
take pity on I; for as we be get a little beyond Wellington, in a
narrow lane, my guard receive a false alarm, that near fifty of the
enemy be at hand; upon which they shift for themselves, and leave
I and my betrayer to do the same. that villain immediately run from
I, and I be glad he do, or I should have certainly endeavour,
though I have no arm, to have execute vengeance on his baseness.
"I be now once more at liberty; and immediately withdraw from the
highway into the field, I travel on, scarce know which way I
go, and make it my chief care to avoid all public road and all
town--nay, even the most homely house; for I imagine every human
creature whom I see desirous of betray I.
"at last, after ramble several day about the country, during which
the field afford I the same bed and the same food which nature
bestow on our savage brother of the creation, I at length arrive at
this place, where the solitude and wildness of the country invite I
to fix my abode. the first person with whom I take up my habitation
be the mother of this old woman, with whom I remain conceal till
the news of the glorious revolution put an end to all my apprehension
of danger, and give I an opportunity of once more visit my own
home, and of enquire a little into my affair, which I soon settle
as agreeably to my brother as to myself; have resign everything to
he, for which he pay I the sum of a thousand pound, and settle on
I an annuity for life.
"his behaviour in this last instance, as in all other, be selfish
and ungenerous. I could not look on he as my friend, nor indeed do
he desire that I should; so I presently take my leave of he, as well
as of my other acquaintance; and from that day to this, my history be
little well than a blank."
"and be it possible, sir," say Jones, "that you can have reside here
from that day to this?"--"O no, sir," answer the gentleman; "I have
be a great traveller, and there be few part of Europe with which I
be not acquaint." "I have not, sir," cry Jones, "the assurance to
ask it of you now; indeed it would be cruel, after so much breath as
you have already spend: but you will give I leave to wish for some
further opportunity of hear the excellent observation which a man
of your sense and knowledge of the world must have make in so long a
course of travel."--"Indeed, young gentleman," answer the stranger,
"I will endeavour to satisfy your curiosity on this head likewise, as
far as I be able." Jones attempt fresh apology, but be prevent;
and while he and Partridge sit with greedy and impatient ear, the
stranger proceed as in the next chapter.
[*] _the rest of this paragraph and the two follow paragraph
in the first edition be as follow_:
"for my own part, I have be for some time very seriously affect
with the danger to which the protestant religion be so visibly
expose, that nothing but the immediate interposition of Providence
seem capable of preserve it; for King James have indeed declare
war against the protestant cause. he have bring known papist into
the army and attempt to bring they into the Church and into the
University. popish priest swarm through the nation, appear
publicly in their habit, and boast that they should shortly walk
in procession through the street. our own clergy be forbid to
preach against popery, and bishop be order to supend those who
do; and to do the business at once an illegal ecclesiastical
commission be erect, little inferior to an inquisition, of which,
probably, it be intend to be the ringleader. thus, as our duty to
the king can never be call more than our second duty, he have
discharge we from this by make it incompatible with our
preserve the first, which be surely to heaven. besides this, he
have dissolve his subject from their allegiance by break his
Coronation Oath, to which their allegiance be annex; for he have
imprison bishop because they would not give up their religion,
and turn out judge because they would not absolutely surrender
the law into his hand; nay, he seize this himself, and when he
claim a dispense power, he declare himself, in fact, as
absolute as any tyrant ever be or can be. I have recapitulate
these matter in full lest some of they should have be omit in
history; and I think nothing less than such provocation as I have
here mention, nothing less than certain and imminent danger to
their religion and liberty, can justify or even mitigate the
dreadful sin of rebellion in any people."
"I promise you, sir," say Jones, "all these fact, and more, I have
read in history, but I will tell you a fact which be not yet
record and of which I suppose you be ignorant. there be actually
now a rebellion on foot in this kingdom in favour of the son of that
very King James, a profess papist, more bigoted, if possible, than
his father, and this carry on by Protestants against a king who
hath never in one single instance make the least invasion on our
liberty."
"prodigious indeed!" answer the stranger. "you tell I what would
be incredible of a nation which do not deserve the character that
Virgil give of a woman, _varium et mutabile semper_. surely this be
to be unworthy of the care which Providence seem to have take of
we in the preservation of our religion against the powerful design
and constant machination of Popery, a preservation so strange and
unaccountable that I almost think we may appeal to it as to a
miracle for the proof of its holiness. prodigious indeed! a
protestant rebellion in favour of a popish prince! the folly of
mankind be as wonderful as their knavery--but to conclude my story:
I resolve to take arm in defence of my country, of my religion,
and my liberty, and Mr. Watson join in the same resolution. we
soon provide ourselves with an necessary and join the Duke at
Bridgewater."
"the unfortunate event of this enterprise you be perhaps well
acquaint with than myself. I escape together with Mr. Watson from
the battle at Sedgemore,...
Chapter xv.
a brief history of Europe; and a curious discourse between Mr Jones
and the Man of the Hill.
"in Italy the landlord be very silent. in France they be more
talkative, but yet civil. in Germany and Holland they be generally
very impertinent. and as for their honesty, I believe it be pretty
equal in all those country. the _laquais à louange_ be sure to lose
no opportunity of cheat you; and as for the postilion, I think
they be pretty much alike all the world over. these, sir, be the
observation on man which I make in my travel; for these be the
only man I ever converse with. my design, when I go abroad, be to
divert myself by see the wondrous variety of prospect, beast,
bird, fish, insect, and vegetable, with which God have be
pleased to enrich the several part of this globe; a variety which, as
it must give great pleasure to a contemplative beholder, so doth it
admirably display the power, and wisdom, and goodness of the Creator.
indeed, to say the truth, there be but one work in his whole creation
that doth he any dishonour, and with that I have long since avoid
hold any conversation."
"you will pardon I," cry Jones; "but I have always imagine that
there be in this very work you mention as great variety as in all the
rest; for, besides the difference of inclination, custom and climate
have, I be tell, introduce the utmost diversity into human nature."
"very little indeed," answer the other: "those who travel in order
to acquaint themselves with the different manner of man might spare
themselves much pain by go to a carnival at Venice; for there they
will see at once all which they can discover in the several court of
Europe. the same hypocrisy, the same fraud; in short, the same folly
and vice dress in different habit. in Spain, these be equip
with much gravity; and in Italy, with vast splendor. in France, a
knave be dress like a fop; and in the northern country, like a
sloven. but human nature be everywhere the same, everywhere the object
of detestation and scorn.
"as for my own part, I past through all these nation as you perhaps
may have do through a croud at a shew-jostling to get by they,
hold my nose with one hand, and defend my pocket with the
other, without speak a word to any of they, while I be press on
to see what I want to see; which, however entertain it might be
in itself, scarce make I amend for the trouble the company give I."
"do not you find some of the nation among which you travel less
troublesome to you than other?" say Jones. "o yes," reply the old
man: "the Turks be much more tolerable to I than the Christians;
for they be man of profound taciturnity, and never disturb a stranger
with question. now and then indeed they bestow a short curse upon
he, or spit in his face as he walk the street, but then they have
do with he; and a man may live an age in their country without
hear a dozen word from they. but of all the people I ever see,
heaven defend I from the French! with their damned prate and
civility, and do the honour of their nation to stranger (as they
be pleased to call it), but indeed set forth their own vanity;
they be so troublesome, that I have infinitely rather pass my life
with the Hottentots than set my foot in Paris again. they be a nasty
people, but their nastiness be mostly without; whereas, in France, and
some other nation that I willnot name, it be all within, and make they
stink much more to my reason than that of Hottentots do to my nose.
"thus, sir, I have end the history of my life; for as to all that
series of year during which I have live retire here, it afford no
variety to entertain you, and may be almost consider as one
day.[*] the retirement have be so compleat, that I could hardly have
enjoy a more absolute solitude in the desert of the Thebais than
here in the midst of this populous kingdom. as I have no estate, I be
plague with no tenant or steward: my annuity be pay I pretty
regularly, as indeed it ought to be; for it be much less than what I
might have expect in return for what I give up. visit I admit none;
and the old woman who keep my house know that her place entirely
depend upon she save I all the trouble of buy the thing that I
want, keep off all sollicitation or business from I, and hold
her tongue whenever I be within hearing. as my walk be all by night,
I be pretty secure in this wild unfrequented place from meet any
company. some few person I have meet by chance, and send they home
heartily fright, as from the oddness of my dress and figure they
take I for a ghost or a hobgoblin. but what have happen to-night
show that even here I cannot be safe from the villany of man; for
without your assistance I have not only be rob, but very probably
murder."
[*] the rest of this paragraph be omit in the third edition
Jones thank the stranger for the trouble he have take in relate
his story, and then express some wonder how he could possibly endure
a life of such solitude; "in which," say he, "you may well complain
of the want of variety. indeed I be astonish how you have fill up,
or rather kill, so much of your time."
"I be not at all surprize," answer the other, "that to one whose
affection and thought be fix on the world my hour should appear
to have want employment in this place: but there be one single act,
for which the whole life of man be infinitely too short: what time can
suffice for the contemplation and worship of that glorious, immortal,
and eternal being, among the work of whose stupendous creation not
only this globe, but even those numberless luminary which we may
here behold spangle all the sky, though they should many of they be
sun light different system of world, may possibly appear but as
a few atom oppose to the whole earth which we inhabit? can a man who
by divine meditation be admit as it be into the conversation of
this ineffable, incomprehensible Majesty, think day, or year, or
age, too long for the continuance of so ravish an honour? shall
the trifling amusement, the palling pleasure, the silly business of
the world, roll away our hour too swiftly from we; and shall the pace
of time seem sluggish to a mind exercise in study so high, so
important, and so glorious? as no time be sufficient, so no place be
improper, for this great concern. on what object can we cast our eye
which may not inspire we with idea of his power, of his wisdom, and
of his goodness? it be not necessary that the rise sun should dart
his fiery glory over the eastern horizon; nor that the boisterous
wind should rush from their cavern, and shake the lofty forest; nor
that the open cloud should pour their deluge on the plain: it be
not necessary, I say, that any of these should proclaim his majesty:
there be not an insect, not a vegetable, of so low an order in the
creation as not to be honour with bear mark of the attribute of
its great creator; mark not only of his power, but of his wisdom and
goodness. man alone, the king of this globe, the last and great
work of the Supreme Being, below the sun; man alone hath basely
dishonour his own nature; and by dishonesty, cruelty, ingratitude,
and treachery, hath call his maker's goodness in question, by
puzzle we to account how a benevolent being should form so foolish
and so vile an animal. yet this be the being from whose conversation
you think, I suppose, that I have be unfortunately restrain, and
without whose blessed society, life, in your opinion, must be tedious
and insipid."
"in the former part of what you say," reply Jones, "I most heartily
and readily concur; but I believe, as well as hope, that the
abhorrence which you express for mankind in the conclusion, be much
too general. indeed, you here fall into an error, which in my little
experience I have observe to be a very common one, by take the
character of mankind from the bad and base among they; whereas,
indeed, as an excellent writer observe, nothing should be esteem as
characteristical of a specie, but what be to be find among the good
and most perfect individual of that specie. this error, I believe,
be generally commit by those who from want of proper caution in the
choice of their friend and acquaintance, have suffer injury from
bad and worthless man; two or three instance of which be very
unjustly charge on all human nature."
"I think I have experience enough of it," answer the other: "my first
mistress and my first friend betray I in the basest manner, and in
matter which threaten to be of the bad of consequence--even to
bring I to a shameful death."
"but you will pardon I," cry Jones, "if I desire you to reflect who
that mistress and who that friend be. what well, my good sir,
could be expect in love derive from the stew, or in friendship
first produce and nourish at the gaming-table? to take the
character of woman from the former instance, or of man from the
latter, would be as unjust as to assert that air be a nauseous and
unwholesome element, because we find it so in a jake. I have live
but a short time in the world, and yet have know man worthy of the
high friendship, and woman of the high love."
"alas! young man," answer the stranger, "you have live, you
confess, but a very short time in the world: I be somewhat old than
you when I be of the same opinion."
"you might have remain so still," reply Jones, "if you have not
be unfortunate, I will venture to say incautious, in the placing
your affection. if there be, indeed, much more wickedness in the
world than there be, it would not prove such general assertion
against human nature, since much of this arrive by mere accident, and
many a man who commit evil be not totally bad and corrupt in his
heart. in truth, none seem to have any title to assert human nature to
be necessarily and universally evil, but those whose own mind afford
they one instance of this natural depravity; which be not, I be
convince, your case."
"and such," say the stranger, "will be always the most backward to
assert any such thing. knave will no more endeavour to persuade we of
the baseness of mankind, than a highwayman will inform you that there
be thief on the road. this would, indeed, be a method to put you on
your guard, and to defeat their own purpose. for which reason, though
knave, as I remember, be very apt to abuse particular person, yet
they never cast any reflection on human nature in general." the old
gentleman speak this so warmly, that as Jones despair of make a
convert, and be unwilling to offend, he return no answer.
the day now begin to send forth its first stream of light, when Jones
make an apology to the stranger for have staid so long, and perhaps
detain he from his rest. the stranger answer, "he never want
rest less than at present; for that day and night be indifferent
season to he; and that he commonly make use of the former for the
time of his repose and of the latter for his walk and lucubration.
however," say he, "it be now a most lovely morning, and if you can
bear any long to be without your own rest or food, I will gladly
entertain you with the sight of some very fine prospect which I
believe you have not yet see."
Jones very readily embrace this offer, and they immediately set
forward together from the cottage. as for Partridge, he have fall
into a profound repose just as the stranger have finish his story;
for his curiosity be satisfied, and the subsequent discourse be not
forcible enough in its operation to conjure down the charm of sleep.
Jones therefore leave he to enjoy his nap; and as the reader may
perhaps be at this season glad of the same favour, we will here put an
end to the eighth book of our history.
BOOK IX.
contain TWELVE HOURS.
Chapter i.
of those who lawfully may, and of those who may not, write such
history as this.
among other good us for which I have think proper to institute
these several introductory chapter, I have consider they as a kind
of mark or stamp, which may hereafter enable a very indifferent reader
to distinguish what be true and genuine in this historic kind of
writing, from what be false and counterfeit. indeed, it seem likely
that some such mark may shortly become necessary, since the favourable
reception which two or three author have lately procure for their
work of this nature from the public, will probably serve as an
encouragement to many other to undertake the like. thus a swarm of
foolish novel and monstrous romance will be produce, either to the
great impoverishing of bookseller, or to the great loss of time and
depravation of moral in the reader; nay, often to the spreading of
scandal and calumny, and to the prejudice of the character of many
worthy and honest people.
I question not but the ingenious author of the Spectator be
principally induce to prefix Greek and latin motto to every paper,
from the same consideration of guard against the pursuit of those
scribbler, who have no talent of a writer but what be teach by
the writing-master, be yet nowise afraid nor ashamed to assume the
same title with the great genius, than their good brother in the
fable be of bray in the lion's skin.
by the device therefore of his motto, it become impracticable for any
man to presume to imitate the Spectators, without understanding at
least one sentence in the learn language. in the same manner I have
now secure myself from the imitation of those who be utterly
incapable of any degree of reflection, and whose learning be not equal
to an essay.
I would not be here understand to insinuate, that the great merit
of such historical production can ever lie in these introductory
chapter; but, in fact, those part which contain mere narrative only,
afford much more encouragement to the pen of an imitator, than those
which be compose of observation and reflection. here I mean such
imitator as Rowe be of Shakespear, or as Horace hint some of the
Romans be of Cato, by bare foot and sour face.
to invent good story, and to tell they well, be possibly very rare
talent, and yet I have observe few person who have scruple to aim
at both: and if we examine the romance and novel with which the
world abound, I think we may fairly conclude, that most of the
author would not have attempt to show their tooth (if the
expression may be allow I) in any other way of writing; nor could
indeed have string together a dozen sentence on any other subject
whatever.
_Scribimus indocti doctique passim_,[*]
[*] --Each desperate blockhead dare to write:
Verse be the trade of every live wight.--francis.
may be more truly say of the historian and biographer, than of any
other specie of writing; for all the art and science (even
criticism itself) require some little degree of learn and
knowledge. Poetry, indeed, may perhaps be think an exception; but
then it demand number, or something like number: whereas, to the
composition of novel and romance, nothing be necessary but paper,
pen, and ink, with the manual capacity of use they. this, I
conceive, their production show to be the opinion of the author
themselves: and this must be the opinion of their reader, if indeed
there be any such.
hence we be to derive that universal contempt which the world, who
always denominate the whole from the majority, have cast on all
historical writer who do not draw their material from record. and
it be the apprehension of this contempt that hath make we so
cautiously avoid the term romance, a name with which we might
otherwise have be well enough content. though, as we have good
authority for all our character, no less indeed than the vast
authentic doomsday-book of nature, as be elsewhere hint, our labour
have sufficient title to the name of history. certainly they deserve
some distinction from those work, which one of the witty of man
regard only as proceed from a _pruritus_, or indeed rather from a
looseness of the brain.
but besides the dishonour which be thus cast on one of the most useful
as well as entertaining of all kind of writing, there be just reason
to apprehend, that by encourage such author we shall propagate much
dishonour of another kind; I mean to the character of many good and
valuable member of society; for the dull writer, no more than the
dull companion, be always inoffensive. they have both enough of
language to be indecent and abusive. and surely if the opinion just
above cite be true, we cannot wonder that work so nastily derive
should be nasty themselves, or have a tendency to make other so.
to prevent therefore, for the future, such intemperate abuse of
leisure, of letter, and of the liberty of the press, especially as
the world seem at present to be more than usually threaten with
they, I shall here venture to mention some qualification, every one
of which be in a pretty high degree necessary to this order of
historian.
the first be, genius, without a full vein of which no study, say
Horace, can avail we. by genius I would understand that power or
rather those power of the mind, which be capable of penetrate into
all thing within our reach and knowledge, and of distinguish their
essential difference. these be no other than invention and judgment;
and they be both call by the collective name of genius, as they be
of those gift of nature which we bring with we into the world.
concern each of which many seem to have fall into very great
error; for by invention, I believe, be generally understand a
creative faculty, which would indeed prove most romance writer to
have the high pretension to it; whereas by invention be really
mean no more (and so the word signify) than discovery, or find
out; or to explain it at large, a quick and sagacious penetration into
the true essence of all the object of our contemplation. this, I
think, can rarely exist without the concomitancy of judgment; for how
we can be say to have discover the true essence of two thing,
without discern their difference, seem to I hard to conceive. now
this last be the undisputed province of judgment, and yet some few man
of wit have agree with all the dull fellow in the world in
represent these two to have be seldom or never the property of
one and the same person.
but though they should be so, they be not sufficient for our purpose,
without a good share of learning; for which I could again cite the
authority of Horace, and of many other, if any be necessary to prove
that tool be of no service to a workman, when they be not sharpen
by art, or when he want rule to direct he in his work, or hath no
matter to work upon. all these us be supply by learn; for
nature can only furnish we with capacity; or, as I have choose to
illustrate it, with the tool of our profession; learning must fit
they for use, must direct they in it, and, lastly, must contribute
part at least of the material. a competent knowledge of history and
of the belle-lettre be here absolutely necessary; and without this
share of knowledge at least, to affect the character of an historian,
be as vain as to endeavour at build a house without timber or
mortar, or brick or stone. Homer and Milton, who, though they add
the ornament of number to their work, be both historian of our
order, be master of all the learning of their time.
again, there be another sort of knowledge, beyond the power of
learn to bestow, and this be to be have by conversation. so
necessary be this to the understanding the character of man, that
none be more ignorant of they than those learn pedant whose life
have be entirely consume in college, and among book; for however
exquisitely human nature may have be describe by writer, the true
practical system can be learn only in the world. indeed the like
happen in every other kind of knowledge. neither physic nor law be
to be practically know from book. Nay, the farmer, the planter, the
gardener, must perfect by experience what he hath acquire the
rudiment of by read. how accurately soever the ingenious Mr Miller
may have describe the plant, he himself would advise his disciple to
see it in the garden. as we must perceive, that after the nice
stroke of a Shakespear or a Jonson, of a Wycherly or an Otway, some
touch of nature will escape the reader, which the judicious action
of a Garrick, of a Cibber, or a Clive,[*] can convey to he; so, on the
real stage, the character show himself in a strong and bold light
than he can be describe. and if this be the case in those fine and
nervous description which great author themselves have take from
life, how much more strongly will it hold when the writer himself
take his line not from nature, but from book? such character be
only the faint copy of a copy, and can have neither the justness nor
spirit of an original.
[*] there be a peculiar propriety in mention this great actor,
and these two most justly celebrate actress, in this place, as
they have all form themselves on the study of nature only, and not
on the imitation of their predecessor. hence they have be able to
excel all who have go before they; a degree of merit which the
servile herd of imitator can never possibly arrive at.
now this conversation in our historian must be universal, that be,
with all rank and degree of man; for the knowledge of what be call
high life will not instruct he in low; nor, _e converso_, will his
be acquaint with the inferior part of mankind teach he the
manner of the superior. and though it may be think that the
knowledge of either may sufficiently enable he to describe at least
that in which he hath be conversant, yet he will even here fall
greatly short of perfection; for the folly of either rank do in
reality illustrate each other. for instance, the affectation of high
life appear more glaring and ridiculous from the simplicity of the
low; and again, the rudeness and barbarity of this latter, strike
with much strong idea of absurdity, when contrast with, and
oppose to, the politeness which controul the former. besides, to say
the truth, the manner of our historian will be improve by both these
conversation; for in the one he will easily find example of
plainness, honesty, and sincerity; in the other of refinement,
elegance, and a liberality of spirit; which last quality I myself have
scarce ever see in man of low birth and education.
nor will all the quality I have hitherto give my historian avail
he, unless he have what be generally mean by a good heart, and be
capable of feeling. the author who will make I weep, say Horace,
must first weep himself. in reality, no man can paint a distress well
which he doth not feel while he be paint it; nor do I doubt, but
that the most pathetic and affect scene have be writ with tear.
in the same manner it be with the ridiculous. I be convinced I never
make my reader laugh heartily but where I have laugh before he;
unless it should happen at any time, that instead of laugh with I
he should be incline to laugh at I. perhaps this may have be the
case at some passage in this chapter, from which apprehension I will
here put an end to it.
Chapter ii.
contain a very surprizing adventure indeed, which Mr Jones meet with
in his walk with the Man of the Hill.
Aurora now first open her casement, _anglice_ the day begin to
break, when Jones walk forth in company with the stranger, and
mount Mazard Hill; of which they have no soon gain the summit
than one of the most noble prospect in the world present itself to
their view, and which we would likewise present to the reader, but for
two reason: first, we despair of make those who have see this
prospect admire our description; secondly, we very much doubt whether
those who have not see it would understand it.
Jones stand for some minute fix in one posture, and direct his
eye towards the south; upon which the old gentleman ask, what he
be look at with so much attention? "alas! sir," answer he with a
sigh, "I be endeavour to trace out my own journey hither. good
heaven! what a distance be Gloucester from we! what a vast track of
land must be between I and my own home!"--"Ay, ay, young gentleman,"
cry the other, "and by your sighing, from what you love well than
your own home, or I be mistaken. I perceive now the object of your
contemplation be not within your sight, and yet I fancy you have a
pleasure in look that way." Jones answer with a smile, "I find,
old friend, you have not yet forget the sensation of your youth. I
own my thought be employ as you have guess."
they now walk to that part of the hill which look to the
north-west, and which hang over a vast and extensive wood. here they
be no soon arrive than they hear at a distance the most violent
scream of a woman, proceed from the wood below they. Jones
listen a moment, and then, without say a word to his companion
(for indeed the occasion seem sufficiently press), run, or rather
slid, down the hill, and, without the least apprehension or concern
for his own safety, make directly to the thicket, whence the sound have
issue.
he have not enter far into the wood before he behold a most shocking
sight indeed, a woman stript half naked, under the hand of a ruffian,
who have put his garter round her neck, and be endeavour to draw
she up to a tree. Jones ask no question at this interval, but fall
instantly upon the villain, and make such good use of his trusty oaken
stick that he lay he sprawl on the ground before he could defend
himself, indeed almost before he know he be attack; nor do he
cease the prosecution of his blow till the woman herself beg he
to forbear, say, she believe he have sufficiently do his
business.
the poor wretch then fall upon her knee to Jones, and give he a
thousand thank for her deliverance. he presently lift she up, and
tell she he be highly pleased with the extraordinary accident which
have send he thither for her relief, where it be so improbable she
should find any; add, that Heaven seem to have design he as
the happy instrument of her protection. "Nay," answer she, "I could
almost conceive you to be some good angel; and, to say the truth, you
look more like an angel than a man in my eye." indeed he be a
charming figure; and if a very fine person, and a most comely set of
feature, adorn with youth, health, strength, freshness, spirit, and
good-nature, can make a man resemble an angel, he certainly have that
resemblance.
the redeem captive have not altogether so much of the human-angelic
specie: she seem to be at least of the middle age, nor have her face
much appearance of beauty; but her cloath be tear from all the
upper part of her body, her breast, which be well form and
extremely white, attract the eye of her deliverer, and for a few
moment they stand silent, and gaze at each other; till the ruffian
on the ground begin to move, Jones take the garter which have be
intend for another purpose, and bind both his hand behind he. and
now, on contemplate his face, he discover, greatly to his
surprize, and perhaps not a little to his satisfaction, this very
person to be no other than ensign Northerton. nor have the ensign
forget his former antagonist, whom he know the moment he come to
himself. his surprize be equal to that of Jones; but I conceive his
pleasure be rather less on this occasion.
Jones help Northerton upon his leg, and then look he stedfastly
in the face, "I fancy, sir," say he, "you do not expect to meet I
any more in this world, and I confess I have as little expectation to
find you here. however, fortune, I see, hath bring we once more
together, and hath give I satisfaction for the injury I have
receive, even without my own knowledge."
"it be very much like a man of honour, indeed," answer Northerton,
"to take satisfaction by knock a man down behind his back. neither
be I capable of give you satisfaction here, as I have no sword; but
if you dare behave like a gentleman, let we go where I can furnish
myself with one, and I will do by you as a man of honour ought."
"Doth it become such a villain as you be," cry Jones, "to
contaminate the name of honour by assume it? but I shall waste no
time in discourse with you. justice require satisfaction of you now,
and shall have it." then turn to the woman, he ask she, if she
be near her home; or if not, whether she be acquaint with any
house in the neighbourhood, where she might procure herself some
decent cloath, in order to proceed to a justice of the peace.
she answer she be an entire stranger in that part of the world.
Jones then recollect himself, say, he have a friend near who would
direct they; indeed, he wonder at his not follow; but, in fact,
the good Man of the Hill, when our heroe depart, sit himself down on
the brow, where, though he have a gun in his hand, he with great
patience and unconcern have attend the issue.
Jones then step without the wood, perceive the old man sit as
we have just describe he; he presently exert his utmost agility,
and with surprizing expedition ascend the hill.
the old man advise he to carry the woman to Upton, which, he say,
be the near town, and there he would be sure of furnish she
with all manner of conveniencie. Jones have receive his direction
to the place, take his leave of the Man of the Hill, and, desire he
to direct Partridge the same way, return hastily to the wood.
our heroe, at his departure to make this enquiry of his friend, have
consider, that as the ruffian's hand be tie behind he, he be
incapable of execute any wicked purpose on the poor woman. besides,
he know he should not be beyond the reach of her voice, and could
return soon enough to prevent any mischief. he have moreover declare
to the villain, that if he attempt the least insult, he would be
himself immediately the executioner of vengeance on he. but Jones
unluckily forget, that though the hand of Northerton be tie, his
leg be at liberty; nor do he lay the least injunction on the
prisoner that he should not make what use of these he please.
Northerton therefore have give no parole of that kind, think he
might without any breach of honour depart; not be oblige, as he
imagine, by any rule, to wait for a formal discharge. he therefore
take up his leg, which be at liberty, and walk off through the
wood, which favour his retreat; nor do the woman, whose eye be
perhaps rather turn toward her deliverer, once think of his escape,
or give herself any concern or trouble to prevent it.
Jones therefore, at his return, find the woman alone. he would have
spend some time in search for Northerton, but she would not permit
he; earnestly entreat that he would accompany she to the town
whither they have be direct. "as to the fellow's escape," say she,
"it give I no uneasiness; for philosophy and Christianity both
preach up forgiveness of injury. but for you, sir, I be concern at
the trouble I give you; nay, indeed, my nakedness may well make I
ashamed to look you in the face; and if it be not for the sake of
your protection, I should wish to go alone."
Jones offer she his coat; but, I know not for what reason, she
absolutely refuse the most earnest solicitation to accept it. he
then beg she to forget both the cause of her confusion. "with
regard to the former," say he, "I have do no more than my duty in
protect you; and as for the latter, I will entirely remove it, by
walk before you all the way; for I would not have my eye offend
you, and I could not answer for my power of resist the attractive
charm of so much beauty."
thus our heroe and the redeem lady walk in the same manner as
Orpheus and Eurydice march heretofore; but though I cannot believe
that Jones be designedly tempt by his fair one to look behind he,
yet as she frequently want his assistance to help she over stile,
and have besides many trip and other accident, he be often oblige
to turn about. however, he have well fortune than what attend poor
Orpheus, for he bring his companion, or rather follower, safe into
the famous town of Upton.
Chapter iii.
the arrival of Mr Jones with his lady at the inn; with a very full
description of the battle of Upton.
though the reader, we doubt not, be very eager to know who this lady
be, and how she fall into the hand of Mr Northerton, we must beg he
to suspend his curiosity for a short time, as we be oblige, for some
very good reason which hereafter perhaps he may guess, to delay his
satisfaction a little long.
Mr Jones and his fair companion no soon enter the town, than they
go directly to that inn which in their eye present the fairest
appearance to the street. here Jones, have order a servant to show
a room above stair, be ascend, when the dishevel fair, hastily
follow, be lay hold on by the master of the house, who cry,
"Heyday, where be that beggar wench go? stay below stair, I desire
you." but Jones at that instant thunder from above, "let the lady
come up," in so authoritative a voice, that the good man instantly
withdraw his hand, and the lady make the good of her way to the
chamber.
here Jones wish her joy of her safe arrival, and then depart, in
order, as he promise, to send the landlady up with some cloath. the
poor woman thank he heartily for all his kindness, and say, she
hop she should see he again soon, to thank he a thousand time
more. during this short conversation, she cover her white bosom as
well as she could possibly with her arm; for Jones could not avoid
steal a sly peep or two, though he take all imaginable care to
avoid give any offence.
our traveller have happen to take up their residence at a house of
exceed good repute, whither irish lady of strict virtue, and many
northern lass of the same predicament, be accustom to resort in
their way to Bath. the landlady therefore would by no mean have
admit any conversation of a disreputable kind to pass under her
roof. indeed, so foul and contagious be all such proceeding, that
they contaminate the very innocent scene where they be commit,
and give the name of a bad house, or of a house of ill repute, to all
those where they be suffer to be carry on.
not that I would intimate that such strict chastity as be preserve
in the temple of Vesta can possibly be maintain at a public inn. my
good landlady do not hope for such a blessing, nor would any of the
lady I have speak of, or indeed any other of the most rigid note,
have expect or insist on any such thing. but to exclude all vulgar
concubinage, and to drive all whore in rag from within the wall, be
within the power of every one. this my landlady very strictly adhere
to, and this her virtuous guest, who do not travel in rag, would
very reasonably have expect of she.
now it require no very blameable degree of suspicion to imagine that
Mr Jones and his ragged companion have certain purpose in their
intention, which, though tolerate in some christian country,
connive at in other, and practise in all, be however as expressly
forbid as murder, or any other horrid vice, by that religion which
be universally believe in those country. the landlady, therefore,
have no soon receive an intimation of the entrance of the above-say
person than she begin to meditate the most expeditious mean for
their expulsion. in order to this, she have provide herself with a
long and deadly instrument, with which, in time of peace, the
chambermaid be willnot to demolish the labour of the industrious
spider. in vulgar phrase, she have take up the broomstick, and be
just about to sally from the kitchen, when Jones accost she with a
demand of a gown and other vestment, to cover the half-naked woman
upstairs.
nothing can be more provoking to the human temper, nor more dangerous
to that cardinal virtue, patience, than solicitation of extraordinary
office of kindness on behalf of those very person with whom we be
highly incensed. for this reason Shakespear hath artfully introduce
his Desdemona soliciting favour for Cassio of her husband, as the
mean of inflame, not only his jealousy, but his rage, to the
high pitch of madness; and we find the unfortunate Moor less able
to command his passion on this occasion, than even when he behold his
value present to his wife in the hand of his suppose rival. in
fact, we regard these effort as insult on our understanding, and to
such the pride of man be very difficultly bring to submit.
my landlady, though a very good-temper woman, have, I suppose, some
of this pride in her composition, for Jones have scarce end his
request, when she fall upon he with a certain weapon, which, though
it be neither long, nor sharp, nor hard, nor indeed threaten from its
appearance with either death or wound, hath be however hold in great
dread and abhorrence by many wise man--nay, by many brave one;
insomuch, that some who have dare to look into the mouth of a loaded
cannon, have not dare to look into a mouth where this weapon be
brandish; and rather than run the hazard of its execution, have
content themselves with make a most pitiful and sneak figure in
the eye of all their acquaintance.
to confess the truth, I be afraid Mr Jones be one of these; for
though he be attack and violently belabour with the aforesaid
weapon, he could not be provoke to make any resistance; but in a most
cowardly manner apply, with many entreaty, to his antagonist to
desist from pursue she blow; in plain English, he only beg she
with the utmost earnestness to hear he; but before he could obtain
his request, my landlord himself enter into the fray, and embrace
that side of the cause which seem to stand very little in need of
assistance.
there be a sort of hero who be suppose to be determine in their
chusing or avoid a conflict by the character and behaviour of the
person whom they be to engage. these be say to know their man, and
Jones, I believe, know his woman; for though he have be so submissive
to she, he be no soon attack by her husband, than he demonstrate
an immediate spirit of resentment, and enjoin he silence under a
very severe penalty; no less than that, I think, of be convert
into fuel for his own fire.
the husband, with great indignation, but with a mixture of pity,
answer, "you must pray first to be make able. I believe I be a
well man than yourself; ay, every way, that I be;" and presently
proceed to discharge half-a-dozen whore at the lady above stair,
the last of which have scarce issue from his lip, when a swing
blow from the cudgel that Jones carry in his hand assault he over
the shoulder.
it be a question whether the landlord or the landlady be the most
expeditious in return this blow. my landlord, whose hand be
empty, fall to with his fist, and the good wife, uplift her broom
and aim at the head of Jones, have probably put an immediate end to
the fray, and to Jones likewise, have not the descent of this broom
be prevent--not by the miraculous intervention of any heathen
deity, but by a very natural though fortunate accident, viz., by the
arrival of Partridge; who enter the house at that instant (for fear
have cause he to run every step from the hill), and who, see the
danger which threaten his master or companion (which you chuse to
call he), prevent so sad a catastrophe, by catch hold of the
landlady's arm, as it be brandish aloft in the air.
the landlady soon perceive the impediment which prevent her blow;
and be unable to rescue her arm from the hand of Partridge, she
let fall the broom; and then leave Jones to the discipline of her
husband, she fall with the utmost fury on that poor fellow, who have
already give some intimation of himself, by cry, "Zounds! do you
intend to kill my friend?"
Partridge, though not much addict to battle, would not however stand
still when his friend be attack; nor be he much displeased with
that part of the combat which fall to his share; he therefore return
my landlady's blow as soon as he receive they: and now the fight be
obstinately maintain on all part, and it seem doubtful to which
side Fortune would incline, when the naked lady, who have listen at
the top of the stair to the dialogue which precede the engagement,
descend suddenly from above, and without weigh the unfair
inequality of two to one, fall upon the poor woman who be box with
Partridge; nor do that great champion desist, but rather redouble
his fury, when he find fresh succour be arrive to his assistance.
victory must now have fall to the side of the traveller (for the
brave troop must yield to number) have not Susan the chambermaid
come luckily to support her mistress. this Susan be as two-hand a
wench (accord to the phrase) as any in the country, and would, I
believe, have beat the famed Thalestris herself, or any of her subject
Amazons; for her form be robust and man-like, and every way make for
such encounter. as her hand and arm be form to give blow with
great mischief to an enemy, so be her face as well contrive to
receive blow without any great injury to herself, her nose be
already flat to her face; her lip be so large, that no swelling
could be perceive in they, and moreover they be so hard, that a
fist could hardly make any impression on they. lastly, her cheek-bone
stand out, as if nature have intend they for two bastion to defend
her eye in those encounter for which she seem so well calculate,
and to which she be most wonderfully well inclined.
this fair creature enter the field of battle, immediately file to
that wing where her mistress maintain so unequal a fight with one of
either sex. here she presently challenge Partridge to single combat.
he accept the challenge, and a most desperate fight begin between
they.
now the dog of war be let loose, begin to lick their bloody lip;
now victory, with golden wing, hang hover in the air; now Fortune,
take her scale from her shelf, begin to weigh the fate of Tom
Jones, his female companion, and Partridge, against the landlord, his
wife, and maid; all which hang in exact balance before she; when a
good-natured accident put suddenly an end to the bloody fray, with
which half of the combatant have already sufficiently feast. this
accident be the arrival of a coach and four; upon which my landlord
and landlady immediately desist from fight, and at their entreaty
obtain the same favour of their antagonist: but Susan be not so
kind to Partridge; for that Amazonian fair have overthrow and
bestrid her enemy, be now cuff he lustily with both her hand,
without any regard to his request of a cessation of arm, or to those
loud exclamation of murder which he roar forth.
no soon, however, have Jones quit the landlord, than he fly to
the rescue of his defeat companion, from whom he with much
difficulty draw off the enrage chambermaid: but Partridge be not
immediately sensible of his deliverance, for he still lie flat on the
floor, guard his face with his hand; nor do he cease roar till
Jones have force he to look up, and to perceive that the battle be
at an end.
the landlord, who have no visible hurt, and the landlady, hide she
well-scratch face with her handkerchief, run both hastily to the
door to attend the coach, from which a young lady and she maid now
alight. these the landlady presently usher into that room where Mr
Jones have at first deposit his fair prize, as it be the good
apartment in the house. hither they be oblige to pass through the
field of battle, which they do with the utmost haste, cover their
face with their handkerchief, as desirous to avoid the notice of any
one. indeed their caution be quite unnecessary; for the poor
unfortunate Helen, the fatal cause of all the bloodshed, be entirely
take up in endeavour to conceal her own face, and Jones be no
less occupy in rescue Partridge from the fury of Susan; which
be happily effect, the poor fellow immediately depart to the
pump to wash his face, and to stop that bloody torrent which Susan have
plentifully set a-flow from his nostril.
chapter iv.
in which the arrival of a man of war put a final end to hostility,
and cause the conclusion of a firm and last peace between all
party.
a serjeant and a file of musqueteer, with a deserter in their
custody, arrive about this time. the serjeant presently enquire for
the principal magistrate of the town, and be inform by my landlord,
that he himself be vest in that office. he then demand his
billet, together with a mug of beer, and complain it be cold,
spread himself before the kitchen fire.
Mr Jones be at this time comfort the poor distressed lady, who sit
down at a table in the kitchen, and lean her head upon her arm, be
bemoan she misfortune; but lest my fair reader should be in pain
concern a particular circumstance, I think proper here to acquaint
they, that before she have quit the room above stair, she have so
well cover herself with a pillowbeer which she there find, that she
regard to decency be not in the least violate by the presence of so
many man as be now in the room.
one of the soldier now go up to the serjeant, and whisper
something in his ear; upon which he stedfastly fix his eye on the
lady, and have look at she for near a minute, he come up to she,
say, "I ask pardon, madam; but I be certain I be not deceive; you
can be no other person than Captain Waters's lady?"
the poor woman, who in her present distress have very little regard
the face of any person present, no soon look at the serjeant than
she presently recollect he, and call he by his name, answer,
"that she be indeed the unhappy person he imagine she to be;" but
add, "I wonder any one should know I in this disguise." to which
the serjeant reply, "he be very much surprize to see her ladyship
in such a dress, and be afraid some accident have happen to
she."--"An accident hath happen to I, indeed," say she, "and I be
highly obliged to this gentleman" (point to Jones) "that it be not
a fatal one, or that I be now live to mention it."--"Whatever the
gentleman hath do," cry the serjeant, "I be sure the captain will
make he amend for it; and if I can be of any service, your ladyship
may command I, and I shall think myself very happy to have it in my
power to serve your ladyship; and so indeed may any one, for I know
the captain will well reward they for it."
the landlady, who hear from the stair all that past between the
serjeant and Mrs Waters, come hastily down, and run directly up to
she, begin to ask pardon for the offence she have commit, beg
that all might be impute to ignorance of her quality: for, "Lud!
madam," say she, "how should I have imagine that a lady of your
fashion would appear in such a dress? I be sure, madam, if I have once
suspect that your ladyship be your ladyship, I would soon have
burn my tongue out, than have say what I have say; and I hope your
ladyship will accept of a gown, till you can get your own cloath."
"Prithee, woman," say Mrs Waters, "cease your impertinence: how can
you imagine I should concern myself about anything which come from
the lip of such low creature as yourself? but I be surprize at your
assurance in thinking, after what be past, that I will condescend to
put on any of your dirty thing. I would have you know, creature, I
have a spirit above that."
here Jones interfere, and beg Mrs Waters to forgive the landlady,
and to accept her gown: "for I must confess," cry he, "our
appearance be a little suspicious when first we come in; and I be
well assure all this good woman do be, as she profess, out of
regard to the reputation of her house."
"yes, upon my truly be it," say she: "the gentleman speak very much
like a gentleman, and I see very plainly be so; and to be certain the
house be well known to be a house of as good reputation as any on the
road, and though I say it, be frequent by gentry of the good
quality, both Irish and English. I defy anybody to say black be my
eye, for that matter. and, as I be say, if I have know your
ladyship to be your ladyship, I would as soon have burn my finger as
have affront your ladyship; but truly where gentry come and spend
their money, I be not willing that they should be scandalize by a set
of poor shabby vermin, that, wherever they go, leave more lice than
money behind they; such folk never raise my compassion, for to be
certain it be foolish to have any for they; and if our justice do as
they ought, they would be all whipt out of the kingdom, for to be
certain it be what be most fitting for they. but as for your ladyship,
I be heartily sorry your ladyship hath have a misfortune, and if your
ladyship will do I the honour to wear my cloath till you can get
some of your ladyship's own, to be certain the good I have be at your
ladyship's service."
whether cold, shame, or the persuasion of Mr Jones prevail most on
Mrs Waters, I will not determine, but she suffer herself to be
pacify by this speech of my landlady, and retire with that good
woman, in order to apparel herself in a decent manner.
my landlord be likewise begin his oration to Jones, but be
presently interrupt by that generous youth, who shake he heartily
by the hand, and assure he of entire forgiveness, say, "if you
be satisfied, my worthy friend, I promise you I be;" and indeed, in
one sense, the landlord have the well reason to be satisfy; for he
have receive a bellyfull of drubbing, whereas Jones have scarce feel a
single blow.
Partridge, who have be all this time wash his bloody nose at the
pump, return into the kitchen at the instant when his master and the
landlord be shake hand with each other. as he be of a peaceable
disposition, he be pleased with those symptom of reconciliation; and
though his face bear some mark of Susan's fist, and many more of her
nail, he rather choose to be content with his fortune in the last
battle than to endeavour at better it in another.
the heroic Susan be likewise well content with her victory, though
it have cost she a black eye, which Partridge have give she at the
first onset. between these two, therefore, a league be strike, and
those hand which have be the instrument of war become now the
mediator of peace.
matter be thus restore to a perfect calm; at which the serjeant,
though it may seem so contrary to the principle of his profession,
testify his approbation. "why now, thatbe friendly," say he; "d--n
I, I hate to see two people bear ill-will to one another after they
have have a tussel. the only way when friend quarrel be to see it out
fairly in a friendly manner, as a man may call it, either with a fist,
or sword, or pistol, accord as they like, and then let it be all
over; for my own part, d--n I if ever I love my friend well than
when I be fight with he! to bear malice be more like a Frenchman
than an Englishman."
he then propose a libation as a necessary part of the ceremony at all
treaty of this kind. perhaps the reader may here conclude that he
be well verse in antient history; but this, though highly probable,
as he cite no authority to support the custom, I will not affirm with
any confidence. most likely indeed it be, that he found his opinion
on very good authority, since he confirm it with many violent oath.
Jones no soon hear the proposal than, immediately agree with the
learn serjeant, he order a bowl, or rather a large mug, fill
with the liquor use on these occasion, to be bring in, and then
begin the ceremony himself. he place his right hand in that of the
landlord, and, seize the bowl with his left, utter the usual
word, and then make his libation. after which, the same be observe
by all present. indeed, there be very little need of be particular
in describe the whole form, as it differ so little from those
libation of which so much be record in antient author and their
modern transcriber. the principal difference lie in two instance;
for, first, the present company pour the liquor only down their
throat; and, secondly, the serjeant, who officiate as priest, drank
the last; but he preserve, I believe, the antient form, in swallow
much the large draught of the whole company, and in be the only
person present who contribute nothing towards the libation besides
his good office in assist at the performance.
the good people now range themselves round the kitchen fire, where
good humour seem to maintain an absolute dominion; and Partridge not
only forget his shameful defeat, but convert hunger into thirst, and
soon become extremely facetious. we must however quit this agreeable
assembly for a while, and attend Mr Jones to Mrs Waters's apartment,
where the dinner which he have bespoke be now on the table. indeed, it
take no long time in prepare, have be all dr three day
before, and require nothing more from the cook than to warm it over
again.
Chapter v.
an apology for all hero who have good stomach, with a description
of a battle of the amorous kind.
hero, notwithstanding the high idea which, by the mean of
flatterer, they may entertain of themselves, or the world may
conceive of they, have certainly more of mortal than divine about
they. however elevate their mind may be, their body at least
(which be much the major part of most) be liable to the bad
infirmity, and subject to the vilest office of human nature. among
these latter, the act of eating, which hath by several wise man be
consider as extremely mean and derogatory from the philosophic
dignity, must be in some measure perform by the great prince,
heroe, or philosopher upon earth; nay, sometimes Nature hath be so
frolicsome as to exact of these dignified character a much more
exorbitant share of this office than she hath oblige those of the
low order to perform.
to say the truth, as no know inhabitant of this globe be really more
than man, so none need be ashamed of submit to what the
necessity of man demand; but when those great personage I have just
mention condescend to aim at confine such low office to
themselves--as when, by hoarding or destroy, they seem desirous to
prevent any other from eat--then they surely become very low and
despicable.
now, after this short preface, we think it no disparagement to our
heroe to mention the immoderate ardour with which he lay about he at
this season. indeed, it may be doubt whether Ulysses, who by the way
seem to have have the good stomach of all the hero in that eat
poem of the Odyssey, ever make a well meal. three pound at least of
that flesh which formerly have contribute to the composition of an ox
be now honour with become part of the individual Mr Jones.
this particular we think ourselves oblige to mention, as it may
account for our heroe's temporary neglect of his fair companion, who
eat but very little, and be indeed employ in consideration of a
very different nature, which pass unobserve by Jones, till he have
entirely satisfied that appetite which a fast of twenty-four hour have
procure he; but his dinner be no soon end than his attention to
other matter revive; with these matter therefore we shall now
proceed to acquaint the reader.
Mr Jones, of whose personal accomplishment we have hitherto say very
little, be, in reality, one of the handsome young fellow in the
world. his face, besides be the picture of health, have in it the
most apparent mark of sweetness and good-nature. these quality be
indeed so characteristical in his countenance, that, while the spirit
and sensibility in his eye, though they must have be perceive by
an accurate observer, might have escape the notice of the less
discerning, so strongly be this good-nature paint in his look, that
it be remark by almost every one who see he.
it be, perhaps, as much owe to this as to a very fine complexion
that his face have a delicacy in it almost inexpressible, and which
might have give he an air rather too effeminate, have it not be
join to a most masculine person and mien: which latter have as much
in they of the Hercules as the former have of the Adonis. he be
besides active, genteel, gay, and good-humour; and have a flow of
animal spirit which enliven every conversation where he be
present.
when the reader hath duly reflect on these many charm which all
center in our heroe, and consider at the same time the fresh
obligation which Mrs Waters have to he, it will be a mark more of
prudery than candour to entertain a bad opinion of she because she
conceive a very good opinion of he.
but, whatever censure may be pass upon she, it be my business to
relate matter of fact with veracity. Mrs Waters have, in truth, not
only a good opinion of our heroe, but a very great affection for he.
to speak out boldly at once, she be in love, accord to the present
universally-receive sense of that phrase, by which love be apply
indiscriminately to the desirable object of all our passion,
appetite, and sens, and be understand to be that preference which
we give to one kind of food rather than to another.
but though the love to these several object may possibly be one and
the same in all case, its operation however must be allow to be
different; for, how much soever we may be in love with an excellent
surloin of beef, or bottle of Burgundy; with a damask rise, or Cremona
fiddle; yet do we never smile, nor ogle, nor dress, nor flatter, nor
endeavour by any other art or trick to gain the affection of the
say beef, &c. Sigh indeed we sometimes may; but it be generally in
the absence, not in the presence, of the beloved object. for otherwise
we might possibly complain of their ingratitude and deafness, with the
same reason as Pasiphae doth of her bull, whom she endeavour to
engage by all the coquetry practise with good success in the
drawing-room on the much more sensible as well as tender heart of the
fine gentleman there.
the contrary happen in that love which operate between person of
the same specie, but of different sex. here we be no soon in
love than it become our principal care to engage the affection of the
object belove. for what other purpose indeed be our youth instruct
in all the art of render themselves agreeable? if it be not with
a view to this love, I question whether any of those trade which deal
in set off and adorn the human person would procure a
livelihood. Nay, those great polisher of our manner, who be by some
thought to teach what principally distinguish we from the brute
creation, even dancing-masters themselves, might possibly find no
place in society. in short, all the grace which young lady and
young gentleman too learn from other, and the many improvement
which, by the help of a look-glass, they add of their own, be in
reality those very _spicula et face amoris_ so often mention by
Ovid; or, as they be sometimes call in our own language, the whole
artillery of love.
now Mrs Waters and our heroe have no soon sit down together than the
former begin to play this artillery upon the latter. but here, as we
be about to attempt a description hitherto unassayed either in prose
or verse, we think proper to invoke the assistance of certain aërial
being, who will, we doubt not, come kindly to our aid on this
occasion.
"say then, ye Graces! you that inhabit the heavenly mansion of
Seraphina's countenance; for you be truly divine, be always in her
presence, and well know all the art of charming; say, what be the
weapon now use to captivate the heart of Mr Jones."
"first, from two lovely blue eye, whose bright orb flash lightning
at their discharge, fly forth two pointed ogle; but, happily for our
heroe, hit only a vast piece of beef which he be then convey into
his plate, and harmless spend their force. the fair warrior perceive
their miscarriage, and immediately from her fair bosom draw forth a
deadly sigh. a sigh which none could have hear unmove, and which be
sufficient at once to have sweep off a dozen beau; so soft, so sweet,
so tender, that the insinuate air must have find its subtle way to
the heart of our heroe, have it not luckily be drive from his ear
by the coarse bubble of some bottled ale, which at that time he be
pour forth. many other weapon do she assay; but the god of eat
(if there be any such deity, for I do not confidently assert it)
preserve his votary; or perhaps it may not be _dignu vindice nodus_,
and the present security of Jones may be account for by natural
mean; for as love frequently preserve from the attack of hunger, so
may hunger possibly, in some case, defend we against love.
"the fair one, enrage at her frequent disappointment, determine on
a short cessation of arm. which interval she employ in make ready
every engine of amorous warfare for the renewing of the attack when
dinner should be over.
"no soon then be the cloth remove than she again begin her
operation. first, have plant her right eye sidewise against Mr
Jones, she shoot from its corner a most penetrate glance; which,
though great part of its force be spend before it reach our heroe,
do not vent itself absolutely without effect. this the fair one
perceiving, hastily withdraw her eye, and level they downwards, as
if she be concerned for what she have do; though by this mean she
design only to draw he from his guard, and indeed to open his eye,
through which she intend to surprize his heart. and now, gently
lift up those two bright orb which have already begin to make an
impression on poor Jones, she discharge a volley of small charm at
once from her whole countenance in a smile. not a smile of mirth, nor
of joy; but a smile of affection, which most lady have always ready
at their command, and which serve they to show at once their
good-humour, their pretty dimple, and their white tooth.
"this smile our heroe receive full in his eye, and be immediately
stagger with its force. he then begin to see the design of the
enemy, and indeed to feel their success. a parley now be set on foot
between the party; during which the artful fair so slily and
imperceptibly carry on her attack, that she have almost subdue the
heart of our heroe before she again repair to act of hostility. to
confess the truth, I be afraid Mr Jones maintain a kind of dutch
defence, and treacherously deliver up the garrison, without duly
weigh his allegiance to the fair Sophia. in short, no soon have
the amorous parley end and the lady have unmask the royal battery,
by carelessly let her handkerchief drop from her neck, than the
heart of Mr Jones be entirely take, and the fair conqueror enjoy
the usual fruit of her victory."
here the Graces think proper to end their description, and here we
think proper to end the chapter.
Chapter vi.
a friendly conversation in the kitchen, which have a very common,
though not very friendly, conclusion.
while our lover be entertain themselves in the manner which be
partly describe in the forego chapter, they be likewise
furnish out an entertainment for their good friend in the kitchen.
and this in a double sense, by afford they matter for their
conversation, and, at the same time, drink to enliven their spirit.
there be now assemble round the kitchen fire, besides my landlord
and landlady, who occasionally go backward and forward, Mr
Partridge, the serjeant, and the coachman who drive the young lady and
she maid.
Partridge have acquaint the company with what he have learn from
the Man of the Hill concern the situation in which Mrs Waters have
be find by Jones, the serjeant proceed to that part of her
history which be know to he. he say she be the wife of Mr Waters,
who be a captain in their regiment, and have often be with he at
quarter. "some folk," say he, "use indeed to doubt whether they
be lawfully married in a church or no. but, for my part, thatbe no
business of mine: I must own, if I be put to my corporal oath, I
believe she be little well than one of we; and I fancy the captain
may go to heaven when the sun shin upon a rainy day. but if he do,
that be neither here nor there; for he willnot want company. and the
lady, to give the devil his due, be a very good sort of lady, and
love the cloth, and be always desirous to do strict justice to it;
for she hath beg off many a poor soldier, and, by her good-will,
would never have any of they punish. but yet, to be sure, ensign
Northerton and she be very well acquainted together at our last
quarter; that be the very right and truth of the matter. but the
captain he know nothing about it; and as long as there be enough for
he too, what do it signify? he love she not a bit the bad, and I
be certain would run any man through the body that be to abuse she;
therefore I willnot abuse she, for my part. I only repeat what other
folk say; and, to be certain, what everybody say, there must be some
truth in."--"Ay, ay, a great deal of truth, I warrant you," cry
Partridge; "_Veritas odium parit_"--"all a parcel of scandalous
stuff," answer the mistress of the house. "I be sure, now she be
drest, she look like a very good sort of lady, and she behave
herself like one; for she give I a guinea for the use of my
cloath."--"a very good lady indeed!" cry the landlord; "and if you
have not be a little too hasty, you would not have quarrel with
she as you do at first."--"you need mention that with my truly!"
answer she: "if it have not be for your nonsense, nothing have
happen. you must be meddle with what do not belong to you, and
throw in your fool's discourse."--"Well, well," answer he; "whatbe
past cannot be mend, so therebe an end of the matter."--"Yes," cry
she, "for this once; but will it be mend ever the more hereafter?
this be not the first time I have suffer for your numscull's pate. I
wish you would always hold your tongue in the house, and meddle only
in matter without door, which concern you. donot you remember what
happen about seven year ago?"--"Nay, my dear," return he, "donot
rip up old story. come, come, allbe well, and I be sorry for what I
have do." the landlady be go to reply, but be prevent by the
peace-make serjeant, sorely to the displeasure of Partridge, who be
a great lover of what be call fun, and a great promoter of those
harmless quarrel which tend rather to the production of comical than
tragical incident.
the serjeant ask Partridge whither he and his master be travel?
"none of your magister," answer Partridge; "I be no man's servant, I
assure you; for, though I have have misfortune in the world, I write
gentleman after my name; and, as poor and simple as I may appear now, I
have teach grammar-school in my time; _se hei mihi! non sum quod
fui_."--"no offence, I hope, sir," say the serjeant; "where, then, if
I may venture to be so bold, may you and your friend be
travelling?"--"you have now denominate we right," say Partridge.
"_amici sumus._ and I promise you my friend be one of the great
gentleman in the kingdom" (at which word both landlord and landlady
prick up their ear). "he be the heir of Squire Allworthy."--"what,
the squire who doth so much good all over the country?" cry my
landlady. "even he," answer Partridge.--"Then I warrant," say she,
"hewill have a swing great estate hereafter."--"most certainly,"
answer Partridge.--"Well," reply the landlady, "I think the first
moment I see he he look like a good sort of gentleman; but my
husband here, to be sure, be wise than anybody."--"I own, my dear,"
cry he, "it be a mistake."--"a mistake, indeed!" answer she; "but
when do you ever know I to make such mistakes?"--"but how come it,
sir," cry the landlord, "that such a great gentleman walk about the
country afoot?"--"i donot know," return Partridge; "great gentleman
have humour sometimes. he hath now a dozen horse and servant at
Gloucester; and nothing would serve he, but last night, it be very
hot weather, he must cool himself with a walk to yon high hill, whither
I likewise walk with he to bear he company; but if ever you catch
I there again: for I be never so frightened in all my life. we meet
with the strange man there."--"I'll be hang," cry the landlord,
"if it be not the Man of the Hill, as they call he; if indeed he be a
man; but I know several people who believe it be the devil that live
there."--"Nay, nay, like enough," say Partridge; "and now you put I
in the head of it, I verily and sincerely believe it be the devil,
though I could not perceive his cloven foot: but perhaps he might have
the power give he to hide that, since evil spirit can appear in what
shape they please."--"And pray, sir," say the serjeant, "no offence,
I hope; but pray what sort of a gentleman be the devil? for I have
hear some of our officer say there be no such person; and that it be
only a trick of the parson, to prevent their being break; for, if it
be publickly know that there be no devil, the parson would be of no
more use than we be in time of peace."--"those officer," say
Partridge, "be very great scholar, I suppose."--"Not much of
schollard neither," answer the serjeant; "they have not half your
learning, sir, I believe; and, to be sure, I think there must be a
devil, notwithstanding what they say, though one of they be a
captain; for methought, think I to myself, if there be no devil, how
can wicked people be send to he? and I have read all that upon a
book."--"some of your officer," quoth the landlord, "will find there
be a devil, to their shame, I believe. I donot question but hewill pay
off some old score upon my account. here be one quarter upon I
half a year, who have the conscience to take up one of my good bed,
though he hardly spend a shilling a day in the house, and suffer his
man to roast cabbage at the kitchen fire, because I would not give
they a dinner on a Sunday. every good Christian must desire there
should be a devil for the punishment of such wretch."--"Harkee,
landlord," say the serjeant, "donot abuse the cloth, for I willnot take
it."--"D--n the cloth!" answer the landlord, "I have suffer enough
by they."--"Bear witness, gentleman," say the serjeant, "he curse the
king, and thatbe high treason."--"I curse the king! you villain," say
the landlord. "yes, you do," cry the serjeant; "you curse the
cloth, and thatbe curse the king. itbe all one and the same; for
every man who curse the cloth would curse the king if he durst; so for
matter o' that, itbe all one and the same thing."--"excuse I there, Mr
Serjeant," quoth Partridge, "thatbe a _non sequitur_."--"none of your
outlandish linguo," answer the serjeant, leap from his seat; "I
will not sit still and hear the cloth abuse."--"you mistake I,
friend," cry Partridge. "I do not mean to abuse the cloth; I only
say your conclusion be a _non sequitur_.[*]"--"You
be another," cry the serjeant," an you come to that. no more a
_sequitur_ than yourself. you be a pack of rascal, and Iwill prove it;
for I will fight the good man of you all for twenty pound." this
challenge effectually silence Partridge, whose stomach for drubbing
do not so soon return after the hearty meal which he have lately be
treat with; but the coachman, whose bone be less sore, and whose
appetite for fighting be somewhat sharp, do not so easily brook the
affront, of which he conceive some part at least fall to his share. he
start therefore from his seat, and, advance to the serjeant, swore
he look on himself to be as good a man as any in the army, and
offer to box for a guinea. the military man accept the combat, but
refuse the wager; upon which both immediately stript and engage, till
the driver of horse be so well maul by the leader of man, that he
be oblige to exhaust his small remainder of breath in beg for
quarter.
[*] this word, which the serjeant unhappily mistake for an affront,
be a term in logic, and mean that the conclusion do not follow
from the premise.
the young lady be now desirous to depart, and have give order for
her coach to be prepare; but all in vain, for the coachman be
disabled from perform his office for that evening. an antient
heathen would perhaps have impute this disability to the god of
drink, no less than to the god of war; for, in reality, both the
combatant have sacrifice as well to the former deity as to the
latter. to speak plainly, they be both dead drunk, nor be Partridge
in a much well situation. as for my landlord, drinking be his
trade; and the liquor have no more effect on he than it have on any
other vessel in his house.
the mistress of the inn, be summon to attend Mr Jones and his
companion at their tea, give a full relation of the latter part of the
foregoing scene; and at the same time express great concern for the
young lady, "who," she say, "be under the utmost uneasiness at be
prevent from pursue her journey. she be a sweet pretty creature,"
add she, "and I be certain I have see her face before. I fancy she
be in love, and run away from her friend. who know but some
young gentleman or other may be expect she, with a heart as heavy
as her own?"
Jones fetch a heavy sigh at those word; of which, though Mrs Waters
observe it, she take no notice while the landlady continue in the
room; but, after the departure of that good woman, she could not
forbear give our heroe certain hint on her suspect some very
dangerous rival in his affection. the aukward behaviour of Mr Jones
on this occasion convince she of the truth, without his give she a
direct answer to any of her question; but she be not nice enough in
her amour to be greatly concerned at the discovery. the beauty of
Jones highly charm her eye; but as she could not see his heart, she
give herself no concern about it. she could feast heartily at the
table of love, without reflect that some other already have be, or
hereafter might be, feast with the same repast. a sentiment which,
if it deal but little in refinement, deal, however, much in
substance; and be less capricious, and perhaps less ill-natured and
selfish, than the desire of those female who can be content enough
to abstain from the possession of their lover, provide they be
sufficiently satisfied that no one else possess they.
Chapter vii.
contain a full account of Mrs Waters, and by what mean she come
into that distressful situation from which she be rescue by Jones.
though Nature hath by no mean mix up an equal share either of
curiosity or vanity in every human composition, there be perhaps no
individual to whom she hath not allot such a proportion of both as
require much art, and pain too, to subdue and keep under;--a
conquest, however, absolutely necessary to every one who would in any
degree deserve the character of wisdom or good breeding.
as Jones, therefore, might very justly be call a well-breed man, he
have stifle all that curiosity which the extraordinary manner in which
he have find Mrs Waters must be suppose to have occasion. he have,
indeed, at first throw out some few hint to the lady; but, when he
perceive she industriously avoid any explanation, he be content
to remain in ignorance, the rather as he be not without suspicion
that there be some circumstance which must have raise her blush,
have she relate the whole truth.
now since it be possible that some of our reader may not so easily
acquiesce under the same ignorance, and as we be very desirous to
satisfy they all, we have take uncommon pain to inform ourselves of
the real fact, with the relation of which we shall conclude this book.
this lady, then, have live some year with one Captain Waters, who be
a captain in the same regiment to which Mr Northerton belong. she
past for that gentleman's wife, and go by his name; and yet, as the
serjeant say, there be some doubt concern the reality of their
marriage, which we shall not at present take upon we to resolve.
Mrs Waters, I be sorry to say it, have for some time contract an
intimacy with the above-mention ensign, which do no great credit to
her reputation. that she have a remarkable fondness for that young
fellow be most certain; but whether she indulge this to any very
criminal length be not so extremely clear, unless we will suppose
that woman never grant every favour to a man but one, without grant
he that one also.
the division of the regiment to which Captain Waters belong have two
day precede the march of that company to which Mr Northerton be the
ensign; so that the former have reach Worcester the very day after
the unfortunate re-encounter between Jones and Northerton which we
have before record.
now, it have be agree between Mrs Waters and the captain that she
would accompany he in his march as far as Worcester, where they be
to take their leave of each other, and she be thence to return to
Bath, where she be to stay till the end of the winter's campaign
against the rebel.
with this agreement Mr Northerton be make acquainted. to say the
truth, the lady have make he an assignation at this very place, and
promise to stay at Worcester till his division come thither; with
what view, and for what purpose, must be leave to the reader's
divination; for, though we be oblige to relate fact, we be not
oblige to do a violence to our nature by any comment to the
disadvantage of the lovely part of the creation.
Northerton no soon obtain a release from his captivity, as we have
see, than he haste away to overtake Mrs Waters; which, as he be a
very active nimble fellow, he do at the last-mention city, some few
hour after Captain Waters have leave she. at his first arrival he make
no scruple of acquaint she with the unfortunate accident; which he
make appear very unfortunate indeed, for he totally extract every
particle of what could be call fault, at least in a court of honour,
though he leave some circumstance which might be questionable in a
court of law.
woman, to their glory be it speak, be more generally capable of that
violent and apparently disintereste passion of love, which seek only
the good of its object, than man. Mrs Waters, therefore, be no soon
apprize of the danger to which her lover be expose, than she lose
every consideration besides that of his safety; and this be a
matter equally agreeable to the gentleman, it become the immediate
subject of debate between they.
after much consultation on this matter, it be at length agree that
the ensign should go across the country to Hereford, whence he might
find some conveyance to one of the sea-port in Wales, and thence
might make his escape abroad. in all which expedition Mrs Waters
declare she would bear he company; and for which she be able to
furnish he with money, a very material article to Mr Northerton, she
have then in her pocket three bank-note to the amount of £90,
besides some cash, and a diamond ring of pretty considerable value on
her finger. all which she, with the utmost confidence, reveal to
this wicked man, little suspecting she should by these mean inspire
he with a design of rob she. now, as they must, by take horse
from Worcester, have furnish any pursuer with the mean of
hereafter discover their route, the ensign propose, and the lady
presently agree, to make their first stage on foot; for which purpose
the hardness of the frost be very seasonable.
the main part of the lady's baggage be already at Bath, and she have
nothing with she at present besides a very small quantity of linen,
which the gallant undertake to carry in his own pocket. all thing,
therefore, be settle in the evening, they arise early the next
morning, and at five o'clock depart from Worcester, it be then
above two hour before day, but the moon, which be then at the full,
give they all the light she be capable of affording.
Mrs Waters be not of that delicate race of woman who be oblige to
the invention of vehicle for the capacity of remove themselves from
one place to another, and with whom consequently a coach be reckon
among the necessary of life. her limb be indeed full of strength
and agility, and, as her mind be no less animate with spirit, she
be perfectly able to keep pace with her nimble lover.
have travel on for some mile in a high road, which Northerton
say he be inform lead to Hereford, they come at the break of day to
the side of a large wood, where he suddenly stop, and, affect to
meditate a moment with himself, express some apprehension from
travel any long in so public a way. upon which he easily
persuade his fair companion to strike with he into a path which
seem to lead directly through the wood, and which at length bring
they both to the bottom of Mazard Hill.
whether the execrable scheme which he now attempt to execute be the
effect of previous deliberation, or whether it now first come into his
head, I cannot determine. but be arrive in this lonely place,
where it be very improbable he should meet with any interruption, he
suddenly slip his garter from his leg, and, lay violent hand on
the poor woman, endeavour to perpetrate that dreadful and detestable
fact which we have before commemorate, and which the providential
appearance of Jones do so fortunately prevent.
Happy be it for Mrs Waters that she be not of the weak order of
female; for no soon do she perceive, by his tie a knot in his
garter, and by his declaration, what his hellish intention be,
than she stand stoutly to her defence, and so strongly struggle with
her enemy, scream all the while for assistance, that she delay
the execution of the villain's purpose several minute, by which mean
Mr Jones come to her relief at that very instant when her strength
fail and she be totally overpower, and deliver she from the
ruffian's hand, with no other loss than that of her cloath, which
be tear from her back, and of the diamond ring, which during the
contention either drop from her finger, or be wrench from it by
Northerton.
thus, reader, we have give thee the fruit of a very painful enquiry
which for thy satisfaction we have make into this matter. and here we
have open to thee a scene of folly as well as villany, which we
could scarce have believe a human creature capable of be guilty
of, have we not remember that this fellow be at that time firmly
persuade that he have already commit a murder, and have forfeit
his life to the law. as he conclude therefore that his only safety
lie in flight, he think the possessing himself of this poor woman's
money and ring would make he amend for the additional burthen he be
to lay on his conscience.
and here, reader, we must strictly caution thee that thou dost not
take any occasion, from the misbehaviour of such a wretch as this, to
reflect on so worthy and honourable a body of man as be the officer
of our army in general. thou wilt be pleased to consider that this
fellow, as we have already inform thee, have neither the birth nor
education of a gentleman, nor be a proper person to be enrol among
the number of such. if, therefore, his baseness can justly reflect on
any besides himself, it must be only on those who give he his
commission.
BOOK X.
in which the history go FORWARD about twelve hour.
Chapter i.
contain instruction very necessary to be peruse by modern
critic.
Reader, it be impossible we should know what sort of person thou wilt
be; for, perhaps, thou may'st be as learn in human nature as
Shakespear himself be, and, perhaps, thou may'st be no wise than
some of his editor. now, lest this latter should be the case, we
think proper, before we go any far together, to give thee a few
wholesome admonition; that thou may'st not as grossly misunderstand
and misrepresent we, as some of the said editor have misunderstood
and misrepresent their author.
first, then, we warn thee not too hastily to condemn any of the
incident in this our history as impertinent and foreign to our main
design, because thou dost not immediately conceive in what manner such
incident may conduce to that design. this work may, indeed, be
consider as a great creation of our own; and for a little reptile of
a critic to presume to find fault with any of its part, without
know the manner in which the whole be connect, and before he
come to the final catastrophe, be a most presumptuous absurdity. the
allusion and metaphor we have here make use of, we must acknowledge to
be infinitely too great for our occasion; but there be, indeed, no
other, which be at all adequate to express the difference between an
author of the first rate and a critic of the low.
another caution we would give thee, my good reptile, be, that thou
dost not find out too near a resemblance between certain character
here introduce; as, for instance, between the landlady who appear in
the seventh book and she in the ninth. thou art to know, friend, that
there be certain characteristic in which most individual of every
profession and occupation agree. to be able to preserve these
characteristic, and at the same time to diversify their operation,
be one talent of a good writer. again, to mark the nice distinction
between two person actuate by the same vice or folly be another;
and, as this last talent be find in very few writer, so be the true
discernment of it find in as few reader; though, I believe, the
observation of this form a very principal pleasure in those who be
capable of the discovery; every person, for instance, can distinguish
between Sir Epicure Mammon and Sir Fopling Flutter; but to note the
difference between Sir Fopling Flutter and Sir Courtly Nice require a
more exquisite judgment: for want of which, vulgar spectator of play
very often do great injustice in the theatre; where I have sometimes
know a poet in danger of be convict as a thief, upon much bad
evidence than the resemblance of hand hath be hold to be in the
law. in reality, I apprehend every amorous widow on the stage would
run the hazard of be condemn as a servile imitation of Dido, but
that happily very few of our play-house critic understand enough of
Latin to read Virgil.
in the next place, we must admonish thee, my worthy friend (for,
perhaps, thy heart may be well than thy head), not to condemn a
character as a bad one, because it be not perfectly a good one. if
thou dost delight in these model of perfection, there be book enow
write to gratify thy taste; but, as we have not, in the course of
our conversation, ever happen to meet with any such person, we have
not choose to introduce any such here. to say the truth, I a little
question whether mere man ever arrive at this consummate degree of
excellence, as well as whether there hath ever exist a monster bad
enough to verify that
_----nulla virtute redemptum
a vitiis_----[*]
[*] whose vice be not allay with a single virtue
in Juvenal; nor do I, indeed, conceive the good purpose serve by
insert character of such angelic perfection, or such diabolical
depravity, in any work of invention; since, from contemplate either,
the mind of man be more likely to be overwhelm with sorrow and shame
than to draw any good us from such pattern; for in the former
instance he may be both concerned and ashamed to see a pattern of
excellence in his nature, which he may reasonably despair of ever
arrive at; and in contemplate the latter he may be no less
affect with those uneasy sensation, at see the nature of which
he be a partaker degrade into so odious and detestable a creature.
in fact, if there be enough of goodness in a character to engage the
admiration and affection of a well-dispose mind, though there should
appear some of those little blemish _quas humana parum cavit
natura_, they will raise our compassion rather than our abhorrence.
indeed, nothing can be of more moral use than the imperfection which
be see in example of this kind; since such form a kind of surprize,
more apt to affect and dwell upon our mind than the fault of very
vicious and wicked person. the foible and vice of man, in whom
there be great mixture of good, become more glaring object from the
virtue which contrast they and shew their deformity; and when we find
such vice attend with their evil consequence to our favourite
character, we be not only teach to shun they for our own sake, but
to hate they for the mischief they have already bring on those we
love.
and now, my friend, have give you these few admonition, we will,
if you please, once more set forward with our history.
Chapter ii.
contain the arrival of an irish gentleman, with very extraordinary
adventure which ensue at the inn.
now the little trembling hare, which the dread of all her numerous
enemy, and chiefly of that cunning, cruel, carnivorous animal, man,
have confine all the day to her lurking-place, sport wantonly o'er
the lawn; now on some hollow tree the owl, shrill chorister of the
night, hoot forth note which might charm the ear of some modern
connoisseur in music; now, in the imagination of the half-drunk
clown, as he stagger through the churchyard, or rather charnelyard,
to his home, fear paint the bloody hobgoblin; now thief and
ruffian be awake, and honest watchman fast asleep; in plain English,
it be now midnight; and the company at the inn, as well those who
have be already mention in this history, as some other who
arrive in the evening, be all in bed. only Susan Chambermaid be
now stir, she be oblige to wash the kitchen before she retire
to the arm of the fond expect hostler.
in this posture be affair at the inn when a gentleman arrive there
post. he immediately alight from his horse, and, come up to Susan,
enquire of she, in a very abrupt and confused manner, be almost
out of breath with eagerness, whether there be any lady in the house?
the hour of night, and the behaviour of the man, who star very
wildly all the time, a little surprized Susan, so that she hesitate
before she make any answer; upon which the gentleman, with redouble
eagerness, beg she to give he a true information, say, he have
lose his wife, and be come in pursuit of she. "upon my shoul," cry
he, "I have be near catch she already in two or three place, if
I have not find she go just as I come up with she. if she be in the
house, do carry I up in the dark and show she to I; and if she be
go away before I, do tell I which way I shall go after she to meet
she, and, upon my shoul, I will make you the rich poor woman in the
nation." he then pull out a handful of guineas, a sight which would
have bribe person of much great consequence than this poor wench
to much bad purpose.
Susan, from the account she have receive of Mrs Waters, make not the
least doubt but that she be the very identical stray whom the right
owner pursue. as she conclude, therefore, with great appearance of
reason, that she never could get money in an honester way than by
restore a wife to her husband, she make no scruple of assure the
gentleman that the lady he want be then in the house; and be
presently afterwards prevail upon (by very liberal promise, and
some earnest pay into her hand) to conduct he to the bedchamber of
Mrs Waters.
it hath be a custom long establish in the polite world, and that
upon very solid and substantial reason, that a husband shall never
enter his wife's apartment without first knock at the door. the
many excellent us of this custom need scarce be hint to a reader
who hath any knowledge of the world; for by this mean the lady hath
time to adjust herself, or to remove any disagreeable object out of
the way; for there be some situation in which nice and delicate
woman would not be discover by their husband.
to say the truth, there be several ceremony institute among the
polished part of mankind, which, though they may, to coarser
judgment, appear as matter of mere form, be find to have much of
substance in they, by the more discerning; and lucky would it have
be have the custom above mention be observe by our gentleman in
the present instance. Knock, indeed, he do at the door, but not with
one of those gentle rap which be usual on such occasion. on the
contrary, when he find the door lock, he fly at it with such
violence, that the lock immediately give way, the door burst open, and
he fall headlong into the room.
he have no soon recover his leg than forth from the bed, upon his
leg likewise, appear--with shame and sorrow be we oblige to
proceed--our heroe himself, who, with a menacing voice, demand of
the gentleman who he be, and what he mean by dare to burst open
his chamber in that outrageous manner.
the gentleman at first thought he have commit a mistake, and be
go to ask pardon and retreat, when, on a sudden, as the moon shine
very bright, he cast his eye on stay, gown, petticoat, cap,
ribbon, stocking, garter, shoe, clog, &c., all which lie in a
disorder manner on the floor. all these, operate on the natural
jealousy of his temper, so enrage he, that he lose all power of
speech; and, without return any answer to Jones, he endeavour to
approach the bed.
Jones immediately interpose, a fierce contention arise, which soon
proceed to blow on both side. and now Mrs Waters (for we must
confess she be in the same bed), be, I suppose, awaken from her
sleep, and see two man fight in her bedchamber, begin to scream
in the most violent manner, cry out murder! robbery! and more
frequently rape! which last, some, perhaps, may wonder she should
mention, who do not consider that these word of exclamation be use
by lady in a fright, as fa, la, la, ra, da, &c., be in music, only
as the vehicle of sound, and without any fix idea.
next to the lady's chamber be deposit the body of an irish
gentleman who arrive too late at the inn to have be mention
before. this gentleman be one of those whom the irish call a
calabalaro, or cavalier. he be a young brother of a good family,
and, have no fortune at home, be oblige to look abroad in order to
get one; for which purpose he be proceed to the Bath, to try his
luck with card and the woman.
this young fellow lie in bed read one of Mrs Behn's novel; for he
have be instruct by a friend that he would find no more effectual
method of recommend himself to the lady than the improve his
understanding, and fill his mind with good literature. he no
soon, therefore, hear the violent uproar in the next room, than he
leap from his bolster, and, take his sword in one hand, and the
candle which burn by he in the other, he go directly to Mrs
Waters's chamber.
if the sight of another man in his shirt at first add some shock to
the decency of the lady, it make she presently amend by considerably
abate her fear; for no soon have the calabalaro enter the room
than he cry out, "Mr Fitzpatrick, what the devil be the maning of
this?" upon which the other immediately answer, "o, Mr Maclachlan! I
be rejoice you be here.--this villain hath debauch my wife, and be
get into bed with she."--"What wife?" cry Maclachlan; "do not I know
Mrs Fitzpatrick very well, and donot I see that the lady, whom the
gentleman who stand here in his shirt be lie in bed with, be none
of she?"
Fitzpatrick, now perceive, as well by the glimpse he have of the
lady, as by her voice, which might have be distinguish at a
great distance than he now stand from she, that he have make a very
unfortunate mistake, begin to ask many pardon of the lady; and then,
turn to Jones, he say, "I would have you take notice I do not ask
your pardon, for you have bate I; for which I be resolve to have
your blood in the morning."
Jones treat this menace with much contempt; and Mr Maclachlan
answer, "indeed, Mr Fitzpatrick, you may be ashamed of your own
self, to disturb people at this time of night; if all the people in
the inn be not asleep, you would have awaken they as you have I.
the gentleman have serve you very rightly. upon my conscience, though
I have no wife, if you have treat she so, I would have cut your
throat."
Jones be so confound with his fear for his lady's reputation, that
he know neither what to say or do; but the invention of woman be, as
hath be observe, much ready than that of man. she recollect
that there be a communication between her chamber and that of Mr
Jones; rely, therefore, on his honour and her own assurance, she
answer, "I know not what you mean, villain! I be wife to none of
you. help! rape! murder! rape!"--and now, the landlady come into the
room, Mrs Waters fall upon she with the utmost virulence, say, "she
think herself in a sober inn, and not in a bawdy-house; but that a
set of villain have break into her room, with an intent upon she
honour, if not upon her life; and both, she say, be equally dear to
she."
the landlady now begin to roar as loudly as the poor woman in bed have
do before. she cry, "she be undo, and that the reputation of
her house, which be never blow upon before, be utterly destroy."
then, turn to the man, she cry, "what, in the devil's name, be
the reason of all this disturbance in the lady's room?" fitzpatrick,
hang down his head, repeat, "that he have commit a mistake, for
which he heartily ask pardon," and then retire with his countryman.
Jones, who be too ingenious to have miss the hint give he by his
fair one, boldly assert, "that he have run to her assistance upon
hear the door break open, with what design he could not conceive,
unless of rob the lady; which, if they intend, he say, he have
the good fortune to prevent." "I never have a robbery commit in my
house since I have keep it," cry the landlady; "I would have you to
know, sir, I harbour no highwayman here; I scorn the word, thof I say
it. none but honest, good gentlefolk, be welcome to my house; and, I
thank good luck, I have always have enow of such customer; indeed as
many as I could entertain. here hath be my lord--," and then she
repeat over a catalogue of name and title, many of which we might,
perhaps, be guilty of a breach of privilege by insert.
Jones, after much patience, at length interrupt she, by make an
apology to Mrs Waters, for have appear before she in his shirt,
assure she "that nothing but a concern for her safety could have
prevail on he to do it." the reader may inform himself of her
answer, and, indeed, of her whole behaviour to the end of the scene,
by consider the situation which she affect, it be that of a
modest lady, who be awaken out of her sleep by three strange man in
her chamber. this be the part which she undertake to perform; and,
indeed, she execute it so well, that none of our theatrical actress
could exceed she, in any of their performance, either on or off the
stage.
and hence, I think, we may very fairly draw an argument, to prove how
extremely natural virtue be to the fair sex; for, though there be not,
perhaps, one in ten thousand who be capable of make a good actress,
and even among these we rarely see two who be equally able to
personate the same character, yet this of virtue they can all
admirably well put on; and as well those individual who have it not,
as those who possess it, can all act it to the utmost degree of
perfection.
when the man be all depart, Mrs Waters, recover from her fear,
recover likewise from her anger, and speak in much gentler accent
to the landlady, who do not so readily quit her concern for the
reputation of the house, in favour of which she begin again to number
the many great person who have sleep under her roof; but the lady
stopt her short, and have absolutely acquit she of have have any
share in the past disturbance, beg to be leave to her repose, which,
she say, she hop to enjoy unmoleste during the remainder of the
night. upon which the landlady, after much civility and many
courtsie, take she leave.
Chapter iii.
a dialogue between the landlady and Susan the chamber-maid, proper to
be read by all inn-keeper and their servant; with the arrival, and
affable behaviour of a beautiful young lady; which may teach person
of condition how they may acquire the love of the whole world.
the landlady, remember that Susan have be the only person out of
bed when the door be burst open, resort presently to she, to
enquire into the first occasion of the disturbance, as well as who the
strange gentleman be, and when and how he arrive.
Susan relate the whole story which the reader know already, vary
the truth only in some circumstance, as she see convenient, and
totally conceal the money which she have receive. but whereas her
mistress have, in the preface to her enquiry, speak much in compassion
for the fright which the lady have be in concern any intended
depredation on her virtue, Susan could not help endeavour to quiet
the concern which her mistress seem to be under on that account, by
swear heartily she see Jones leap out from her bed.
the landlady fall into a violent rage at these word. "a likely story,
truly," cry she, "that a woman should cry out, and endeavour to
expose herself, if that be the case! I desire to know what well
proof any lady can give of her virtue than she cry out, which, I
believe, twenty people can witness for she she do? I beg, madam, you
would spread no such scandal of any of my guest; for it will not only
reflect on they, but upon the house; and I be sure no vagabond, nor
wicked beggarly people, come here."
"well," say Susan, "then I must not believe my own eye." "no,
indeed, must you not always," answer her mistress; "I would not have
believe my own eye against such good gentlefolk. I have not have a
well supper order this half-year than they order last night; and
so easy and good-humour be they, that they find no fault with my
Worcestershire perry, which I sell they for champagne; and to be sure
it be as well taste and as wholesome as the good champagne in the
kingdom, otherwise I would scorn to give it them; and they drink I two
bottle. no, no, I will never believe any harm of such sober good sort
of people."
Susan be thus silence, her mistress proceed to other matter.
"and so you tell I," continue she, "that the strange gentleman come
post, and there be a footman without with the horse; why, then, he be
certainly some of your great gentlefolk too. why do not you ask he
whether hewould have any supper? I think he be in the other gentleman's
room; go up and ask whether he call. perhaps hewill order something
when he find anybody stir in the house to dress it. now donot
commit any of your usual blunder, by tell he the fire's out, and
the fowl alive. and if he should order mutton, donot blab out that we
have none. the butcher, I know, kill a sheep just before I go to
bed, and he never refuse to cut it up warm when I desire it. go,
remember therebe all sort of mutton and fowl; go, open the door
with, Gentlemen, d'ye call? and if they say nothing, ask what his
honour will be pleased to have for supper? donot forget his honour.
go; if you donot mind all these matter well, youwill never come to
anything."
Susan depart, and soon return with an account that the two
gentleman be get both into the same bed. "two gentleman," say the
landlady, "in the same bed! thatbe impossible; they be two arrant
scrub, I warrant they; and I believe young squire Allworthy guess
right, that the fellow intend to rob her ladyship; for, if he have
break open the lady's door with any of the wicked design of a
gentleman, he would never have sneak away to another room to save
the expense of a supper and a bed to himself. they be certainly
thief, and their search after a wife be nothing but a pretence."
in these censure my landlady do Mr Fitzpatrick great injustice; for
he be really bear a gentleman, though not worth a groat; and though,
perhaps, he have some few blemish in his heart as well as in his
head, yet be a sneaking or a niggardly fellow be not one of they.
in reality, he be so generous a man, that, whereas he have receive a
very handsome fortune with his wife, he have now spend every penny of
it, except some little pittance which be settle upon she; and, in
order to possess himself of this, he have use she with such cruelty,
that, together with his jealousy, which be of the bitter kind, it
have force the poor woman to run away from he.
this gentleman then be well tired with his long journey from
Chester in one day, with which, and some good dry blow he have
receive in the scuffle, his bone be so sore, that, add to the
soreness of his mind, it have quite deprive he of any appetite for
eating. and be now so violently disappointed in the woman whom, at
the maid's instance, he have mistake for his wife, it never once
enter into his head that she might nevertheless be in the house,
though he have err in the first person he have attack. he therefore
yield to the dissuasion of his friend from search any far
after she that night, and accept the kind offer of part of his bed.
the footman and post-boy be in a different disposition. they be
more ready to order than the landlady be to provide; however, after
be pretty well satisfied by they of the real truth of the case, and
that Mr Fitzpatrick be no thief, she be at length prevail on to
set some cold meat before they, which they be devour with great
greediness, when Partridge come into the kitchen. he have be first
awake by the hurry which we have before see; and while he be
endeavour to compose himself again on his pillow, a screech-owl have
give he such a serenade at his window, that he leap in a most
horrible affright from his bed, and, huddle on his cloath with
great expedition, run down to the protection of the company, whom he
hear talk below in the kitchen.
his arrival detain my landlady from return to her rest; for she
be just about to leave the other two guest to the care of Susan; but
the friend of young Squire Allworthy be not to be so neglect,
especially as he call for a pint of wine to be mull. she
immediately obey, by put the same quantity of perry to the fire;
for this readily answer to the name of every kind of wine.
the irish footman be retire to bed, and the post-boy be go to
follow; but Partridge invite he to stay and partake of his wine,
which the lad very thankfully accept. the schoolmaster be indeed
afraid to return to bed by himself; and as he do not know how soon he
might lose the company of my landlady, he be resolve to secure that
of the boy, in whose presence he apprehend no danger from the devil
or any of his adherent.
and now arrive another post-boy at the gate; upon which Susan, be
order out, return, introduce two young woman in rid habit,
one of which be so very richly laced, that Partridge and the post-boy
instantly start from their chair, and my landlady fall to her
courtsie, and her ladyship, with great eagerness.
the lady in the rich habit say, with a smile of great condescension,
"if you will give I leave, madam, I will warm myself a few minute at
your kitchen fire, for it be really very cold; but I must insist on
disturb no one from his seat." this be speak on account of
Partridge, who have retreat to the other end of the room, strike with
the utmost awe and astonishment at the splendor of the lady's dress.
indeed, she have a much well title to respect than this; for she be
one of the most beautiful creature in the world.
the lady earnestly desire Partridge to return to his seat; but could
not prevail. she then pull off her glove, and display to the fire
two hand, which have every property of snow in they, except that of
melt. her companion, who be indeed her maid, likewise pull off
her glove, and discover what bear an exact resemblance, in cold and
colour, to a piece of frozen beef.
"I wish, madam," quoth the latter, "your ladyship would not think of
go any far to-night. I be terribly afraid your ladyship will
not be able to bear the fatigue."
"why sure," cry the landlady, "her ladyship's honour can never
intend it. o, bless I! far to-night, indeed! let I beseech your
ladyship not to think on't----But, to be sure, your ladyship cannot.
what will your honour be pleased to have for supper? I have mutton of
all kind, and some nice chicken."
"I think, madam," say the lady, "it would be rather breakfast than
supper; but I cannot eat anything; and, if I stay, shall only lie down
for an hour or two. however, if you please, madam, you may get I a
little sack whey, make very small and thin."
"yes, madam," cry the mistress of the house, "I have some excellent
white wine."--"you have no sack, then?" say the lady. "yes, an't
please your honour, I have; I may challenge the country for that--but
let I beg your ladyship to eat something."
"upon my word, I cannot eat a morsel," answer the lady; "and I shall
be much oblige to you if you will please to get my apartment ready as
soon as possible; for I be resolve to be on horseback again in three
hour."
"why, Susan," cry the landlady, "be there a fire light yet in the
wild-goose? I be sorry, madam, all my good room be full. several
people of the first quality be now in bed. herebe a great young
squire, and many other great gentlefolk of quality." Susan answer,
"that the irish gentleman be get into the wild-goose."
"be ever anything like it?" say the mistress; "why the devil would
you not keep some of the good room for the quality, when you know
scarce a day pass without some call here?----if they be
gentleman, I be certain, when they know it be for her ladyship, they
will get up again."
"not upon my account," say the lady; "I will have no person disturb
for I. if you have a room that be commonly decent, it will serve I
very well, though it be never so plain. I beg, madam, you will not
give yourself so much trouble on my account." "o, madam!" cry the
other, "I have several very good room for that matter, but none good
enough for your honour's ladyship. however, as you be so
condescend to take up with the good I have, do, Susan, get a fire
in the Rose this minute. will your ladyship be pleased to go up now,
or stay till the fire be light?" "I think I have sufficiently warm
myself," answer the lady; "so, if you please, I will go now; I be
afraid I have keep people, and particularly that gentleman (meaning
Partridge), too long in the cold already. indeed, I cannot bear to
think of keep any person from the fire this dreadful weather."--she
then depart with her maid, the landlady march with two light
candle before she.
when that good woman return, the conversation in the kitchen be all
upon the charm of the young lady. there be indeed in perfect beauty a
power which none almost can withstand; for my landlady, though she be
not pleased at the negative give to the supper, declare she have
never see so lovely a creature. Partridge run out into the most
extravagant encomium on her face, though he could not refrain from
pay some compliment to the gold lace on her habit; the post-boy
sing forth the praise of her goodness, which be likewise echo by
the other post-boy, who be now come in. "shebe a true good lady, I
warrant she," say he; "for she hath mercy upon dumb creature; for
she ask I every now and tan upon the journey, if I do not think
she should hurt the horse by rid too fast? and when she come in
she charge I to give they as much corn as ever they would eat."
such charm be there in affability, and so sure be it to attract the
praise of all kind of people. it may indeed be compare to the
celebrate Mrs Hussey.[*] it be equally sure to set off every female
perfection to the high advantage, and to palliate and conceal every
defect. a short reflection, which we could not forbear make in this
place, where my reader hath see the loveliness of an affable
deportment; and truth will now oblige we to contrast it, by show
the reverse.
[*] a celebrated mantua-maker in the Strand, famous for set off
the shape of woman.
chapter iv.
contain infallible nostrum for procure universal disesteem and
hatred.
the lady have no soon lay herself on her pillow than the
waiting-woman return to the kitchen to regale with some of those
dainty which her mistress have refuse.
the company, at her entrance, shew she the same respect which they
have before pay to her mistress, by rise; but she forget to imitate
she, by desire they to sit down again. indeed, it be scarce
possible they should have do so, for she place her chair in such a
posture as to occupy almost the whole fire. she then order a chicken
to be broil that instant, declare, if it be not ready in a
quarter of an hour, she would not stay for it. now, though the say
chicken be then at roost in the stable, and require the several
ceremony of catch, killing, and pick, before it be bring to
the gridiron, my landlady would nevertheless have undertake to do all
within the time; but the guest, be unfortunately admit behind
the scene, must have be witness to the _fourberie_; the poor woman
be therefore oblige to confess that she have none in the house; "but,
madam," say she, "I can get any kind of mutton in an instant from the
butcher's."
"do you think, then," answer the waiting-gentlewoman, "that I have
the stomach of a horse, to eat mutton at this time of night? sure you
people that keep inn imagine your better be like yourself.
indeed, I expect to get nothing at this wretched place. I wonder my
lady would stop at it. I suppose none but tradesman and grasier ever
call here." the landlady fire at this indignity offer to her house;
however, she suppress her temper, and content herself with say,
"very good quality frequent it, she thank heaven!" "donot tell
I," cry the other, "of quality! I believe I know more of people of
quality than such as you.--But, prithee, without trouble I with any
of your impertinence, do tell I what I can have for supper; for,
though I cannot eat horse-flesh, I be really hungry." "why, truly,
madam," answer the landlady, "you could not take I again at such a
disadvantage; for I must confess I have nothing in the house, unless a
cold piece of beef, which indeed a gentleman's footman and the
post-boy have almost clear to the bone." "Woman," say Mrs Abigail
(so for shortness we will call she), "I entreat you not to make I
sick. if I have fast a month, I could not eat what have be touch
by the finger of such fellow. be there nothing neat or decent to be
have in this horrid place?" "what think you of some egg and bacon,
madam?" say the landlady. "be your egg new laid? be you certain
they be lay to-day? and let I have the bacon cut very nice and
thin; for I cannot endure anything thatbe gross.--prithee try if you
can do a little tolerably for once, and donot think you have a
farmer's wife, or some of those creature, in the house."--The
landlady begin then to handle her knife; but the other stopt she,
say, "good woman, I must insist upon your first wash your hand;
for I be extremely nice, and have be always use from my cradle to
have everything in the most elegant manner."
the landlady, who govern herself with much difficulty, begin now the
necessary preparation; for as to Susan, she be utterly reject, and
with such disdain, that the poor wench be as hard put to it to
restrain her hand from violence as her mistress have be to hold she
tongue. this indeed Susan do not entirely; for, though she literally
keep it within her tooth, yet there it mutter many "marry-come-up,
as good flesh and blood as yourself;" with other such indignant
phrase.
while the supper be prepare, Mrs Abigail begin to lament she have
not order a fire in the parlour; but, she say, that be now too
late. "however," say she, "I have novelty to recommend a kitchen; for
I do not believe I ever eat in one before." then, turn to the
post-boy, she ask they, "why they be not in the stable with their
horse? if I must eat my hard fare here, madam," cry she to the
landlady, "I beg the kitchen may be keep clear, that I may not be
surround with all the blackguard in town: as for you, sir," say
she to Partridge, "you look somewhat like a gentleman, and may sit
still if you please; I donot desire to disturb anybody but mob."
"yes, yes, madam," cry Partridge, "I be a gentleman, I do assure
you, and I be not so easily to be disturb. _Non semper vox casualis
est verbo nominativus_." this Latin she take to be some affront, and
answer, "you may be a gentleman, sir; but you donot show yourself as
one to talk Latin to a woman." Partridge make a gentle reply, and
conclude with more Latin; upon which she toss up her nose, and
content herself by abuse he with the name of a great scholar.
the supper be now on the table, Mrs Abigail eat very heartily for
so delicate a person; and, while a second course of the same be by
her order prepare, she say, "and so, madam, you tell I your house
be frequent by people of great quality?"
the landlady answer in the affirmative, say, "there be a great
many very good quality and gentlefolk in it now. therebe young Squire
Allworthy, as that gentleman there know."
"and pray who be this young gentleman of quality, this young squire
Allworthy?" say Abigail.
"who should he be," answer Partridge, "but the son and heir of the
great Squire Allworthy, of Somersetshire!"
"upon my word," say she, "you tell I strange news; for I know Mr
Allworthy of Somersetshire very well, and I know he hath no son
alive."
the landlady prick up her ear at this, and Partridge look a
little confound. however, after a short hesitation, he answer,
"indeed, madam, it be true, everybody doth not know he to be squire
Allworthy's son; for he be never married to his mother; but his son
he certainly be, and will be his heir too, as certainly as his name be
Jones." at that word, Abigail let drop the bacon which she be
convey to her mouth, and cry out, "you surprize I, sir! be it
possible Mr Jones should be now in the house?" "_Quare non?_" answer
Partridge, "it be possible, and it be certain."
Abigail now make haste to finish the remainder of her meal, and then
repair back to her mistress, when the conversation pass which may
be read in the next chapter.
Chapter v.
show who the amiable lady, and her unamiable maid, be.
as in the month of June, the damask rise, which chance hath plant
among the lily, with their candid hue mix his vermilion; or as
some playsome heifer in the pleasant month of May diffuse she
odoriferous breath over the flowery meadow; or as, in the blooming
month of April, the gentle, constant dove, perch on some fair bough,
sit meditate on her mate; so, look a hundred charm and
breathing as many sweet, her thought be fix on her Tommy, with
a heart as good and innocent as her face be beautiful, Sophia (for it
be she herself) lie recline her lovely head on her hand, when she
maid enter the room, and, run directly to the bed, cry,
"Madam--madam--who doth your ladyship think be in the house?" Sophia,
start up, cry, "I hope my father hath not overtake we." "no,
madam, it be one worth a hundred father; Mr Jones himself be here at
this very instant." "Mr Jones!" say Sophia, "it be impossible! I
cannot be so fortunate." her maid aver the fact, and be presently
detach by her mistress to order he to be call; for she say she
be resolve to see he immediately.
Mrs Honour have no soon leave the kitchen in the manner we have before
see than the landlady fall severely upon she. the poor woman have
indeed be load her heart with foul language for some time, and
now it scour out of her mouth, as filth doth from a mud-cart, when
the board which confine it be remove. Partridge likewise shovel
in his share of calumny, and (what may surprize the reader) not only
bespatter the maid, but attempt to sully the lily-white character
of Sophia herself. "never a barrel the well herring," cry he,
"_Noscitur a socio_, be a true saying. it must be confess, indeed,
that the lady in the fine garment be the civiller of the two; but I
warrant neither of they be a bit well than they should be. a couple
of Bath trull, Iwill answer for they; your quality donot ride about at
this time o' night without servant." "sbodlikin, and thatbe true,"
cry the landlady, "you have certainly hit upon the very matter; for
quality donot come into a house without bespeak a supper, whether
they eat or no."
while they be thus discourse, Mrs Honour return and discharge
her commission, by bid the landlady immediately wake Mr Jones, and
tell he a lady want to speak with he. the landlady refer she to
Partridge, say, "he be the squire's friend: but, for her part, she
never call man-folk, especially gentleman," and then walk
sullenly out of the kitchen. Honour apply herself to Partridge; but
he refuse, "for my friend," cry he, "go to bed very late, and he
would be very angry to be disturb so soon." Mrs Honour insist
still to have he call, say, "she be sure, instead of be
angry, that he would be to the high degree delight when he know
the occasion." "another time, perhaps, he might," cry Partridge;
"but _non omnia possumus omne_. one woman be enough at once for a
reasonable man." "what do you mean by one woman, fellow?" cry
Honour. "none of your fellow," answer Partridge. he then proceed
to inform she plainly that Jones be in bed with a wench, and make use
of an expression too indelicate to be here insert; which so enrage
Mrs Honour, that she call he jackanape, and return in a violent
hurry to her mistress, whom she acquaint with the success of her
errand, and with the account she have receive; which, if possible, she
exaggerate, be as angry with Jones as if he have pronounce all the
word that come from the mouth of Partridge. she discharge a torrent
of abuse on the master, and advise her mistress to quit all thought
of a man who have never show himself deserve of she. she then rip
up the story of Molly Seagrim, and give the most malicious turn to his
formerly quit Sophia herself; which, I must confess, the present
incident not a little countenance.
the spirit of Sophia be too much dissipate by concern to enable
she to stop the torrent of she maid. at last, however, she interrupt
she, say, "I never can believe this; some villain hath belie he.
you say you have it from his friend; but surely it be not the office of
a friend to betray such secret." "I suppose," cry Honour, "the
fellow be his pimp; for I never see so ill-look a villain. besides,
such profligate rake as Mr Jones be never ashamed of these matter."
to say the truth, this behaviour of Partridge be a little
inexcusable; but he have not sleep off the effect of the dose which he
swallow the evening before; which have, in the morning, receive the
addition of above a pint of wine, or indeed rather of malt spirit;
for the perry be by no mean pure. now, that part of his head which
Nature design for the reservoir of drink be very shallow, a small
quantity of liquor overflow it, and open the sluice of his heart;
so that all the secret there deposit run out. these sluice be
indeed, naturally, very ill-secure. to give the well-natured turn we
can to his disposition, he be a very honest man; for, as he be the
most inquisitive of mortal, and eternally pry into the secret of
other, so he very faithfully pay they by communicate, in return,
everything within his knowledge.
while Sophia, torment with anxiety, know not what to believe, nor
what resolution to take, Susan arrive with the sack-whey. Mrs Honour
immediately advise her mistress, in a whisper, to pump this wench,
who probably could inform she of the truth. Sophia approve it, and
begin as follow: "come hither, child; now answer I truly what I be
go to ask you, and I promise you I will very well reward you. be
there a young gentleman in this house, a handsome young gentleman,
that----." here Sophia blush and be confound. "a young
gentleman," cry Honour, "that come hither in company with that saucy
rascal who be now in the kitchen?" Susan answer, "there be."--"Do
you know anything of any lady?" continue Sophia, "any lady? I donot
ask you whether she be handsome or no; perhaps she be not; thatbe
nothing to the purpose; but do you know of any lady?" "La, madam,"
cry Honour, "you will make a very bad examiner. Hark'ee, child,"
say she, "be not that very young gentleman now in bed with some nasty
trull or other?" here Susan smile, and be silent. "answer the
question, child," say Sophia, "and herebe a guinea for you."--"A
guinea! madam," cry Susan; "la, whatbe a guinea? if my mistress
should know it I shall certainly lose my place that very instant."
"herebe another for you," say Sophia, "and I promise you faithfully
your mistress shall never know it." Susan, after a very short
hesitation, take the money, and tell the whole story, conclude with
say, "if you have any great curiosity, madam, I can steal softly
into his room, and see whether he be in his own bed or no." she
accordingly do this by Sophia's desire, and return with an answer
in the negative.
Sophia now tremble and turn pale. Mrs Honour beg she to be
comfort, and not to think any more of so worthless a fellow. "why
there," say Susan, "I hope, madam, your ladyship willnot be offend;
but pray, madam, be not your ladyship's name Madam Sophia Western?"
"how be it possible you should know I?" answer Sophia. "why that
man, that the gentlewoman speak of, who be in the kitchen, tell about
you last night. but I hope your ladyship be not angry with I."
"indeed, child," say she, "I be not; pray tell I all, and I promise
you Iwill reward you." "why, madam," continue Susan, "that man tell we
all in the kitchen that Madam Sophia Western--indeed I donot know how
to bring it out."--Here she stopt, till, have receive encouragement
from Sophia, and be vehemently press by Mrs Honour, she proceed
thus:--"He tell we, madam, though to be sure it be all a lie, that
your ladyship be die for love of the young squire, and that he be
go to the war to get rid of you. I think to myself then he be a
false-hearted wretch; but, now, to see such a fine, rich, beautiful
lady as you be, forsake for such an ordinary woman; for to be sure so
she be, and another man's wife into the bargain. it be such a strange
unnatural thing, in a manner."
Sophia give she a third guinea, and, tell she she would certainly
be her friend if she mention nothing of what have pass, nor
inform any one who she be, dismiss the girl, with order to the
post-boy to get the horse ready immediately.
be now leave alone with she maid, she tell her trusty waiting-woman,
"that she never be more easy than at present. I be now convince,"
say she, "he be not only a villain, but a low despicable wretch. I
can forgive all rather than his expose my name in so barbarous a
manner. that render he the object of my contempt. yes, Honour, I be
now easy; I be indeed; I be very easy;" and then she burst into a
violent flood of tear.
after a short interval spend by Sophia, chiefly in cry, and
assure she maid that she be perfectly easy, Susan arrive with an
account that the horse be ready, when a very extraordinary thought
suggest itself to our young heroine, by which Mr Jones would be
acquaint with she have be at the inn, in a way which, if any
spark of affection for she remain in he, would be at least some
punishment for his fault.
the reader will be pleased to remember a little muff, which hath have
the honour of be more than once remember already in this history.
this muff, ever since the departure of Mr Jones, have be the constant
companion of Sophia by day, and her bedfellow by night; and this muff
she have at this very instant upon her arm; whence she take it off with
great indignation, and, have writ her name with her pencil upon a
piece of paper which she pin to it, she bribe the maid to convey
it into the empty bed of Mr Jones, in which, if he do not find it,
she charge she to take some method of convey it before his eye in
the morning.
then, have pay for what Mrs Honour have eat, in which bill be
include an account for what she herself might have eat, she mount
her horse, and, once more assure her companion that she be
perfectly easy, continue her journey.
Chapter vi.
Containing, among other thing, the ingenuity of Partridge, the
madness of Jones, and the folly of Fitzpatrick.
it be now past five in the morning, and other company begin to rise
and come to the kitchen, among whom be the serjeant and the
coachman, who, be thoroughly reconcile, make a libation, or, in
the english phrase, drink a hearty cup together.
in this drinking nothing more remarkable happen than the behaviour
of Partridge, who, when the serjeant drink a health to King George,
repeat only the word king; nor could he be bring to utter more;
for though he be go to fight against his own cause, yet he could
not be prevail upon to drink against it.
Mr Jones, be now return to his own bed (but from whence he
return we must beg to be excuse from relate), summon Partridge
from this agreeable company, who, after a ceremonious preface, have
obtain leave to offer his advice, deliver himself as follows:--
"it be, sir, an old saying, and a true one, that a wise man may
sometimes learn counsel from a fool; I wish, therefore, I might be so
bold as to offer you my advice, which be to return home again, and
leave these _horrida bella_, these bloody war, to fellow who be
content to swallow gunpowder, because they have nothing else to eat.
now, everybody know your honour want for nothing at home; when
thatbe the case, why should any man travel abroad?"
"Partridge," cry Jones, "thou art certainly a coward; I wish,
therefore, thou wouldst return home thyself, and trouble I no more."
"I ask your honour's pardon," cry Partridge; "I speak on your
account more than my own; for as to I, Heaven know my circumstance
be bad enough, and I be so far from be afraid, that I value a
pistol, or a blunderbuss, or any such thing, no more than a pop-gun.
every man must die once, and what signify the manner how? besides,
perhaps I may come off with the loss only of an arm or a leg. I assure
you, sir, I be never less afraid in my life; and so, if your honour
be resolve to go on, I be resolve to follow you. but, in that case,
I wish I might give my opinion. to be sure, it be a scandalous way of
travel, for a great gentleman like you to walk afoot. now here be
two or three good horse in the stable, which the landlord will
certainly make no scruple of trust you with; but, if he should, I
can easily contrive to take they; and, let the bad come to the
bad, the king would certainly pardon you, as you be go to fight
in his cause."
now, as the honesty of Partridge be equal to his understanding, and
both deal only in small matter, he would never have attempt a
roguery of this kind, have he not imagine it altogether safe; for he
be one of those who have more consideration of the gallow than of
the fitness of thing; but, in reality, he think he might have
commit this felony without any danger; for, besides that he doubt
not but the name of Mr Allworthy would sufficiently quiet the
landlord, he conceive they should be altogether safe, whatever turn
affair might take; as Jones, he imagine, would have friend enough
on one side, and as his friend would as well secure he on the other.
when Mr Jones find that Partridge be in earnest in this proposal, he
very severely rebuke he, and that in such bitter term, that the
other attempt to laugh it off, and presently turn the discourse to
other matter; say, he believe they be then in a bawdy house,
and that he have with much ado prevent two wench from disturb
his honour in the middle of the night. "Heyday!" say he, "I believe
they get into your chamber whether I would or no; for here lie the
muff of one of they on the ground." indeed, as Jones return to his
bed in the dark, he have never perceive the muff on the quilt, and, in
leap into his bed, he have tumble it on the floor. this Partridge
now take up, and be go to put into his pocket, when Jones desire
to see it. the muff be so very remarkable, that our heroe might
possibly have recollect it without the information annex. but his
memory be not put to that hard office; for at the same instant he see
and read the word Sophia Western upon the paper which be pin to
it. his look now grow frantic in a moment, and he eagerly cry out,
"oh Heavens! how come this muff here?" "I know no more than your
honour," cry Partridge; "but I see it upon the arm of one of the
woman who would have disturb you, if I would have suffer they."
"where be they?" cry Jones, jump out of bed, and lay hold of
his cloath. "many mile off, I believe, by this time," say
Partridge. and now Jones, upon further enquiry, be sufficiently
assure that the bearer of this muff be no other than the lovely
Sophia herself.
the behaviour of Jones on this occasion, his thought, his look, his
word, his action, be such as beggar all description. after many
bitter execration on Partridge, and not few on himself, he order
the poor fellow, who be frightened out of his wit, to run down and
hire he horse at any rate; and a very few minute afterwards, have
shuffle on his clothe, he hasten down-stair to execute the order
himself, which he have just before give.
but before we proceed to what pass on his arrival in the kitchen, it
will be necessary to recur to what have there happen since Partridge
have first leave it on his master's summon.
the serjeant be just march off with his party, when the two irish
gentleman arise, and come downstairs; both complain that they have
be so often wake by the noise in the inn, that they have never once
be able to close their eye all night.
the coach which have bring the young lady and her maid, and which,
perhaps, the reader may have hitherto conclude be her own, be,
indeed, a return coach belong to Mr King, of Bath, one of the
worthy and honest man that ever deal in horse-flesh, and whose
coach we heartily recommend to all our reader who travel that road.
by which mean they may, perhaps, have the pleasure of rid in the
very coach, and be drive by the very coachman, that be record in
this history.
the coachman, have but two passenger, and hear Mr Maclachlan be
go to Bath, offer to carry he thither at a very moderate price.
he be induce to this by the report of the hostler, who say that the
horse which Mr Maclachlan have hire from Worcester would be much more
pleased with return to his friend there than to prosecute a long
journey; for that the say horse be rather a two-legged than a
four-legged animal.
Mr Maclachlan immediately close with the proposal of the coachman,
and, at the same time, persuade his friend Fitzpatrick to accept of
the fourth place in the coach. this conveyance the soreness of his
bone make more agreeable to he than a horse; and, be well assure
of meet with his wife at Bath, he think a little delay would be
of no consequence.
Maclachlan, who be much the sharp man of the two, no soon hear
that this lady come from Chester, with the other circumstance which
he learn from the hostler, than it come into his head that she might
possibly be his friend's wife; and presently acquaint he with this
suspicion, which have never once occur to Fitzpatrick himself. to
say the truth, he be one of those composition which nature make up
in too great a hurry, and forget to put any brain into their head.
now it happen to this sort of man, as to bad hound, who never hit
off a fault themselves; but no soon doth a dog of sagacity open his
mouth than they immediately do the same, and, without the guidance of
any scent, run directly forwards as fast as they be able. in the same
manner, the very moment Mr Maclachlan have mention his apprehension,
Mr Fitzpatrick instantly concur, and fly directly up-stair, to
surprize his wife, before he know where she be; and unluckily (as
Fortune love to play trick with those gentleman who put themselves
entirely under her conduct) run his head against several door and
post to no purpose. much kinder be she to I, when she suggest
that simile of the hound, just before insert; since the poor wife
may, on these occasion, be so justly compare to a hunted hare. like
that little wretched animal, she prick up her ear to listen after
the voice of her pursuer; like she, fly away tremble when she
hear it; and, like she, be generally overtake and destroy in the
end.
this be not however the case at present; for after a long fruitless
search, Mr Fitzpatrick return to the kitchen, where, as if this have
be a real chace, enter a gentleman hallow as hunter do when
the hound be at a fault. he be just alight from his horse, and
have many attendant at his heel.
here, reader, it may be necessary to acquaint thee with some matter,
which, if thou dost know already, thou art wise than I take thee to
be. and this information thou shalt receive in the next chapter.
Chapter vii.
in which be conclude the adventure that happen at the inn at
Upton.
in the first place, then, this gentleman just arrive be no other
person than Squire Western himself, who be come hither in pursuit of
his daughter; and, have he fortunately be two hour early, he have
not only find she, but his niece into the bargain; for such be the
wife of Mr Fitzpatrick, who have run away with she five year before,
out of the custody of that sage lady, Madam Western.
now this lady have depart from the inn much about the same time with
Sophia; for, have be wake by the voice of her husband, she have
send up for the landlady, and be by she apprized of the matter, have
bribe the good woman, at an extravagant price, to furnish she with
horse for her escape. such prevalence have money in this family; and
though the mistress would have turn away her maid for a corrupt
hussy, if she have know as much as the reader, yet she be no more
proof against corruption herself than poor Susan have be.
Mr Western and his nephew be not know to one another; nor indeed
would the former have take any notice of the latter if he have know
he; for, this be a steal match, and consequently an unnatural one
in the opinion of the good squire, he have, from the time of she
commit it, abandon the poor young creature, who be then no more
than eighteen, as a monster, and have never since suffer she to be
name in his presence.
the kitchen be now a scene of universal confusion, Western enquiring
after his daughter, and Fitzpatrick as eagerly after his wife, when
Jones enter the room, unfortunately have Sophia's muff in his
hand.
as soon as Western see Jones, he set up the same holla as be use by
sportsman when their game be in view. he then immediately run up and
lay hold of Jones, cry, "we have get the dog fox, I warrant the
bitch be not far off." the jargon which follow for some minute,
where many speak different thing at the same time, as it would be
very difficult to describe, so would it be no less unpleasant to read.
Jones have, at length, shake Mr Western off, and some of the
company have interfere between they, our heroe protest his
innocence as to know anything of the lady; when Parson Supple
step up, and say, "it be folly to deny it; for why, the mark of
guilt be in thy hand. I will myself asseverate and bind it by an
oath, that the muff thou bearest in thy hand belongeth unto Madam
Sophia; for I have frequently observe she, of later day, to bear it
about she." "my daughter's muff!" cry the squire in a rage. "hath he
get my daughter's muff? bear witness the good be find upon he.
Iwill have he before a justice of peace this instant. where be my
daughter, villain?" "Sir," say Jones, "I beg you would be pacify.
the muff, I acknowledge, be the young lady's; but, upon my honour, I
have never see she." at these word Western lose all patience, and
grow inarticulate with rage.
some of the servant have acquaint Fitzpatrick who Mr Western be.
the good Irishman, therefore, think he have now an opportunity to do
an act of service to his uncle, and by that mean might possibly
obtain his favour, stept up to Jones, and cry out, "upon my
conscience, sir, you may be ashamed of deny your have see the
gentleman's daughter before my face, when you know I find you there
upon the bed together." then, turn to Western, he offer to
conduct he immediately to the room where his daughter be; which
offer be accept, he, the squire, the parson, and some other,
ascend directly to Mrs Waters's chamber, which they enter with no
less violence than Mr Fitzpatrick have do before.
the poor lady start from her sleep with as much amazement as terror,
and behold at her bedside a figure which might very well be suppose
to have escape out of Bedlam. such wildness and confusion be in the
look of Mr Western; who no soon see the lady than he start back,
shew sufficiently by his manner, before he speak, that this be not
the person seek after.
so much more tenderly do woman value their reputation than their
person, that, though the latter seem now in more danger than
before, yet, as the former be secure, the lady scream not with such
violence as she have do on the other occasion. however, she no soon
find herself alone than she abandon all thought of further repose;
and, as she have sufficient reason to be dissatisfied with her present
lodging, she dress herself with all possible expedition.
Mr Western now proceed to search the whole house, but to as little
purpose as he have disturb poor Mrs Waters. he then return
disconsolate into the kitchen, where he find Jones in the custody of
his servant.
this violent uproar have raise all the people in the house, though it
be yet scarcely daylight. among these be a grave gentleman, who have
the honour to be in the commission of the peace for the county of
Worcester. of which Mr Western be no soon informed than he offer
to lay his complaint before he. the justice decline execute his
office, as he say he have no clerk present, nor no book about justice
business; and that he could not carry all the law in his head about
steal away daughter, and such sort of thing.
here Mr Fitzpatrick offer to lend he his assistance, inform the
company that he have be himself breed to the law. (and indeed he have
serve three year as clerk to an attorney in the north of Ireland,
when, chuse a genteeler walk in life, he quit his master, come
over to England, and set up that business which require no
apprenticeship, namely, that of a gentleman, in which he have
succeed, as hath be already partly mention.)
Mr Fitzpatrick declare that the law concern daughter be out of
the present case; that steal a muff be undoubtedly felony, and the
good be find upon the person, be sufficient evidence of the
fact.
the magistrate, upon the encouragement of so learn a coadjutor, and
upon the violent intercession of the squire, be at length prevail
upon to seat himself in the chair of justice, where be place, upon
view the muff which Jones still hold in his hand, and upon the
parson's swear it to be the property of Mr Western, he desire Mr
Fitzpatrick to draw up a commitment, which he say he would sign.
Jones now desire to be hear, which be at last, with difficulty,
grant he. he then produce the evidence of Mr Partridge, as to the
find it; but, what be still more, Susan depose that Sophia
herself have deliver the muff to she, and have order she to convey
it into the chamber where Mr Jones have find it.
whether a natural love of justice, or the extraordinary comeliness of
Jones, have work on Susan to make the discovery, I will not
determine; but such be the effect of her evidence, that the
magistrate, throw himself back in his chair, declare that the
matter be now altogether as clear on the side of the prisoner as it
have before be against he: with which the parson concur, say,
the Lord forbid he should be instrumental in commit an innocent
person to durance. the justice then arise, acquit the prisoner, and
break up the court.
Mr Western now give every one present a hearty curse, and, immediately
order his horse, depart in pursuit of his daughter, without
take the least notice of his nephew Fitzpatrick, or return any
answer to his claim of kindred, notwithstanding all the obligation he
have just receive from that gentleman. in the violence, moreover, of
his hurry, and of his passion, he luckily forget to demand the muff of
Jones: I say luckily; for he would have die on the spot rather than
have part with it.
Jones likewise, with his friend Partridge, set forward the moment he
have pay his reckoning, in quest of his lovely Sophia, whom he now
resolve never more to abandon the pursuit of. nor could he bring
himself even to take leave of Mrs Waters; of whom he detest the very
thought, as she have be, though not designedly, the occasion of his
miss the happy interview with Sophia, to whom he now vow
eternal constancy.
as for Mrs Waters, she take the opportunity of the coach which be
go to Bath; for which place she set out in company with the two
irish gentleman, the landlady kindly lend she her cloath; in
return for which she be content only to receive about double their
value, as a recompence for the loan. upon the road she be perfectly
reconcile to Mr Fitzpatrick, who be a very handsome fellow, and
indeed do all she could to console he in the absence of his wife.
thus end the many odd adventure which Mr Jones encounter at his
inn at Upton, where they talk, to this day, of the beauty and lovely
behaviour of the charming Sophia, by the name of the Somersetshire
angel.
Chapter viii.
in which the history go backward.
before we proceed any far in our history, it may be proper to look
a little back, in order to account for the extraordinary appearance of
Sophia and her father at the inn at Upton.
the reader may be pleased to remember that, in the ninth chapter of
the seventh book of our history, we leave Sophia, after a long debate
between love and duty, decide the cause, as it usually, I believe,
happen, in favour of the former.
this debate have arise, as we have there show, from a visit which her
father have just before make she, in order to force her consent to a
marriage with Blifil; and which he have understand to be fully imply
in her acknowledgment "that she neither must nor could refuse any
absolute command of his."
now from this visit the squire retire to his evening potation,
overjoy at the success he have gain with his daughter; and, as he
be of a social disposition, and willing to have partaker in his
happiness, the beer be order to flow very liberally into the
kitchen; so that before eleven in the evening there be not a single
person sober in the house except only Mrs Western herself and the
charming Sophia.
early in the morning a messenger be despatch to summon Mr Blifil;
for, though the squire imagine that young gentleman have be much
less acquainted than he really be with the former aversion of his
daughter, as he have not, however, yet receive her consent, he long
impatiently to communicate it to he, not doubt but that the
intend bride herself would confirm it with her lip. as to the
wedding, it have the evening before be fix, by the male party, to
be celebrate on the next morning save one.
Breakfast be now set forth in the parlour, where Mr Blifil attend,
and where the squire and his sister likewise be assemble; and now
Sophia be order to be call.
O, Shakespear! have I thy pen! O, Hogarth! have I thy pencil! then would
I draw the picture of the poor serve-man, who, with pale
countenance, star eye, chatter tooth, faultere tongue, and
trembling limb,
(e'en such a man, so faint, so spiritless,
so dull, so dead in look, so woe-begone,
Drew Priam's curtain in the dead of night,
and would have tell he, half his Troy be burn'd)
enter the room, and declare--that Madam Sophia be not to be find.
"not to be find!" cry the squire, start from his chair; "zound
and d--nation! blood and fury! where, when, how, what--not to be
find! where?"
"La! brother," say Mrs Western, with true political coldness, "you
be always throw yourself into such violent passion for nothing.
my niece, I suppose, be only walk out into the garden. I protest you
be grow so unreasonable, that it be impossible to live in the house
with you."
"Nay, nay," answer the squire, return as suddenly to himself, as
he have go from himself; "if that be all the matter, it signify not
much; but, upon my soul, my mind misgave I when the fellow say she
be not to be find." he then give order for the bell to be ring in
the garden, and sit himself contentedly down.
no two thing could be more the reverse of each other than be the
brother and sister in most instance; particularly in this, that as
the brother never foresaw anything at a distance, but be most
sagacious in immediately see everything the moment it have happen;
so the sister eternally foresee at a distance, but be not so
quick-sighted to object before her eye. of both these the reader may
have observe example: and, indeed, both their several talent be
excessive; for, as the sister often foresaw what never come to pass,
so the brother often see much more than be actually the truth.
this be not however the case at present. the same report be bring
from the garden as before have be bring from the chamber, that
Madam Sophia be not to be find.
the squire himself now sally forth, and begin to roar forth the name
of Sophia as loudly, and in as hoarse a voice, as whilome do Hercules
that of Hylas; and, as the poet tell we that the whole shore echo
back the name of that beautiful youth, so do the house, the garden,
and all the neighbouring field resound nothing but the name of
Sophia, in the hoarse voice of the man, and in the shrill pipe of
the woman; while echo seem so pleased to repeat the beloved sound,
that, if there be really such a person, I believe Ovid hath belie she
sex.
nothing reign for a long time but confusion; till at last the
squire, have sufficiently spend his breath, return to the parlour,
where he find Mrs Western and Mr Blifil, and throw himself, with the
utmost dejection in his countenance, into a great chair.
here Mrs Western begin to apply the follow consolation:
"Brother, I be sorry for what hath happen; and that my niece should
have behave herself in a manner so unbecome her family; but it be
all your own doing, and you have nobody to thank but yourself. you
know she hath be educate always in a manner directly contrary to my
advice, and now you see the consequence. have I not a thousand time
argue with you about give my niece her own will? but you know I
never could prevail upon you; and when I have take so much pain to
eradicate her headstrong opinion, and to rectify your error in
policy, you know she be take out of my hand; so that I have nothing
to answer for. have I be trust entirely with the care of her
education, no such accident as this have ever befall you; so that you
must comfort yourself by think it be all your own doing; and,
indeed, what else could be expect from such indulgence?"
"Zounds! sister," answer he, "you be enough to make one mad. have I
indulge she? have I give she she will?----it be no long ago than
last night that I threaten, if she disobey I, to confine she to
her chamber upon bread and water as long as she lived.----you would
provoke the patience of Job."
"do ever mortal hear the like?" reply she. "Brother, if I have not
the patience of fifty job, you would make I forget all decency and
decorum. why would you interfere? do I not beg you, do I not intreat
you, to leave the whole conduct to I? you have defeat all the
operation of the campaign by one false step. would any man in his
sens have provoke a daughter by such threat as these? how often
have I tell you that english woman be not to be treat like
ciracessian[*] slave. we have the protection of the world; we be to
be win by gentle mean only, and not to be hector, and bully, and
beat into compliance. I thank Heaven no Salique law govern here.
Brother, you have a roughness in your manner which no woman but myself
would bear. I do not wonder my niece be frightened and terrify into
take this measure; and, to speak honestly, I think my niece will be
justify to the world for what she hath do. I repeat it to you
again, brother, you must comfort yourself by rememb're that it be
all your own fault. how often have I advised--" here western rise
hastily from his chair, and, vent two or three horrid imprecation,
run out of the room.
[*] possibly Circassian.
when he be depart, his sister express more bitterness (if
possible) against he than she have do while he be present; for the
truth of which she appeal to Mr Blifil, who, with great complacence,
acquiesce entirely in all she say; but excuse all the fault of Mr
Western, "as they must be consider," he say, "to have proceed
from the too inordinate fondness of a father, which must be allow
the name of an amiable weakness." "so much the more inexcuseable,"
answer the lady; "for whom doth he ruin by his fondness but his own
child?" to which Blifil immediately agree.
Mrs Western then begin to express great confusion on the account of Mr
Blifil, and of the usage which he have receive from a family to which
he intend so much honour. on this subject she treat the folly of
her niece with great severity; but conclude with throw the whole
on her brother, who, she say, be inexcuseable to have proceed so
far without well assurance of his daughter's consent: "but he be
(say she) always of a violent, headstrong temper; and I can scarce
forgive myself for all the advice I have throw away upon he."
after much of this kind of conversation, which, perhaps, would not
greatly entertain the reader, be it here particularly related, Mr
Blifil take his leave and return home, not highly pleased with his
disappointment: which, however, the philosophy which he have acquire
from Square, and the religion infuse into he by Thwackum, together
with somewhat else, teach he to bear rather well than more
passionate lover bear these kind of evil.
chapter ix.
the escape of Sophia.
it be now time to look after Sophia; whom the reader, if he love she
half so well as I do, will rejoice to find escape from the clutch
of her passionate father, and from those of her dispassionate lover.
twelve time do the iron register of time beat on the sonorous
bell-metal, summon the ghost to rise and walk their nightly
round.----In plainer language, it be twelve o'clock, and all the
family, as we have say, lie bury in drink and sleep, except only
Mrs Western, who be deeply engage in read a political pamphlet,
and except our heroine, who now softly steal down-stair, and, have
unbarred and unlocked one of the house-door, sally forth, and
hasten to the place of appointment.
notwithstanding the many pretty art which lady sometimes practise,
to display their fear on every little occasion (almost as many as the
other sex use to conceal theirs), certainly there be a degree of
courage which not only become a woman, but be often necessary to
enable she to discharge her duty. it be, indeed, the idea of
fierceness, and not of bravery, which destroy the female character;
for who can read the story of the justly celebrated Arria without
conceiving as high an opinion of her gentleness and tenderness as of
her fortitude? at the same time, perhaps, many a woman who shriek at
a mouse, or a rat, may be capable of poison a husband; or, what be
bad, of drive he to poison himself.
Sophia, with all the gentleness which a woman can have, have all the
spirit which she ought to have. when, therefore, she come to the place
of appointment, and, instead of meet she maid, as be agree, see a
man ride directly up to she, she neither scream out nor faint
away: not that her pulse then beat with its usual regularity; for she
be, at first, under some surprize and apprehension: but these be
relieve almost as soon as raise, when the man, pull off his hat,
ask she, in a very submissive manner, "if her ladyship do not
expect to meet another lady?" and then proceed to inform she that he
be send to conduct she to that lady.
Sophia could have no possible suspicion of any falsehood in this
account: she therefore mount resolutely behind the fellow, who
convey she safe to a town about five mile distant, where she have
the satisfaction of find the good Mrs Honour: for, as the soul of
the waiting-woman be wrapt up in those very habiliment which use to
enwrap her body, she could by no mean bring herself to trust they out
of her sight. upon these, therefore, she keep guard in person, while
she detach the aforesaid fellow after her mistress, have give he
all proper instruction.
they now debate what course to take, in order to avoid the pursuit of
Mr Western, who they know would send after they in a few hour. the
London road have such charm for Honour, that she be desirous of go
on directly; allege that, as Sophia could not be miss till eight
or nine the next morning, her pursuer would not be able to overtake
she, even though they know which way she have go. but Sophia have too
much at stake to venture anything to chance; nor do she dare trust
too much to her tender limb, in a contest which be to be decide
only by swiftness. she resolve, therefore, to travel across the
country, for at least twenty or thirty mile, and then to take the
direct road to London. so, have hire horse to go twenty mile one
way, when she intend to go twenty mile the other, she set forward
with the same guide behind whom she have ride from her father's
house; the guide have now take up behind he, in the room of
Sophia, a much heavy, as well as much less lovely burden; be,
indeed, a huge portmanteau, well stuff with those outside ornament,
by mean of which the fair Honour hop to gain many conquest, and,
finally, to make her fortune in London city.
when they have go about two hundred pace from the inn on the London
road, Sophia ride up to the guide, and, with a voice much full of
honey than be ever that of Plato, though his mouth be suppose to
have be a bee-hive, beg he to take the first turning which lead
towards Bristol.
Reader, I be not superstitious, nor any great believer of modern
miracle. I do not, therefore, deliver the following as a certain
truth; for, indeed, I can scarce credit it myself: but the fidelity of
an historian oblige I to relate what hath be confidently assert.
the horse, then, on which the guide ride, be report to have be so
charm by Sophia's voice, that he make a full stop, and express an
unwillingness to proceed any far.
perhaps, however, the fact may be true, and less miraculous than it
hath be represent; since the natural cause seem adequate to the
effect: for, as the guide at that moment desist from a constant
application of his armed right heel (for, like hudibra, he wear but
one spur), it be more than possible that this omission alone might
occasion the beast to stop, especially as this be very frequent with
he at other time.
but if the voice of Sophia have really an effect on the horse, it have
very little on the rider. he answer somewhat surlily, "that measter
have order he to go a different way, and that he should lose his
place if he go any other than that he be order."
Sophia, find all her persuasion have no effect, begin now to add
irresistible charm to her voice; charm which, accord to the
proverb, make the old mare trot, instead of stand still; charm!
to which modern age have attribute all that irresistible force which
the antient impute to perfect oratory. in a word, she promise she
would reward he to his utmost expectation.
the lad be not totally deaf to these promise; but he dislike their
be indefinite; for, though perhaps he have never hear that word,
yet that, in fact, be his objection. he say, "Gentlevolks do not
consider the case of poor volk; that he have like to have be turn
away the other day, for rid about the country with a gentleman from
Squire Allworthy's, who do not reward he as he should have do."
"with whom?" say Sophia eagerly. "with a gentleman from Squire
Allworthy's," repeat the lad; "the squire's son, I think they call
'un."--"Whither? which way do he go?" say Sophia.--"Why, a little o'
one side o' Bristol, about twenty mile off," answer the
lad.--"guide I," say Sophia, "to the same place, and Iwill give thee
a guinea, or two, if one be not sufficient."--"To be certain," say
the boy, "it be honestly worth two, when your ladyship consider what
a risk I run; but, however, if your ladyship will promise I the two
guineas, Iwill e'en venture: to be certain it be a sinful thing to ride
about my measter's horse; but one comfort be, I can only be turn
away, and two guineas will partly make I amend."
the bargain be thus strike, the lad turn aside into the Bristol
road, and Sophia set forward in pursuit of Jones, highly contrary to
the remonstrance of Mrs Honour, who have much more desire to see London
than to see Mr Jones: for indeed she be not his friend with her
mistress, as he have be guilty of some neglect in certain pecuniary
civility, which be by custom due to the waiting-gentlewoman in all
love affair, and more especially in those of a clandestine kind. this
we impute rather to the carelessness of his temper than to any want of
generosity; but perhaps she derive it from the latter motive. certain
it be that she hat he very bitterly on that account, and resolve to
take every opportunity of injure he with her mistress. it be
therefore highly unlucky for she, that she have go to the very same
town and inn whence Jones have start, and still more unlucky be she
in have stumble on the same guide, and on this accidental discovery
which Sophia have make.
our traveller arrive at Hambrook[*] at the break of day, where
Honour be against she will charge to enquire the route which Mr
Jones have take. of this, indeed, the guide himself could have
inform they; but Sophia, I know not for what reason, never ask he
the question.
[*] this be the village where Jones meet the Quaker.
when Mrs Honour have make her report from the landlord, Sophia, with
much difficulty, procure some indifferent horse, which bring she
to the inn where Jones have be confine rather by the misfortune of
meeting with a surgeon than by have meet with a broken head.
here Honour, be again charge with a commission of enquiry, have no
soon apply herself to the landlady, and have describe the person
of Mr Jones, than that sagacious woman begin, in the vulgar phrase, to
smell a rat. when Sophia therefore enter the room, instead of
answer the maid, the landlady, address herself to the mistress,
begin the follow speech: "good lack-a-day! why there now, who would
have think it? I protest the lovely couple that ever eye behold.
I-fackins, madam, it be no wonder the squire run on so about your
ladyship. he tell I indeed you be the fine lady in the world, and
to be sure so you be. mercy on he, poor heart! I bepitie he, so I
do, when he use to hug his pillow, and call it his dear Madam
Sophia. I do all I could to dissuade he from go to the war: I
tell he there be man enow that be good for nothing else but to be
kill, that have not the love of such fine lady." "sure," say
Sophia, "the good woman be distract." "no, no," cry the landlady,
"I be not distract. what, doth your ladyship think I donot know
then? I assure you he tell I all." "what saucy fellow," cry Honour,
"tell you anything of my lady?" "no saucy fellow," answer the
landlady, "but the young gentleman you enquire after, and a very
pretty young gentleman he be, and he love Madam Sophia Western to the
bottom of his soul." "he love my lady! Iwould have you to know, woman,
she be meat for his master."--"Nay, Honour," say Sophia, interrupt
she, "donot be angry with the good woman; she intend no harm." "no,
marry, donot I," answer the landlady, embolden by the soft accent
of Sophia; and then launch into a long narrative too tedious to be
here set down, in which some passage dropt that give a little offence
to Sophia, and much more to her waiting-woman, who hence take occasion
to abuse poor Jones to her mistress the moment they be alone
together, say, "that he must be a very pitiful fellow, and could
have no love for a lady, whose name he would thus prostitute in an
ale-house."
Sophia do not see his behaviour in so very disadvantageous a light,
and be perhaps more pleased with the violent rapture of his love
(which the landlady exaggerate as much as she have do every other
circumstance) than she be offend with the rest; and indeed she
impute the whole to the extravagance, or rather ebullience, of his
passion, and to the openness of his heart.
this incident, however, be afterwards revive in her mind, and
place in the most odious colour by Honour, serve to heighten and
give credit to those unlucky occurrence at Upton, and assist the
waiting-woman in her endeavour to make her mistress depart from that
inn without see Jones.
the landlady find Sophia intend to stay no long than till she
horse be ready, and that without either eat or drinking, soon
withdraw; when Honour begin to take her mistress to task (for indeed
she use great freedom), and after a long harangue, in which she
remind she of her intention to go to London, and give frequent hint
of the impropriety of pursue a young fellow, she at last conclude
with this serious exhortation: "for heaven's sake, madam, consider
what you be about, and whither you be go."
this advice to a lady who have already ride near forty mile, and in no
very agreeable season, may seem foolish enough. it may be suppose she
have well consider and resolve this already; nay, Mrs Honour, by the
hint she throw out, seem to think so; and this I doubt not be the
opinion of many reader, who have, I make no doubt, be long since
well convinced of the purpose of our heroine, and have heartily
condemn she for it as a wanton baggage.
but in reality this be not the case. Sophia have be lately so
distract between hope and fear, her duty and love to her father, her
hatred to Blifil, her compassion, and (why should we not confess the
truth?) her love for Jones; which last the behaviour of her father, of
her aunt, of every one else, and more particularly of Jones himself,
have blow into a flame, that her mind be in that confused state which
may be truly say to make we ignorant of what we do, or whither we go,
or rather, indeed, indifferent as to the consequence of either.
the prudent and sage advice of she maid produce, however, some cool
reflection; and she at length determine to go to Gloucester, and
thence to proceed directly to London.
but, unluckily, a few mile before she enter that town, she meet the
hack-attorney, who, as be before mention, have din there with Mr
Jones. this fellow, be well know to Mrs Honour, stopt and speak to
she; of which Sophia at that time take little notice, more than to
enquire who he be.
but, have have a more particular account from Honour of this man
afterwards at Gloucester, and hearing of the great expedition he
usually make in travelling, for which (as hath be before observe)
he be particularly famous; recollect, likewise, that she have
overhear Mrs Honour inform he that they be go to Gloucester,
she begin to fear lest her father might, by this fellow's mean, be
able to trace she to that city; wherefore, if she should there strike
into the London road, she apprehend he would certainly be able to
overtake she. she therefore alter her resolution; and, have hire
horse to go a week's journey a way which she do not intend to
travel, she again set forward after a light refreshment, contrary to
the desire and earnest entreaty of she maid, and to the no less
vehement remonstrance of Mrs Whitefield, who, from good breeding, or
perhaps from good nature (for the poor young lady appear much
fatigue), press she very heartily to stay that evening at
Gloucester.
have refresh herself only with some tea, and with lie about two
hour on the bed, while her horse be get ready, she resolutely
leave Mrs Whitefield's about eleven at night, and, strike directly
into the Worcester road, within less than four hour arrive at that
very inn where we last see she.
have thus trace our heroine very particularly back from her
departure, till her arrival at Upton, we shall in a very few word
bring her father to the same place; who, have receive the first
scent from the post-boy, who conduct his daughter to Hambrook, very
easily trace she afterwards to Gloucester; whence he pursue she to
Upton, as he have learn Mr Jones have take that route (for Partridge,
to use the squire's expression, leave everywhere a strong scent behind
he), and he doubt not in the least but Sophia travel, or, as he
phrase it, run, the same way. he use indeed a very coarse
expression, which need not be here insert; as fox-hunter, who alone
will understand it, will easily suggest it to themselves.
BOOK XI.
contain about three day.
Chapter i.
a crust for the critic.
in our last initial chapter we may be suppose to have treat that
formidable set of man who be call critic with more freedom than
become we; since they exact, and indeed generally receive, great
condescension from author. we shall in this, therefore, give the
reason of our conduct to this august body; and here we shall,
perhaps, place they in a light in which they have not hitherto be
see.
this word critic be of greek derivation, and signify judgment. hence
I presume some person who have not understand the original, and have
see the english translation of the primitive, have conclude that it
mean judgment in the legal sense, in which it be frequently use as
equivalent to condemnation.
I be the rather inclined to be of that opinion, as the great number
of critic hath of late year be find amongst the lawyer. many of
these gentleman, from despair, perhaps, of ever rise to the bench in
Westminster-hall, have place themselves on the bench at the
playhouse, where they have exert their judicial capacity, and have
give judgment, _i.e._, condemn without mercy.
the gentleman would, perhaps, be well enough please, if we be to
leave they thus compare to one of the most important and honourable
office in the commonwealth, and, if we intend to apply to their
favour, we would do so; but, as we design to deal very sincerely and
plainly too with they, we must remind they of another officer of
justice of a much low rank; to whom, as they not only pronounce, but
execute, their own judgment, they bear likewise some remote
resemblance.
but in reality there be another light, in which these modern critic
may, with great justice and propriety, be see; and this be that of a
common slanderer. if a person who prys into the character of other,
with no other design but to discover their fault, and to publish they
to the world, deserve the title of a slanderer of the reputation of
man, why should not a critic, who read with the same malevolent view,
be as properly stile the slanderer of the reputation of book?
Vice hath not, I believe, a more abject slave; society produce not a
more odious vermin; nor can the devil receive a guest more worthy of
he, nor possibly more welcome to he, than a slanderer. the world, I
be afraid, regard not this monster with half the abhorrence which he
deserve; and I be more afraid to assign the reason of this criminal
lenity show towards he; yet it be certain that the thief look
innocent in the comparison; nay, the murderer himself can seldom stand
in competition with his guilt: for slander be a more cruel weapon than
a sword, as the wound which the former give be always incurable.
one method, indeed, there be of killing, and that the basest and most
execrable of all, which bear an exact analogy to the vice here
disclaim against, and that be poison: a means of revenge so base,
and yet so horrible, that it be once wisely distinguish by our law
from all other murder, in the peculiar severity of the punishment.
besides the dreadful mischief do by slander, and the baseness of
the mean by which they be effect, there be other circumstance
that highly aggravate its atrocious quality; for it often proceed
from no provocation, and seldom promise itself any reward, unless
some black and infernal mind may propose a reward in the thought of
have procure the ruin and misery of another.
Shakespear hath nobly touch this vice, when he says--
"who steal my purse steal trash; 't be something, nothing;
'twa mine, 'tis his, and hath be slave to thousand:
but he that filch from I my good name
Robs I of that which not ENRICHES HIM,
but makes I POOR indeed."
with all this my good reader will doubtless agree; but much of it will
probably seem too severe, when apply to the slanderer of book. but
let it here be consider that both proceed from the same wicked
disposition of mind, and be alike void of the excuse of temptation.
nor shall we conclude the injury do this way to be very slight, when
we consider a book as the author's offspring, and indeed as the child
of his brain.
the reader who hath suffer his muse to continue hitherto in a virgin
state can have but a very inadequate idea of this kind of paternal
fondness. to such we may parody the tender exclamation of Macduff,
"alas! Thou hast write no book." but the author whose muse hath
bring forth will feel the pathetic strain, perhaps will accompany I
with tear (especially if his darling be already no more), while I
mention the uneasiness with which the big muse bear about her burden,
the painful labour with which she produce it, and, lastly, the care,
the fondness, with which the tender father nourish his favourite,
till it be bring to maturity, and produce into the world.
nor be there any paternal fondness which seem less to savour of
absolute instinct, and which may so well be reconcile to worldly
wisdom, as this. these child may most truly be call the rich of
their father; and many of they have with true filial piety feed their
parent in his old age: so that not only the affection, but the
interest, of the author may be highly injure by these slanderer,
whose poisonous breath bring his book to an untimely end.
lastly, the slander of a book be, in truth, the slander of the author:
for, as no one can call another bastard, without call the mother a
whore, so neither can any one give the name of sad stuff, horrid
nonsense, &c., to a book, without call the author a blockhead;
which, though in a moral sense it be a preferable appellation to that
of villain, be perhaps rather more injurious to his worldly interest.
now, however ludicrous all this may appear to some, other, I doubt
not, will feel and acknowledge the truth of it; nay, may, perhaps,
think I have not treat the subject with decent solemnity; but surely
a man may speak truth with a smile countenance. in reality, to
depreciate a book maliciously, or even wantonly, be at least a very
ill-natured office; and a morose snarl critic may, I believe, be
suspect to be a bad man.
I will therefore endeavour, in the remain part of this chapter, to
explain the mark of this character, and to show what criticism I here
intend to obviate: for I can never be understand, unless by the very
person here mean, to insinuate that there be no proper judge of
writing, or to endeavour to exclude from the commonwealth of
literature any of those noble critic to whose labour the learned
world be so greatly indebted. such be Aristotle, Horace, and
Longinus, among the antient, Dacier and Bossu among the French, and
some perhaps among we; who have certainly be duly authorise to
execute at least a judicial authority _in foro literario_.
but without ascertain all the proper qualification of a critic,
which I have touch on elsewhere, I think I may very boldly object to
the censure of any one past upon work which he hath not himself
read. such censurer as these, whether they speak from their own guess
or suspicion, or from the report and opinion of other, may properly
be say to slander the reputation of the book they condemn.
such may likewise be suspect of deserve this character, who,
without assign any particular fault, condemn the whole in general
defamatory term; such as vile, dull, d--d stuff, &c., and
particularly by the use of the monosyllable low; a word which become
the mouth of no critic who be not right honourable.
again, though there may be some fault justly assign in the work,
yet, if those be not in the most essential part, or if they be
compensate by great beauty, it will savour rather of the malice
of a slanderer than of the judgment of a true critic to pass a severe
sentence upon the whole, merely on account of some vicious part. this
be directly contrary to the sentiment of Horace:
_verum ubi plura nitent in carmine, non ego paucis
Offendor maculi, quas aut incuria fudit,
Aut humana parum cavit natura----_
but where the beauty, more in number, shine,
I be not angry, when a casual line
(that with some trivial fault unequal flow)
a careless hand or human frailty shows.--mr FRANCIS.
for, as Martial say, _Aliter non fit, Avite, liber_. no book can be
otherwise compose. all beauty of character, as well as of
countenance, and indeed of everything human, be to be try in this
manner. Cruel indeed would it be if such a work as this history, which
hath employ some thousand of hour in the composing, should be
liable to be condemn, because some particular chapter, or perhaps
chapter, may be obnoxious to very just and sensible objection. and
yet nothing be more common than the most rigorous sentence upon book
support by such objection, which, if they be rightly take (and
that they be not always), do by no mean go to the merit of the
whole. in the theatre especially, a single expression which doth not
coincide with the taste of the audience, or with any individual critic
of that audience, be sure to be hiss; and one scene which should be
disapprove would hazard the whole piece. to write within such severe
rule as these be as impossible as to live up to some splenetic
opinion: and if we judge accord to the sentiment of some critic,
and of some Christians, no author will be save in this world, and no
man in the next.
Chapter ii.
the adventure which Sophia meet with after she leave Upton.
our history, just before it be oblige to turn about and travel
backwards, have mention the departure of Sophia and she maid from the
inn; we shall now therefore pursue the step of that lovely creature,
and leave her unworthy lover a little long to bemoan his ill-luck,
or rather his ill-conduct.
Sophia have direct her guide to travel through bye-road, across
the country, they now pass the Severn, and have scarce get a mile
from the inn, when the young lady, look behind she, see several
horse come after on full speed. this greatly alarm her fear, and
she call to the guide to put on as fast as possible.
he immediately obey she, and away they ride a full gallop. but the
fast they go, the fast be they follow; and as the horse
behind be somewhat swifter than those before, so the former be at
length overtaken. a happy circumstance for poor Sophia; whose fear,
join to her fatigue, have almost overpower her spirit; but she be
now instantly relieve by a female voice, that greet she in the
soft manner, and with the utmost civility. this greet Sophia, as
soon as she could recover her breath, with like civility, and with the
high satisfaction to herself, return.
the traveller who join Sophia, and who have give she such terror,
consist, like her own company, of two female and a guide. the two
party proceed three full mile together before any one offer
again to open their mouth; when our heroine, have pretty well get
the well of her fear (but yet be somewhat surprize that the
other still continue to attend she, as she pursue no great road, and
have already pass through several turning), accost the strange
lady in a most obliging tone, and say, "she be very happy to find
they be both travel the same way." the other, who, like a ghost,
only want to be speak to, readily answer, "that the happiness be
entirely her; that she be a perfect stranger in that country, and
be so overjoyed at meet a companion of her own sex, that she have
perhaps be guilty of an impertinence, which require great apology,
in keep pace with she." More civility pass between these two
lady; for Mrs Honour have now give place to the fine habit of the
stranger, and have fall into the rear. but, though Sophia have great
curiosity to know why the other lady continue to travel on through
the same bye-road with herself, nay, though this give she some
uneasiness, yet fear, or modesty, or some other consideration,
restrain she from ask the question.
the strange lady now labour under a difficulty which appear almost
below the dignity of history to mention. her bonnet have be blow
from her head not less than five time within the last mile; nor could
she come at any ribbon or handkerchief to tie it under her chin. when
Sophia be inform of this, she immediately supply she with a
handkerchief for this purpose; which while she be pull from her
pocket, she perhaps too much neglect the management of her horse,
for the beast, now unluckily make a false step, fall upon his
fore-leg, and throw his fair rider from his back.
Though Sophia come head foremost to the ground, she happily receive
not the least damage: and the same circumstance which have perhaps
contribute to her fall now preserve she from confusion; for the lane
which they be then pass be narrow, and very much overgrown with
tree, so that the moon could here afford very little light, and be
moreover, at present, so obscure in a cloud, that it be almost
perfectly dark. by these mean the young lady's modesty, which be
extremely delicate, escape as free from injury as her limb, and she
be once more reinstate in her saddle, have receive no other harm
than a little fright by her fall.
daylight at length appear in its full lustre; and now the two
lady, who be rid over a common side by side, look stedfastly
at each other, at the same moment both their eye become fix; both
their horse stopt, and, both speak together, with equal joy
pronounce, the one the name of Sophia, the other that of Harriet.
this unexpected encounter surprize the lady much more than I
believe it will the sagacious reader, who must have imagine that the
strange lady could be no other than Mrs Fitzpatrick, the cousin of
Miss Western, whom we before mention to have sally from the inn a
few minute after she.
so great be the surprize and joy which these two cousin conceive at
this meeting (for they have formerly be most intimate acquaintance
and friend, and have long live together with their aunt Western),
that it be impossible to recount half the congratulation which pass
between they, before either ask a very natural question of the
other, namely, whither she be go?
this at last, however, come first from Mrs Fitzpatrick; but, easy and
natural as the question may seem, Sophia find it difficult to give it
a very ready and certain answer. she beg her cousin therefore to
suspend all curiosity till they arrive at some inn, "which I
suppose," say she, "can hardly be far distant; and, believe I,
Harriet, I suspend as much curiosity on my side; for, indeed, I
believe our astonishment be pretty equal."
the conversation which pass between these lady on the road be, I
apprehend, little worth relate; and less certainly be that between
the two waiting-woman; for they likewise begin to pay their
compliment to each other. as for the guide, they be debar from
the pleasure of discourse, the one be place in the van, and the
other oblige to bring up the rear.
in this posture they travel many hour, till they come into a wide
and well-beat road, which, as they turn to the right, soon bring
they to a very fair promising inn, where they all alight: but so
fatigue be Sophia, that as she have sit her horse during the last
five or six mile with great difficulty, so be she now incapable of
dismount from he without assistance. this the landlord, who have
hold of her horse, presently perceive, offer to lift she in his
arm from her saddle; and she too readily accept the tender of his
service. indeed fortune seem to have resolve to put Sophia to the
blush that day, and the second malicious attempt succeed well than
the first; for my landlord have no soon receive the young lady in
his arm, than his foot, which the gout have lately very severely
handle, give way, and down he tumble; but, at the same time, with no
less dexterity than gallantry, contrive to throw himself under his
charming burden, so that he alone receive any bruise from the fall;
for the great injury which happen to Sophia be a violent shock
give to her modesty by an immoderate grin, which, at she rise from
the ground, she observe in the countenance of most of the
bye-stander. this make her suspect what have really happen, and what
we shall not here relate for the indulgence of those reader who be
capable of laugh at the offence give to a young lady's delicacy.
accident of this kind we have never regard in a comical light; nor
will we scruple to say that he must have a very inadequate idea of the
modesty of a beautiful young woman, who would wish to sacrifice it to
so paltry a satisfaction as can arise from laughter.
this fright and shock, join to the violent fatigue which both her
mind and body have undergo, almost overcome the excellent
constitution of Sophia, and she have scarce strength sufficient to
totter into the inn, lean on the arm of she maid. here she be no
soon seat than she call for a glass of water; but Mrs Honour,
very judiciously, in my opinion, change it into a glass of wine.
Mrs Fitzpatrick, hear from Mrs Honour that Sophia have not be in
bed during the two last night, and observe she to look very pale
and wan with her fatigue, earnestly entreat she to refresh herself
with some sleep. she be yet a stranger to her history, or her
apprehension; but, have she know both, she would have give the same
advice; for rest be visibly necessary for she; and their long journey
through bye-road so entirely remove all danger of pursuit, that she
be herself perfectly easy on that account.
Sophia be easily prevail on to follow the counsel of her friend,
which be heartily second by her maid. Mrs Fitzpatrick likewise
offer to bear her cousin company, which Sophia, with much
complacence, accept.
the mistress be no soon in bed than the maid prepare to follow she
example. she begin to make many apology to her sister Abigail for
leave she alone in so horrid a place as an inn; but the other stopt
her short, be as well inclined to a nap as herself, and desire the
honour of be her bedfellow. Sophia's maid agree to give she a
share of her bed, but put in her claim to all the honour. so, after
many courtsie and compliment, to bed together go the
waiting-woman, as their mistress have do before they.
it be usual with my landlord (as indeed it be with the whole
fraternity) to enquire particularly of all coachman, footman,
postboy, and other, into the name of all his guest; what their
estate be, and where it lay. it cannot therefore be wonder at that
the many particular circumstance which attend our traveller, and
especially their retire all to sleep at so extraordinary and unusual
an hour as ten in the morning, should excite his curiosity. as soon,
therefore, as the guide enter the kitchen, he begin to examine who
the lady be, and whence they come; but the guide, though they
faithfully relate all they know, give he very little satisfaction.
on the contrary, they rather enflame his curiosity than extinguish
it.
this landlord have the character, among all his neighbour, of be a
very sagacious fellow. he be think to see far and deep into
thing than any man in the parish, the parson himself not excepted.
perhaps his look have contribute not a little to procure he this
reputation; for there be in this something wonderfully wise and
significant, especially when he have a pipe in his mouth; which,
indeed, he seldom be without. his behaviour, likewise, greatly
assist in promote the opinion of his wisdom. in his deportment he
be solemn, if not sullen; and when he speak, which be seldom, he
always deliver himself in a slow voice; and, though his sentence
be short, they be still interrupt with many hum and ha's, ay
ays, and other expletive: so that, though he accompany his word
with certain explanatory gesture, such as shake or nod the
head, or point with his fore-finger, he generally leave his hearer
to understand more than he express; nay, he commonly give they a
hint that he know much more than he think proper to disclose. this
last circumstance alone may, indeed, very well account for his
character of wisdom; since man be strangely inclined to worship what
they do not understand. a grand secret, upon which several imposer on
mankind have totally rely for the success of their fraud.
this polite person, now take his wife aside, ask she "what she
think of the lady lately arrive?" "think of they?" say the wife,
"why, what should I think of they?" "I know," answer he, "what I
think. the guide tell strange story. one pretend to be come from
Gloucester, and the other from Upton; and neither of they, for what I
can find, can tell whither they be go. but what people ever travel
across the country from Upton hither, especially to London? and one of
the maid-servant, before she alight from her horse, ask if this
be not the London road? now I have put all these circumstance
together, and whom do you think I have find they out to be?" "Nay,"
answer she, "you know I never pretend to guess at your
discovery."----"It be a good girl," reply he, chuck she under
the chin; "I must own you have always submit to my knowledge of
these matter. why, then, depend upon it; mind what I say--depend upon
it, they be certainly some of the rebel lady, who, they say, travel
with the young Chevalier; and have take a roundabout way to escape
the duke's army."
"Husband," quoth the wife, "you have certainly hit it; for one of they
be dress as fine as any princess; and, to be sure, she look for all
the world like one.----but yet, when I consider one thing"----"when
you consider," cry the landlord contemptuously----"Come, pray letus
hear what you consider."----"why, it be," answer the wife, "that she
be too humble to be any very great lady: for, while our Betty be
warm the bed, she call she nothing but child, and my dear, and
sweetheart; and, when Betty offer to pull off her shoe and
stocking, she would not suffer she, say, she would not give she
the trouble."
"Pugh!" answer the husband, "that be nothing. dost think, because
you have see some great lady rude and uncivil to person below
they, that none of they know how to behave themselves when they come
before their inferior? I think I know people of fashion when I see
they--I think I do. do not she call for a glass of water when she
come in? another sort of woman would have call for a dram; you know
they would. if she be not a woman of very great quality, sell I for a
fool; and, I believe, those who buy I will have a bad bargain. now,
would a woman of her quality travel without a footman, unless upon
some such extraordinary occasion?" "Nay, to be sure, husband," cry
she, "you know these matter well than I, or most folk." "I think I
do know something," say he. "to be sure," answer the wife, "the
poor little heart look so piteous, when she sit down in the chair, I
protest I could not help have a compassion for she almost as much as
if she have be a poor body. but whatbe to be do, husband? if an she
be a rebel, I suppose you intend to betray she up to the court. well,
shebe a sweet-temper, good-humour lady, be she what she will, and
I shall hardly refrain from cry when I hear she be hang or
behead." "Pooh!" answer the husband.----"But, as to whatbe to be
do, it be not so easy a matter to determine. I hope, before she go
away, we shall have the news of a battle; for, if the Chevalier should
get the well, she may gain we interest at court, and make our
fortune without betray she." "why, thatbe true," reply the wife;
"and I heartily hope she will have it in her power. certainly shebe a
sweet good lady; it would go horribly against I to have she come to
any harm." "Pooh!" cry the landlord, "woman be always so
tender-hearted. why, you would not harbour rebel, would you?" "no,
certainly," answer the wife; "and as for betray she, come what
will on't, nobody can blame we. it be what anybody would do in our
case."
while our politic landlord, who have not, we see, undeservedly the
reputation of great wisdom among his neighbour, be engage in
debate this matter with himself (for he pay little attention to the
opinion of his wife), news arrive that the rebel have give the duke
the slip, and have get a day's march towards London; and soon after
arrive a famous Jacobite squire, who, with great joy in his
countenance, shake the landlord by the hand, say, "allbe our own,
boy, ten thousand honest frenchman be land in Suffolk. Old England
for ever! ten thousand French, my brave lad! I be go to tap away
directly."
this news determine the opinion of the wise man, and he resolve to
make his court to the young lady when she arise; for he have now (he
say) discover that she be no other than Madam Jenny Cameron
herself.
Chapter iii.
a very short chapter, in which however be a sun, a moon, a star, and
an angel.
the sun (for he keep very good hour at this time of the year) have
be some time retire to rest when Sophia arise greatly refresh by
her sleep; which, short as it be, nothing but her extreme fatigue
could have occasion; for, though she have tell she maid, and perhaps
herself too, that she be perfectly easy when she leave Upton, yet it
be certain her mind be a little affected with that malady which be
attend with all the restless symptom of a fever, and be perhaps the
very distemper which physician mean (if they mean anything) by the
fever on the spirit.
Mrs Fitzpatrick likewise leave her bed at the same time; and, have
summon she maid, immediately dress herself. she be really a very
pretty woman, and, have she be in any other company but that of
Sophia, might have be think beautiful; but when Mrs Honour of her
own accord attend (for her mistress would not suffer she to be
waked), and have equip our heroine, the charm of Mrs Fitzpatrick,
who have perform the office of the morning-star, and have precede
great glory, share the fate of that star, and be totally
eclipse the moment those glory shine forth.
perhaps Sophia never look more beautiful than she do at this
instant. we ought not, therefore, to condemn the maid of the inn for
her hyperbole, who, when she descend, after have light the fire,
declare, and ratify it with an oath, that if ever there be an
angel upon earth, she be now above-stair.
Sophia have acquaint her cousin with her design to go to London; and
Mrs Fitzpatrick have agree to accompany she; for the arrival of her
husband at Upton have put an end to her design of go to Bath, or to
her aunt western. they have therefore no soon finish their tea than
Sophia propose to set out, the moon then shin extremely bright,
and as for the frost she defy it; nor have she any of those
apprehension which many young lady would have feel at travel by
night; for she have, as we have before observe, some little degree of
natural courage; and this, her present sensation, which border
somewhat on despair, greatly encrease. besides, as she have already
travel twice with safety by the light of the moon, she be the
well embolden to trust to it a third time.
the disposition of Mrs Fitzpatrick be more timorous; for, though the
great terror have conquer the less, and the presence of her
husband have drive she away at so unseasonable an hour from Upton,
yet, be now arrive at a place where she think herself safe from
his pursuit, these less terror of I know not what operate so
strongly, that she earnestly entreat her cousin to stay till the
next morning, and not expose herself to the danger of travel by
night.
Sophia, who be yield to an excess, when she could neither laugh
nor reason her cousin out of these apprehension, at last give way to
they. perhaps, indeed, have she know of her father's arrival at Upton,
it might have be more difficult to have persuade she; for as to
Jones, she have, I be afraid, no great horror at the thought of be
overtake by he; nay, to confess the truth, I believe she rather
wish than fear it; though I might honestly enough have conceal
this wish from the reader, as it be one of those secret spontaneous
emotion of the soul to which the reason be often a stranger.
when our young lady have determine to remain all that evening in
their inn they be attend by the landlady, who desire to know what
their ladyship would be pleased to eat. such charm be there in the
voice, in the manner, and in the affable deportment of Sophia, that
she ravish the landlady to the high degree; and that good woman,
conclude that she have attend Jenny Cameron, become in a moment a
stanch Jacobite, and wish heartily well to the young Pretender's
cause, from the great sweetness and affability with which she have be
treat by his suppose mistress.
the two cousin begin now to impart to each other their reciprocal
curiosity to know what extraordinary accident on both side
occasion this so strange and unexpected meeting. at last Mrs
Fitzpatrick, have obtain of Sophia a promise of communicate
likewise in her turn, begin to relate what the reader, if he be
desirous to know her history, may read in the ensue chapter.
chapter iv.
the history of Mrs Fitzpatrick.
Mrs Fitzpatrick, after a silence of a few moment, fetch a deep
sigh, thus begin:
"it be natural to the unhappy to feel a secret concern in recollect
those period of their life which have be most delightful to they.
the remembrance of past pleasure affect we with a kind of tender
grief, like what we suffer for depart friend; and the idea of both
may be say to haunt our imagination.
"for this reason, I never reflect without sorrow on those day (the
happy far of my life) which we spend together when both be under
the care of my aunt Western. alas! why be Miss Graveairs and Miss
Giddy no more? you remember, I be sure, when we know each other by no
other name. indeed, you give the latter appellation with too much
cause. I have since experience how much I deserve it. you, my
Sophia, be always my superior in everything, and I heartily hope you
will be so in your fortune. I shall never forget the wise and matronly
advice you once give I, when I lament be disappoint of a ball,
though you could not be then fourteen year old.----o my Sophy, how
bl must have be my situation, when I could think such a
disappointment a misfortune; and when indeed it be the great I have
ever know!"
"and yet, my dear Harriet," answer Sophia, "it be then a serious
matter with you. comfort yourself therefore with thinking, that
whatever you now lament may hereafter appear as trifle and
contemptible as a ball would at this time."
"alas, my Sophia," reply the other lady, "you yourself will think
otherwise of my present situation; for greatly must that tender heart
be alter if my misfortune do not draw many a sigh, nay, many a
tear, from you. the knowledge of this should perhaps deter I from
relate what I be convinced will so much affect you." here Mrs
Fitzpatrick stopt, till, at the repeat entreaty of Sophia, she
thus proceed:
"though you must have hear much of my marriage; yet, as matter may
probably have be misrepresent, I will set out from the very
commencement of my unfortunate acquaintance with my present husband;
which be at Bath, soon after you leave my aunt, and return home to
your father.
"among the gay young fellow who be at this season at Bath, Mr
Fitzpatrick be one. he be handsome, _dégagé,_ extremely gallant, and
in his dress exceed most other. in short, my dear, if you be
unluckily to see he now, I could describe he no well than by
tell you he be the very reverse of everything which he be: for he
hath rusticate himself so long, that he be become an absolute wild
Irishman. but to proceed in my story: the qualification which he then
possess so well recommend he, that, though the people of quality
at that time live separate from the rest of the company, and exclude
they from all their party, Mr Fitzpatrick find mean to gain
admittance. it be perhaps no easy matter to avoid he; for he
require very little or no invitation; and as, be handsome and
genteel, he find it no very difficult matter to ingratiate himself
with the lady, so, he have frequently draw his sword, the man do
not care publickly to affront he. have it not be for some such
reason, I believe he would have be soon expel by his own sex; for
surely he have no strict title to be prefer to the english gentry;
nor do they seem inclined to show he any extraordinary favour. they
all abuse he behind his back, which might probably proceed from
envy; for by the woman he be well receive, and very particularly
distinguish by they.
"my aunt, though no person of quality herself, as she have always live
about the court, be enrol in that party; for, by whatever mean
you get into the polite circle, when you be once there, it be
sufficient merit for you that you be there. this observation, young
as you be, you could scarce avoid make from my aunt, who be free,
or reserve, with all people, just as they have more or less of this
merit.
"and this merit, I believe, it be, which principally recommend Mr
Fitzpatrick to her favour. in which he so well succeed, that he be
always one of her private party. nor be he backward in return
such distinction; for he soon grow so very particular in his behaviour
to she, that the scandal club first begin to take notice of it, and
the well-dispose person make a match between they. for my own
part, I confess, I make no doubt but that his design be strictly
honourable, as the phrase be; that be, to rob a lady of her fortune by
way of marriage. my aunt be, I conceive, neither young enough nor
handsome enough to attract much wicked inclination; but she have
matrimonial charm in great abundance.
"I be the more confirmed in this opinion from the extraordinary
respect which he show to myself from the first moment of our
acquaintance. this I understand as an attempt to lessen, if possible,
that disinclination which my interest might be suppose to give I
towards the match; and I know not but in some measure it have that
effect; for, as I be well content with my own fortune, and of all
people the least a slave to interested view, so I could not be
violently the enemy of a man with whose behaviour to I I be greatly
please; and the more so, as I be the only object of such respect;
for he behave at the same time to many woman of quality without any
respect at all.
"agreeable as this be to I, he soon change it into another kind of
behaviour, which be perhaps more so. he now put on much softness and
tenderness, and languish and sigh abundantly. at time, indeed,
whether from art or nature I will not determine, he give his usual
loose to gaiety and mirth; but this be always in general company, and
with other woman; for even in a country-dance, when he be not my
partner, he become grave, and put on the soft look imaginable the
moment he approach I. indeed he be in all thing so very
particular towards I, that I must have be blind not to have
discover it. and, and, and----" "and you be more pleased still, my
dear Harriet," cry Sophia; "you need not be ashamed," add she,
sigh; "for sure there be irresistible charm in tenderness, which
too many man be able to affect." "true," answer her cousin; "man,
who in all other instance want common sense, be very Machiavels in
the art of love. I wish I do not know an instance.--well, scandal
now begin to be as busy with I as it have before be with my aunt;
and some good lady do not scruple to affirm that Mr Fitzpatrick have
an intrigue with we both.
"but, what may seem astonishing, my aunt never see, nor in the least
seem to suspect, that which be visible enough, I believe, from both
our behaviour. one would indeed think that love quite put out the
eye of an old woman. in fact, they so greedily swallow the address
which be make to they, that, like an outrageous glutton, they be not
at leisure to observe what pass amongst other at the same table.
this I have observe in more case than my own; and this be so
strongly verify by my aunt, that, though she often find we together
at her return from the pump, the least cant word of his, pretend
impatience at her absence, effectually smother all suspicion. one
artifice succeed with she to admiration. this be his treat I
like a little child, and never call I by any other name in her
presence but that of pretty miss. this indeed do he some disservice
with your humble servant; but I soon see through it, especially as in
her absence he behave to I, as I have say, in a different manner.
however, if I be not greatly disoblige by a conduct of which I have
discover the design, I smart very severely for it; for my aunt
really conceive I to be what her lover (as she think he) call
I, and treat I in all respect as a perfect infant. to say the
truth, I wonder she have not insist on my again wear
lead-string.
"at last, my lover (for so he be) think proper, in a most solemn
manner, to disclose a secret which I have know long before. he now
place all the love which he have pretend to my aunt to my account.
he lament, in very pathetic term, the encouragement she have give
he, and make a high merit of the tedious hour in which he have
undergo she conversation.--what shall I tell you, my dear
Sophia?--Then I will confess the truth. I be pleased with my man. I
be pleased with my conquest. to rival my aunt delight I; to rival
so many other woman charm I. in short, I be afraid I do not behave
as I should do, even upon the very first declaration--I wish I do not
almost give he positive encouragement before we part.
"the Bath now talk loudly--I might almost say, roar against I.
several young woman affect to shun my acquaintance, not so much,
perhaps, from any real suspicion, as from a desire of banish I
from a company in which I too much engross their favourite man. and
here I cannot omit express my gratitude to the kindness intend I
by Mr Nash, who take I one day aside, and give I advice, which if I
have follow, I have be a happy woman. `child,' say he, `I be sorry
to see the familiarity which subsist between you and a fellow who be
altogether unworthy of you, and I be afraid will prove your ruin. as
for your old stinking aunt, if it be to be no injury to you and my
pretty Sophy Western (I assure you I repeat his word), I should be
heartily glad that the fellow be in possession of all that belong to
she. I never advise old woman: for, if they take it into their head
to go to the devil, it be no more possible than worth while to keep
they from he. innocence and youth and beauty be worthy a well
fate, and I would save they from his clutch. let I advise you
therefore, dear child, never suffer this fellow to be particular with
you again.' many more thing he say to I, which I have now
forget, and indeed I attend very little to they at the time; for
inclination contradict all he say; and, besides, I could not be
persuade that woman of quality would condescend to familiarity with
such a person as he describe.
"but I be afraid, my dear, I shall tire you with a detail of so many
minute circumstance. to be concise, therefore, imagine I marry;
imagine I with my husband, at the foot of my aunt; and then imagine
the mad woman in Bedlam, in a rave fit, and your imagination
will suggest to you no more than what really happen.
"the very next day my aunt leave the place, partly to avoid see Mr
Fitzpatrick or myself, and as much perhaps to avoid see any one
else; for, though I be tell she hath since deny everything stoutly,
I believe she be then a little confound at her disappointment.
since that time, I have write to her many letter, but never could
obtain an answer, which I must own sit somewhat the heavy, as she
herself be, though undesignedly, the occasion of all my suffering:
for, have it not be under the colour of pay his address to she,
Mr Fitzpatrick would never have find sufficient opportunity to have
engage my heart, which, in other circumstance, I still flatter
myself would not have be an easy conquest to such a person. indeed,
I believe I should not have err so grossly in my choice if I have
rely on my own judgment; but I trust totally to the opinion of
other, and very foolishly take the merit of a man for grant whom I
see so universally well receive by the woman. what be the reason, my
dear, that we, who have understanding equal to the wise and
great of the other sex, so often make choice of the silly
fellow for companion and favourite? it raise my indignation to the
high pitch to reflect on the number of woman of sense who have
be undo by fool." here she pause a moment; but, Sophia make no
answer, she proceed as in the next chapter.
Chapter v.
in which the history of Mrs Fitzpatrick be continue.
"we remain at Bath no long than a fortnight after our wedding; for
as to any reconciliation with my aunt, there be no hope; and of my
fortune not one farthing could be touch till I be of age, of which
I now want more than two year. my husband therefore be resolve to
set out for Ireland; against which I remonstrate very earnestly, and
insist on a promise which he have make I before our marriage that I
should never take this journey against my consent; and indeed I never
intend to consent to it; nor will anybody, I believe, blame I for
that resolution; but this, however, I never mention to my husband,
and petition only for the reprieve of a month; but he have fix the
day, and to that day he obstinately adhere.
"the evening before our departure, as we be dispute this point
with great eagerness on both side, he start suddenly from his
chair, and leave I abruptly, say he be go to the room. he be
hardly out of the house when I see a paper lie on the floor, which,
I suppose, he have carelessly pull from his pocket, together with his
handkerchief. this paper I take up, and, find it to be a letter, I
make no scruple to open and read it; and indeed I read it so often
that I can repeat it to you almost word for word. this then be the
letter:
_'to Mr Brian Fitzpatrick._
'SIR,
'yours receive, and be surprize you should use I in this manner,
as have never see any of your cash, unless for one linsey-woolsey
coat, and your bill now be upwards of £150. consider, sir, how often
you have fob I off with your be shortly to be married to this
lady and t'other lady; but I can neither live on hope or promise,
nor will my woollen-draper take any such in payment. you tell I you
be secure of have either the aunt or the niece, and that you
might have marry the aunt before this, whose jointure you say be
immense, but that you prefer the niece on account of her ready
money. pray, sir, take a fool's advice for once, and marry the first
you can get. you will pardon my offer my advice, as you know I
sincerely wish you well. shall draw on you per next post, in favour
of Messieurs John Drugget and company, at fourteen day, which doubt
not your honouring, and be,
Sir, your humble servant, 'SAM. COSGRAVE.'
"this be the letter, word for word. Guess, my dear girl--guess how
this letter affect I. you prefer the niece on account of her ready
money! if every one of these word have be a dagger, I could with
pleasure have stab they into his heart; but I will not recount my
frantic behaviour on the occasion. I have pretty well spend my tear
before his return home; but sufficient remain of they appear in my
swollen eye. he throw himself sullenly into his chair, and for a long
time we be both silent. at length, in a haughty tone, he say, `I
hope, madam, your servant have pack up all your thing; for the
coach will be ready by six in the morning.' my patience be totally
subdue by this provocation, and I answer, `no, sir, there be a
letter still remain unpacked;' and then throw it on the table I
fall to upbraid he with the most bitter language I could invent.
"whether guilt, or shame, or prudence, restrain he I cannot say;
but, though he be the most passionate of man, he exert no rage on
this occasion. he endeavour, on the contrary, to pacify I by the
most gentle mean. he swear the phrase in the letter to which I
principally object be not his, nor have he ever write any such. he
own, indeed, the have mention his marriage, and that preference
which he have give to myself, but deny with many oath the having
mention any such matter at all on account of the strait he be in
for money, arise, he say, from his have too long neglect his
estate in Ireland. and this, he say, which he could not bear to
discover to I, be the only reason of his have so strenuously
insist on our journey. he then use several very endearing
expression, and conclude by a very fond caress, and many violent
protestation of love.
"there be one circumstance which, though he do not appeal to it, have
much weight with I in his favour, and that be the word jointure in
the taylor's letter, whereas my aunt never have be marry, and this
Mr Fitzpatrick well knew.----As I imagine, therefore, that the fellow
must have insert this of his own head, or from hearsay, I persuade
myself he might have venture likewise on that odious line on no
well authority. what reasoning be this, my dear? be I not an
advocate rather than a judge?--but why do I mention such a
circumstance as this, or appeal to it for the justification of my
forgiveness?--In short, have he be guilty of twenty time as much,
half the tenderness and fondness which he use would have prevail on
I to have forgive he. I now make no farth objection to our
set out, which we do the next morning, and in a little more than
a week arrive at the seat of Mr Fitzpatrick.
"your curiosity will excuse I from relate any occurrence which
past during our journey; for it would indeed be highly disagreeable to
travel it over again, and no less so to you to travel it over with I.
"this seat, then, be an ancient mansion-house: if I be in one of
those merry humour in which you have so often see I, I could
describe it to you ridiculously enough. it look as if it have be
formerly inhabit by a gentleman. here be room enough, and not the
less room on account of the furniture; for indeed there be very
little in it. an old woman, who seem coeval with the building, and
greatly resemble she whom Chamont mention in the Orphan, receive we
at the gate, and in a howl scarce human, and to I unintelligible,
welcome her master home. in short, the whole scene be so gloomy and
melancholy, that it throw my spirit into the low dejection; which
my husband discerning, instead of relieve, encrease by two or three
malicious observation. `there be good house, madam,' say he, `as
you find, in other place besides England; but perhaps you have rather
be in a dirty lodging at Bath.'
"Happy, my dear, be the woman who, in any state of life, hath a
cheerful good-natured companion to support and comfort she! but why do
I reflect on happy situation only to aggravate my own misery? my
companion, far from clear up the gloom of solitude, soon convince
I that I must have be wretche with he in any place, and in any
condition. in a word, he be a surly fellow, a character perhaps you
have never see; for, indeed, no woman ever see it exemplified but in
a father, a brother, or a husband; and, though you have a father, he
be not of that character. this surly fellow have formerly appear to
I the very reverse, and so he do still to every other person. good
heaven! how be it possible for a man to maintain a constant lie in his
appearance abroad and in company, and to content himself with shewing
disagreeable truth only at home? here, my dear, they make themselves
amend for the uneasy restraint which they put on their temper in the
world; for I have observe, the more merry and gay and good-humour
my husband hath at any time be in company, the more sullen and
morose he be sure to become at our next private meeting. how shall I
describe his barbarity? to my fondness he be cold and insensible. my
little comical way, which you, my Sophy, and which other, have
call so agreeable, he treat with contempt. in my most serious
moment he sing and whistle; and whenever I be thoroughly deject
and miserable he be angry, and abuse I: for, though he be never
pleased with my good-humour, nor ascribe it to my satisfaction in
he, yet my low spirit always offend he, and those he impute to
my repentance of have (as he say) marry an Irishman.
"you will easily conceive, my dear Graveairs (I ask your pardon, I
really forget myself), that, when a woman make an imprudent match in
the sense of the world, that is, when she be not an arrant prostitute
to pecuniary interest, she must necessarily have some inclination and
affection for her man. you will as easily believe that this affection
may possibly be lessen; nay, I do assure you, contempt will wholly
eradicate it. this contempt I now begin to entertain for my husband,
whom I now discover to be--I must use the expression--an arrant
blockhead. perhaps you will wonder I do not make this discovery long
before; but woman will suggest a thousand excuse to themselves for
the folly of those they like: besides, give I leave to tell you, it
require a most penetrate eye to discern a fool through the
disguise of gaiety and good breeding.
"it will be easily imagine that, when I once despise my husband, as
I confess to you I soon do, I must consequently dislike his company;
and indeed I have the happiness of be very little troubled with it;
for our house be now most elegantly furnish, our cellar well
stock, and dog and horse provide in great abundance. as my
gentleman therefore entertain his neighbour with great hospitality,
so his neighbour resort to he with great alacrity; and sport and
drinking consume so much of his time, that a small part of his
conversation, that be to say, of his ill-humour, fall to my share.
"Happy would it have be for I if I could as easily have avoid all
other disagreeable company; but, alas! I be confine to some which
constantly torment I; and the more, as I see no prospect of be
relieve from they. these companion be my own rack thought,
which plague and in a manner haunt I night and day. in this
situation I past through a scene, the horror of which can neither be
paint nor imagine. think, my dear, figure, if you can, to yourself,
what I must have undergo. I become a mother by the man I scorn,
hat, and detest. I go through all the agony and misery of a
lying-in (ten time more painful in such a circumstance than the bad
labour can be when one endure it for a man one love) in a desert, or
rather, indeed, a scene of riot and revel, without a friend, without a
companion, or without any of those agreeable circumstance which often
alleviate, and perhaps sometimes more than compensate, the suffering
of our sex at that season."
Chapter vi.
in which the mistake of the landlord throw Sophia into a dreadful
consternation.
Mrs Fitzpatrick be proceed in her narrative when she be
interrupt by the entrance of dinner, greatly to the concern of
Sophia; for the misfortune of her friend have raise her anxiety, and
leave she no appetite but what Mrs Fitzpatrick be to satisfy by her
relation.
the landlord now attend with a plate under his arm, and with the
same respect in his countenance and address which he would have put on
have the lady arrive in a coach and six.
the married lady seem less affected with her own misfortune than
be her cousin; for the former eat very heartily, whereas the latter
could hardly swallow a morsel. Sophia likewise show more concern and
sorrow in her countenance than appear in the other lady; who, have
observe these symptom in her friend, beg she to be comfort,
say, "perhaps all may yet end well than either you or I expect."
our landlord think he have now an opportunity to open his mouth, and
be resolve not to omit it. "I be sorry, madam," cry he, "that your
ladyship cannot eat; for to be sure you must be hungry after so long
fasting. I hope your ladyship be not uneasy at anything, for, as madam
there say, all may end well than anybody expect. a gentleman who
be here just now bring excellent news; and perhaps some folk who
have give other folk the slip may get to London before they be
overtaken; and if they do, I make no doubt but they will find people
who will be very ready to receive they."
all person under the apprehension of danger convert whatever they see
and hear into the object of that apprehension. Sophia therefore
immediately conclude, from the forego speech, that she be know,
and pursue by her father. she be now strike with the utmost
consternation, and for a few minute deprive of the power of speech;
which she no soon recover than she desire the landlord to send
his servant out of the room, and then, address herself to he,
say, "I perceive, sir, you know who we be; but I beseech you--nay, I
be convince, if you have any compassion or goodness, you will not
betray we."
"I betray your ladyship!" quoth the landlord; "no (and then he swear
several very hearty oath); I would soon be cut into ten thousand
piece. I hate all treachery. I! I never betray any one in my life
yet, and I be sure I shall not begin with so sweet a lady as your
ladyship. all the world would very much blame I if I should, since it
will be in your ladyship's power so shortly to reward I. my wife can
witness for I, I know your ladyship the moment you come into the
house: I say it be your honour, before I lift you from your horse,
and I shall carry the bruise I get in your ladyship's service to the
grave; but what signify that, as long as I save your ladyship? to
be sure some people this morning would have think of get a
reward; but no such thought ever enter into my head. I would soon
starve than take any reward for betray your ladyship."
"I promise you, sir," say Sophia, "if it be ever in my power to
reward you, you shall not lose by your generosity."
"alack-a-day, madam!" answer the landlord; "in your ladyship's
power! Heaven put it as much into your will! I be only afraid your
honour will forget such a poor man as an innkeeper; but, if your
ladyship should not, I hope you will remember what reward I
refuse--refuse! that is, I would have refuse, and to be sure it may
be call refuse, for I might have have it certainly; and to be sure
you might have be in some houses;--but, for my part, would not
methink for the world have your ladyship wrong I so much as to
imagine I ever think of betray you, even before I hear the good
news."
"what news, pray?" say Sophia, something eagerly.
"hath not your ladyship hear it, then?" cry the landlord; "nay,
like enough, for I hear it only a few minute ago; and if I have never
hear it, may the devil fly away with I this instant if I would have
betray your honour! no, if I would, may i--" here he subjoin
several dreadful imprecation, which Sophia at last interrupted, and
beg to know what he mean by the news.--He be go to answer,
when Mrs Honour come run into the room, all pale and breathless,
and cry out, "Madam, we be all undo, all ruin, they be come,
they be come!" these word almost freeze up the blood of Sophia; but
Mrs Fitzpatrick ask Honour who be come?--"Who?" answer she,
"why, the French; several hundred thousand of they be land, and we
shall be all murder and ravish."
as a miser, who hath, in some well-build city, a cottage, value twenty
shilling, when at a distance he be alarmed with the news of a fire,
turn pale and tremble at his loss; but when he find the beautiful
palace only be burn, and his own cottage remain safe, he come
instantly to himself, and smile at his good fortune: or as (for we
dislike something in the former simile) the tender mother, when
terrify with the apprehension that her darling boy be drown, be
strike senseless and almost dead with consternation; but when she be
tell that little master be safe, and the victory only, with twelve
hundred brave man, go to the bottom, life and sense again return,
maternal fondness enjoy the sudden relief from all its fear, and the
general benevolence which at another time would have deeply feel the
dreadful catastrophe, lie fast asleep in her mind;--so Sophia, than
whom none be more capable of tenderly feeling the general calamity of
her country, find such immediate satisfaction from the relief of
those terror she have of be overtake by her father, that the
arrival of the french scarce make any impression on she. she gently
chid she maid for the fright into which she have throw she, and say
"she be glad it be no bad; for that she have fear somebody else
be come."
"ay, ay," quoth the landlord, smile, "her ladyship know well
thing; she know the French be our very good friend, and come over
hither only for our good. they be the people who be to make Old
England flourish again. I warrant her honour think the duke be
come; and that be enough to put she into a fright. I be go to
tell your ladyship the news.--His honour's majesty, Heaven bless he,
hath give the duke the slip, and be march as fast as he can to
London, and ten thousand French be land to join he on the road."
Sophia be not greatly pleased with this news, nor with the gentleman
who relate it; but, as she still imagine he know she (for she could
not possibly have any suspicion of the real truth), she durst not show
any dislike. and now the landlord, have remove the cloth from the
table, withdraw; but at his departure frequently repeat his hope of
be remember hereafter.
the mind of Sophia be not at all easy under the supposition of be
know at this house; for she still apply to herself many thing
which the landlord have address to Jenny Cameron; she therefore
order she maid to pump out of he by what mean he have become
acquainted with her person, and who have offer he the reward for
betray she; she likewise order the horse to be in readiness by
four in the morning, at which hour Mrs Fitzpatrick promise to bear
her company; and then, compose herself as well as she could, she
desire that lady to continue her story.
Chapter vii.
in which Mrs Fitzpatrick conclude her history.
while Mrs Honour, in pursuance of the command of her mistress,
order a bowl of punch, and invite my landlord and landlady to
partake of it, Mrs Fitzpatrick thus go on with her relation.
"Most of the officer who be quarter at a town in our
neighbourhood be of my husband's acquaintance. among these there be
a lieutenant, a very pretty sort of man, and who be married to a
woman, so agreeable both in her temper and conversation, that from our
first know each other, which be soon after my lying-in, we be
almost inseparable companion; for I have the good fortune to make
myself equally agreeable to she.
"the lieutenant, who be neither a sot nor a sportsman, be frequently
of our party; indeed he be very little with my husband, and no more
than good breeding constrain he to be, as he live almost
constantly at our house. my husband often express much
dissatisfaction at the lieutenant's prefer my company to his; he
be very angry with I on that account, and give I many a hearty
curse for draw away his companion; say, `I ought to be d--n'd
for have spoil one of the prettiest fellow in the world, by
make a milksop of he.'
"you will be mistake, my dear Sophia, if you imagine that the anger
of my husband arise from my deprive he of a companion; for the
lieutenant be not a person with whose society a fool could be
please; and, if I should admit the possibility of this, so little
right have my husband to place the loss of his companion to I, that I
be convince it be my conversation alone which induce he ever to
come to the house. no, child, it be envy, the bad and most
rancorous kind of envy, the envy of superiority of understanding. the
wretch could not bear to see my conversation prefer to his, by a
man of whom he could not entertain the least jealousy. o my dear
Sophy, you be a woman of sense; if you marry a man, as be most
probable you will, of less capacity than yourself, make frequent
trial of his temper before marriage, and see whether he can bear to
submit to such a superiority.--promise I, Sophy, you will take this
advice; for you will hereafter find its importance." "it be very
likely I shall never marry at all," answer Sophia; "I think, at
least, I shall never marry a man in whose understanding I see any
defect before marriage; and I promise you I would rather give up my
own than see any such afterwards." "give up your understanding!"
reply Mrs Fitzpatrick; "oh, fie, child! I will not believe so meanly
of you. everything else I might myself be bring to give up; but
never this. nature would not have allot this superiority to the
wife in so many instance, if she have intend we should all of we
have surrender it to the husband. this, indeed, man of sense never
expect of we; of which the lieutenant I have just mention be one
notable example; for though he have a very good understanding, he
always acknowledge (as be really true) that his wife have a well.
and this, perhaps, be one reason of the hatred my tyrant bear she.
"before he would be so govern by a wife, he say, especially such an
ugly b-- (for, indeed, she be not a regular beauty, but very
agreeable and extremely genteel), he would see all the woman upon
earth at the devil, which be a very usual phrase with he. he say,
he wonder what I could see in she to be so charmed with her company:
since this woman, say he, hath come among we, there be an end of your
beloved reading, which you pretend to like so much, that you could
not afford time to return the visit of the lady in this country;
and I must confess I have be guilty of a little rudeness this way;
for the lady there be at least no well than the mere country
lady here; and I think I need make no other excuse to you for
decline any intimacy with they.
"this correspondence, however, continue a whole year, even all the
while the lieutenant be quarter in that town; for which I be
content to pay the tax of be constantly abuse in the manner
above mention by my husband; I mean when he be at home; for he be
frequently absent a month at a time at Dublin, and once make a journey
of two month to London: in all which journey I think it a very
singular happiness that he never once desire my company; nay, by his
frequent censure on man who could not travel, as he phrase it,
without a wife tie up to their tail, he sufficiently intimate that,
have I be never so desirous of accompany he, my wish would have
be in vain; but, Heaven know, such wish be very far from my
thought.
"at length my friend be remove from I, and I be again leave to my
solitude, to the torment conversation with my own reflection, and
to apply to book for my only comfort. I now read almost all day long.
how many book do you think I read in three month?" "I cannot guess,
indeed, cousin," answer Sophia. "perhaps half a score." "half a
score! half a thousand, child!" answer the other. "I read a good
deal in Daniel's English history of France; a great deal in Plutarch's
life, the Atalantis, Pope's Homer, Dryden's play, Chillingworth, the
Countess D'Aulnois, and Locke's Human Understanding.
"during this interval I write three very supplicating, and, I think,
move letter to my aunt; but, as I receive no answer to any of
they, my disdain would not suffer I to continue my application." here
she stopt, and, look earnestly at Sophia, say, "methink, my dear,
I read something in your eye which reproach I of a neglect in
another place, where I should have meet with a kind return." "indeed,
dear Harriet," answer Sophia, "your story be an apology for any
neglect; but, indeed, I feel that I have be guilty of a remissness,
without so good an excuse.--yet pray proceed; for I long, though I
tremble, to hear the end."
thus, then, Mrs Fitzpatrick resume her narrative:--"my husband now
take a second journey to England, where he continue upwards of three
month; during the great part of this time I lead a life which
nothing but have lead a bad could make I think tolerable; for
perfect solitude can never be reconcile to a social mind, like mine,
but when it relieve you from the company of those you hate. what
add to my wretchedness be the loss of my little infant: not that I
pretend to have have for it that extravagant tenderness of which I
believe I might have be capable under other circumstance; but I
resolve, in every instance, to discharge the duty of the tender
mother; and this care prevent I from feel the weight of that
heavy of all thing, when it can be at all say to lie heavy on our
hand.
"I have spend full ten week almost entirely by myself, have see
nobody all that time, except my servant and a very few visitor, when
a young lady, a relation to my husband, come from a distant part of
Ireland to visit I. she have staid once before a week at my house, and
then I give she a press invitation to return; for she be a very
agreeable woman, and have improve good natural part by a proper
education. indeed, she be to I a welcome guest.
"a few day after her arrival, perceive I in very low spirit,
without enquire the cause, which, indeed, she very well know, the
young lady fall to compassionate my case. she say, `though
politeness have prevent I from complain to my husband's relation
of his behaviour, yet they all be very sensible of it, and feel
great concern upon that account; but none more than herself.' and
after some more general discourse on this head, which I own I could
not forbear countenancing, at last, after much previous precaution and
enjoin concealment, she communicate to I, as a profound
secret--that my husband keep a mistress.
"you will certainly imagine I hear this news with the utmost
insensibility--upon my word, if you do, your imagination will mislead
you. Contempt have not so keep down my anger to my husband, but that
hatred rise again on this occasion. what can be the reason of this?
be we so abominably selfish, that we can be concern at other
have possession even of what we despise? or be we not rather
abominably vain, and be not this the great injury do to our
vanity? what think you, Sophia?"
"I donot know, indeed," answer Sophia; "I have never trouble myself
with any of these deep contemplation; but I think the lady do very
ill in communicating to you such a secret."
"and yet, my dear, this conduct be natural," reply Mrs Fitzpatrick;
"and, when you have see and read as much as myself, you will
acknowledge it to be so."
"I be sorry to hear it be natural," return Sophia; "for I want
neither read nor experience to convince I that it be very
dishonourable and very ill-natured: nay, it be surely as ill-breed to
tell a husband or wife of the fault of each other as to tell they of
their own."
"well," continue Mrs Fitzpatrick, "my husband at last return; and,
if I be thoroughly acquaint with my own thought, I hat he now
more than ever; but I despise he rather less: for certainly nothing
so much weaken our contempt, as an injury do to our pride or our
vanity.
"he now assume a carriage to I so very different from what he have
lately worn, and so nearly resemble his behaviour the first week of
our marriage, that, have I now have any spark of love remain, he
might, possibly, have rekindle my fondness for he. but, though
hatred may succeed to contempt, and may perhaps get the well of it,
love, I believe, cannot. the truth be, the passion of love be too
restless to remain contented without the gratification which it
receive from its object; and one can no more be inclined to love
without love than we can have eye without see. when a husband,
therefore, cease to be the object of this passion, it be most
probable some other man--I say, my dear, if your husband grow
indifferent to you--if you once come to despise he--I say--that
be--if you have the passion of love in you--Lud! I have bewilder
myself so--but one be apt, in these abstract consideration, to lose
the concatenation of idea, as Mr Locke says:--in short, the truth
be--in short, I scarce know what it be; but, as I be say, my
husband return, and his behaviour, at first, greatly surprize I;
but he soon acquaint I with the motive, and teach I to account
for it. in a word, then, he have spend and lose all the ready money of
my fortune; and, as he could mortgage his own estate no deep, he be
now desirous to supply himself with cash for his extravagance, by
sell a little estate of mine, which he could not do without my
assistance; and to obtain this favour be the whole and sole motive of
all the fondness which he now put on.
"with this I peremptorily refuse to comply. I tell he, and I tell
he truly, that, have I be possess of the Indies at our first
marriage, he might have command it all; for it have be a constant
maxim with I, that where a woman dispose of her heart, she should
always deposit her fortune; but, as he have be so kind, long ago, to
restore the former into my possession, I be resolve likewise to
retain what little remain of the latter.
"I will not describe to you the passion into which these word, and
the resolute air in which they be speak, throw he: nor will I
trouble you with the whole scene which succeed between we. out come,
you may be well assure, the story of the mistress; and out it do
come, with all the embellishment which anger and disdain could bestow
upon it.
"Mr Fitzpatrick seem a little thunderstruck with this, and more
confuse than I have see he, though his idea be always confused
enough, heaven know. he do not, however, endeavour to exculpate
himself; but take a method which almost equally confound I. what
be this but recrimination? he affect to be jealous:--he may, for
aught I know, be incline enough to jealousy in his natural temper;
nay, he must have have it from nature, or the devil must have put it
into his head; for I defy all the world to cast a just aspersion on my
character: nay, the most scandalous tongue have never dare censure
my reputation. my fame, I thank heaven, hath be always as spotless
as my life; and let falsehood itself accuse that if it dare. no, my
dear graveair, however provoke, however ill-treat, however injure
in my love, I have firmly resolve never to give the least room for
censure on this account.--and yet, my dear, there be some people so
malicious, some tongue so venomous, that no innocence can escape
they. the most undesigned word, the most accidental look, the least
familiarity, the most innocent freedom, will be misconstrue, and
magnify into I know not what, by some people. but I despise, my dear
Graveairs, I despise all such slander. no such malice, I assure you,
ever give I an uneasy moment. no, no, I promise you I be above all
that.--But where be I? o let I see, I tell you my husband be
jealous--and of whom, I pray?--Why, of whom but the lieutenant I
mention to you before! he be oblige to resort above a year and
more back to find any object for this unaccountable passion, if,
indeed, he really feel any such, and be not an arrant counterfeit in
order to abuse I.
"but I have tired you already with too many particular. I will now
bring my story to a very speedy conclusion. in short, then, after many
scene very unworthy to be repeat, in which my cousin engage so
heartily on my side, that Mr Fitzpatrick at last turn she out of
door; when he find I be neither to be soothe nor bully into
compliance, he take a very violent method indeed. perhaps you will
conclude he beat I; but this, though he hath approach very near to
it, he never actually do. he confine I to my room, without
suffer I to have either pen, ink, paper, or book: and a servant
every day make my bed, and bring I my food.
"when I have remain a week under this imprisonment, he make I a
visit, and, with the voice of a schoolmaster, or, what be often much
the same, of a tyrant, ask I, `if I would yet comply?' I answer,
very stoutly, `that I would die first.' `then so you shall, and be
d--nd!' cry he; `for you shall never go alive out of this room.'
"here I remain a fortnight long; and, to say the truth, my
constancy be almost subdue, and I begin to think of submission;
when, one day, in the absence of my husband, who be go abroad for
some short time, by the great good fortune in the world, an
accident happened.--I--at a time when I begin to give way to the
utmost despair----everything would be excusable at such a time--at
that very time I received----but it would take up an hour to tell you
all particulars.--In one word, then (for I will not tire you with
circumstance), gold, the common key to all padlock, open my door,
and set I at liberty.
"I now make haste to Dublin, where I immediately procure a passage to
England; and be proceed to Bath, in order to throw myself into the
protection of my aunt, or of your father, or of any relation who would
afford it I. my husband overtake I last night at the inn where I
lay, and which you leave a few minute before I; but I have the good
luck to escape he, and to follow you.
"and thus, my dear, end my history: a tragical one, I be sure, it be
to myself; but, perhaps, I ought rather to apologize to you for its
dullness."
Sophia heave a deep sigh, and answer, "indeed, Harriet, I pity you
from my soul!----But what could you expect? why, why, would you marry
an Irishman?"
"upon my word," reply her cousin, "your censure be unjust. there
be, among the irish, man of as much worth and honour as any among the
English: nay, to speak the truth, generosity of spirit be rather more
common among they. I have know some example there, too, of good
husband; and I believe these be not very plenty in England. ask I,
rather, what I could expect when I marry a fool; and I will tell you
a solemn truth; I do not know he to be so."--"Can no man," say
Sophia, in a very low and altered voice, "do you think, make a bad
husband, who be not a fool?" "that," answer the other, "be too
general a negative; but none, I believe, be so likely as a fool to
prove so. among my acquaintance, the silly fellow be the bad
husband; and I will venture to assert, as a fact, that a man of sense
rarely behave very ill to a wife who deserve very well."
Chapter viii.
a dreadful alarm in the inn, with the arrival of an unexpected friend
of Mrs Fitzpatrick.
Sophia now, at the desire of her cousin, relate--not what follow,
but what hath go before in this history: for which reason the reader
will, I suppose, excuse I for not repeat it over again.
one remark, however, I cannot forbear make on her narrative, namely,
that she make no more mention of Jones, from the beginning to the end,
than if there have be no such person alive. this I will neither
endeavour to account for nor to excuse. indeed, if this may be call
a kind of dishonesty, it seem the more inexcusable, from the apparent
openness and explicit sincerity of the other lady.--But so it be.
just as Sophia arrive at the conclusion of her story, there arrive
in the room where the two lady be sit a noise, not unlike, in
loudness, to that of a pack of hound just let out from their kennel;
nor, in shrillness, to cat, when caterwaul; or to screech owl;
or, indeed, more like (for what animal can resemble a human voice?) to
those sound which, in the pleasant mansion of that gate which seem
to derive its name from a duplicity of tongue, issue from the mouth,
and sometimes from the nostril, of those fair river nymph, clepe
of old the naïade; in the vulgar tongue translate oyster-wench;
for when, instead of the antient libation of milk and honey and oil,
the rich distillation from the juniper-berry, or, perhaps, from malt,
hath, by the early devotion of their votary, be pour forth in
great abundance, should any daring tongue with unhallowed license
prophane, _i.e._, depreciate, the delicate fat Milton oyster, the
plaice sound and firm, the flounder as much alive as when in the
water, the shrimp as big as a prawn, the fine cod alive but a few
hour ago, or any other of the various treasure which those
water-deity who fish the sea and river have commit to the care
of the nymph, the angry Naïades lift up their immortal voice, and
the prophane wretch be strike deaf for his impiety.
such be the noise which now burst from one of the room below; and
soon the thunder, which long have rattle at a distance, begin to
approach near and nearer, till, have ascend by degree upstairs,
it at last enter the apartment where the lady be. in short, to
drop all metaphor and figure, Mrs Honour, have scold violently
below-stair, and continue the same all the way up, come in to her
mistress in a most outrageous passion, cry out, "what doth your
ladyship think? would you imagine that this impudent villain, the
master of this house, hath have the impudence to tell I, nay, to stand
it out to my face, that your ladyship be that nasty, stink wh--re
(Jenny Cameron they call she), that run about the country with the
Pretender? Nay, the lying, saucy villain have the assurance to tell I
that your ladyship have own yourself to be so; but I have claw the
rascal; I have leave the mark of my nail in his impudent face. my
lady! say I, you saucy scoundrel; my lady be meat for no pretender.
she be a young lady of as good fashion, and family, and fortune, as
any in Somersetshire. do you never hear of the great squire western,
sirrah? she be his only daughter; she is----, and heiress to all his
great estate. my lady to be call a nasty Scotch wh--re by such a
varlet!--to be sure I wish I have knock his brain out with the
punch-bowl."
the principal uneasiness with which Sophia be affect on this
occasion Honour have herself cause, by have in her passion
discover who she be. however, as this mistake of the landlord
sufficiently account for those passage which Sophia have before
mistaken, she acquire some ease on that account; nor could she, upon
the whole, forbear smiling. this enrage Honour, and she cry,
"indeed, madam, I do not think your ladyship would have make a
laugh matter of it. to be call whore by such an impudent low
rascal. your ladyship may be angry with I, for aught I know, for
take your part, since proffered service, they say, stink; but to be
sure I could never bear to hear a lady of mine call whore.--Nor will
I bear it. I be sure your ladyship be as virtuous a lady as ever sit
foot on english ground, and I will claw any villain's eye out who
dare for to offer to presume for to say the least word to the
contrary. nobody ever could say the least ill of the character of any
lady that ever I wait upon."
_Hinc illae lachrymae;_ in plain truth, Honour have as much love for
her mistress as most servant have, that be to say--but besides this,
her pride oblige she to support the character of the lady she wait
on; for she think her own be in a very close manner connect with
it. in proportion as the character of her mistress be raise, her
likewise, as she conceive, be raise with it; and, on the contrary,
she think the one could not be lower without the other.
on this subject, reader, I must stop a moment, to tell thee a story.
"the famous Nell Gwynn, step one day, from a house where she have
make a short visit, into her coach, see a great mob assemble, and her
footman all bloody and dirty; the fellow, be ask by his mistress
the reason of his be in that condition, answer, `I have be
fight, madam, with an impudent rascal who call your ladyship a
wh--re.' `you blockhead,' reply Mrs Gwynn, `at this rate you must
fight every day of your life; why, you fool, all the world know it.'
`do they?' cry the fellow, in a muttering voice, after he have shut
the coach-door, `they shallnot call I a whore's footman for all that.'"
thus the passion of Mrs Honour appear natural enough, even if it be
to be no otherwise account for; but, in reality, there be another
cause of her anger; for which we must beg leave to remind our reader
of a circumstance mention in the above simile. there be indeed
certain liquor, which, be apply to our passion, or to fire,
produce effect the very reverse of those produce by water, as they
serve to kindle and inflame, rather than to extinguish. among these,
the generous liquor call punch be one. it be not, therefore,
without reason, that the learn Dr Cheney use to call drinking punch
pour liquid fire down your throat.
now, Mrs Honour have unluckily pour so much of this liquid fire down
her throat, that the smoke of it begin to ascend into her pericranium
and blind the eye of Reason, which be there suppose to keep she
residence, while the fire itself from the stomach easily reach the
heart, and there inflame the noble passion of pride. so that, upon
the whole, we shall cease to wonder at the violent rage of the
waiting-woman; though at first sight we must confess the cause seem
inadequate to the effect.
Sophia and her cousin both do all in their power to extinguish these
flame which have roar so loudly all over the house. they at length
prevail; or, to carry the metaphor one step far, the fire,
have consume all the fuel which the language afford, to wit, every
reproachful term in it, at last go out of its own accord.
but, though tranquillity be restore above-stair, it be not so
below; where my landlady, highly resent the injury do to the
beauty of her husband by the flesh-spade of Mrs Honour, call aloud
for revenge and justice. as to the poor man, who have principally
suffer in the engagement, he be perfectly quiet. perhaps the blood
which he lose might have cool his anger: for the enemy have not only
apply her nail to his cheek, but likewise her fist to his
nostril, which lament the blow with tear of blood in great
abundance. to this we may add reflection on his mistake; but indeed
nothing so effectually silence his resentment as the manner in which
he now discover his error; for as to the behaviour of Mrs Honour, it
have the more confirm he in his opinion; but he be now assure by a
person of great figure, and who be attend by a great equipage, that
one of the lady be a woman of fashion, and his intimate
acquaintance.
by the order of this person, the landlord now ascend, and
acquaint our fair traveller that a great gentleman below desire to
do they the honour of wait on they. Sophia turn pale and tremble
at this message, though the reader will conclude it be too civil,
notwithstanding the landlord's blunder, to have come from her father;
but fear hath the common fault of a justice of peace, and be apt to
conclude hastily from every slight circumstance, without examine the
evidence on both side.
to ease the reader's curiosity, therefore, rather than his
apprehension, we proceed to inform he that an irish peer have arrive
very late that evening at the inn, in his way to London. this
nobleman, have sally from his supper at the hurricane before
commemorate, have see the attendant of Mrs Fitzpatrick, and upon a
short enquiry, be inform that her lady, with whom he be very
particularly acquaint, be above. this information he have no soon
receive than he address himself to the landlord, pacify he, and
send he upstairs with compliment rather civill than those which
be deliver.
it may perhaps be wonder at that the waiting-woman herself be not
the messenger employ on this occasion; but we be sorry to say she
be not at present qualified for that, or indeed for any other office.
the rum (for so the landlord choose to call the distillation from malt)
have basely take the advantage of the fatigue which the poor woman have
undergo, and have make terrible depredation on her noble faculty,
at a time when they be very unable to resist the attack.
we shall not describe this tragical scene too fully; but we think
ourselves oblige, by that historic integrity which we profess,
shortly to hint a matter which we would otherwise have be glad to
have spar. many historian, indeed, for want of this integrity, or
of diligence, to say no bad, often leave the reader to find out
these little circumstance in the dark, and sometimes to his great
confusion and perplexity.
Sophia be very soon ease of her causeless fright by the entry of the
noble peer, who be not only an intimate acquaintance of Mrs
Fitzpatrick, but in reality a very particular friend of that lady. to
say truth, it be by his assistance that she have be enable to
escape from her husband; for this nobleman have the same gallant
disposition with those renowned knight of whom we read in heroic
story, and have deliver many an imprison nymph from durance. he be
indeed as bitter an enemy to the savage authority too often exercise
by husband and father, over the young and lovely of the other sex,
as ever knight-errant be to the barbarous power of enchanter; nay,
to say truth, I have often suspect that those very enchanter with
which romance everywhere abound be in reality no other than the
husband of those day; and matrimony itself be, perhaps, the
enchant castle in which the nymph be say to be confine.
this nobleman have an estate in the neighbourhood of Fitzpatrick, and
have be for some time acquaint with the lady. no soon, therefore,
do he hear of her confinement, than he earnestly apply himself to
procure her liberty; which he presently effect, not by storm the
castle, accord to the example of antient hero, but by corrupt
the governor, in conformity with the modern art of war, in which craft
be hold to be preferable to valour, and gold be find to be more
irresistible than either lead or steel.
this circumstance, however, as the lady do not think it material
enough to relate to her friend, we would not at that time impart it to
the reader. we rather choose to leave he a while under a supposition
that she have find, or coin, or by some very extraordinary, perhaps
supernatural mean, have possess herself of the money with which she
have bribe her keeper, than to interrupt her narrative by give a
hint of what seem to she of too little importance to be mention.
the peer, after a short conversation, could not forbear express
some surprize at meet the lady in that place; nor could he refrain
from tell she he imagine she have be go to Bath. Mrs
Fitzpatrick very freely answer, "that she have be prevent in her
purpose by the arrival of a person she need not mention. in short,"
say she, "I be overtake by my husband (for I need not affect to
conceal what the world know too well already). I have the good fortune
to escape in a most surprizing manner, and be now go to London with
this young lady, who be a near relation of mine, and who hath escape
from as great a tyrant as my own."
his lordship, conclude that this tyrant be likewise a husband, make
a speech full of compliment to both the lady, and as full of
invective against his own sex; nor indeed do he avoid some oblique
glance at the matrimonial institution itself, and at the unjust
power give by it to man over the more sensible and more meritorious
part of the specie. he end his oration with an offer of his
protection, and of his coach and six, which be instantly accept by
Mrs Fitzpatrick, and at last, upon her persuasion, by Sophia.
matter be thus adjust, his lordship take his leave, and the
lady retire to rest, where Mrs Fitzpatrick entertain her cousin
with many high encomium on the character of the noble peer, and
enlarge very particularly on his great fondness for his wife; say,
she believe he be almost the only person of high rank who be
entirely constant to the marriage bed. "indeed," add she, "my dear
Sophy, that be a very rare virtue amongst man of condition. never
expect it when you marry; for, believe I, if you do, you will
certainly be deceive."
a gentle sigh stole from Sophia at these word, which perhaps
contribute to form a dream of no very pleasant kind; but, as she
never reveal this dream to any one, so the reader cannot expect to
see it relate here.
chapter ix.
the morning introduce in some pretty writing. a stagecoach. the
civility of chambermaid. the heroic temper of Sophia. her generosity.
the return to it. the departure of the company, and their arrival at
London; with some remark for the use of traveller.
those member of society who be bear to furnish the blessing of life
now begin to light their candle, in order to pursue their daily
labour for the use of those who be bear to enjoy these blessing.
the sturdy hind now attend the levee of his fellow-labourer the ox;
the cunning artificer, the diligent mechanic, spring from their hard
mattress; and now the bonny housemaid begin to repair the disorder
drum-room, while the riotous author of that disorder, in broken
interrupted slumber, tumble and toss, as if the hardness of down
disquiet their repose.
in simple phrase, the clock have no soon strike seven than the lady
be ready for their journey; and, at their desire, his lordship and
his equipage be prepare to attend they.
and now a matter of some difficulty arise; and this be how his
lordship himself should be convey; for though in stage-coach,
where passenger be properly consider as so much luggage, the
ingenious coachman stow half a dozen with perfect ease into the place
of four; for well he contrive that the fat hostess, or well-feed
alderman, may take up no more room than the slim miss, or taper
master; it be the nature of gut, when well squeeze, to give way,
and to lie in a narrow compass; yet in these vehicle, which be
call, for distinction's sake, gentleman's coach, though they be
often large than the other, this method of packing be never
attempt.
his lordship would have put a short end to the difficulty, by very
gallantly desire to mount his horse; but Mrs Fitzpatrick would by no
mean consent to it. it be therefore conclude that the Abigails
should, by turn, relieve each other on one of his lordship's horse,
which be presently equip with a side-saddle for that purpose.
everything be settle at the inn, the lady discharge their
former guide, and Sophia make a present to the landlord, partly to
repair the bruise which he have receive under herself, and partly on
account of what he have suffer under the hand of her enraged
waiting-woman. and now Sophia first discover a loss which give she
some uneasiness; and this be of the hundred-pound bank-bill which she
father have give she at their last meeting; and which, within a very
inconsiderable trifle, be all the treasure she be at present worth.
she search everywhere, and shake and tumble all her thing to no
purpose, the bill be not to be find: and she be at last fully
persuade that she have lose it from her pocket when she have the
misfortune of tumble from her horse in the dark lane, as before
record: a fact that seem the more probable, as she now recollect
some discomposure in her pocket which have happen at that time, and
the great difficulty with which she have draw forth her handkerchief
the very instant before her fall, in order to relieve the distress of
Mrs Fitzpatrick.
misfortune of this kind, whatever inconveniencie they may be
attend with, be incapable of subdue a mind in which there be any
strength, without the assistance of avarice. Sophia, therefore, though
nothing could be worse time than this accident at such a season,
immediately get the well of her concern, and, with her wonte
serenity and cheerfulness of countenance, return to her company. his
lordship conduct the lady into the vehicle, as he do likewise Mrs
Honour, who, after many civility, and more dear madam, at last
yield to the well-breed importunity of her sister Abigail, and
submit to be compliment with the first ride in the coach; in
which indeed she would afterwards have be content to have pursue
her whole journey, have not her mistress, after several fruitless
intimation, at length force she to take her turn on horseback.
the coach, now have receive its company, begin to move forwards,
attend by many servant, and lead by two captain, who have before
ride with his lordship, and who would have be dismiss from the
vehicle upon a much less worthy occasion than be this of
accommodate two lady. in this they act only as gentleman; but
they be ready at any time to have perform the office of a footman,
or indeed would have condescend low, for the honour of his
lordship's company, and for the convenience of his table.
my landlord be so pleased with the present he have receive from
Sophia, that he rather rejoice in than regret his bruise or his
scratch. the reader will perhaps be curious to know the _quantum_ of
this present; but we cannot satisfy his curiosity. whatever it be, it
satisfy the landlord for his bodily hurt; but he lament he have not
know before how little the lady value her money; "for to be sure,"
say he, "one might have charge every article double, and she would
have make no cavil at the reckoning."
his wife, however, be far from draw this conclusion; whether she
really feel any injury do to her husband more than he do himself, I
will not say: certain it be, she be much less satisfied with the
generosity of Sophia. "indeed," cry she, "my dear, the lady know
well how to dispose of her money than you imagine. she might very
well think we should not put up such a business without some
satisfaction, and the law would have cost she an infinite deal more
than this poor little matter, which I wonder you would take." "you be
always so bloodily wise," quoth the husband: "it would have cost she
more, would it? dost fancy I donot know that as well as thee? but
would any of that more, or so much, have come into our pocket?
indeed, if son Tom the lawyer have be alive, I could have be glad
to have put such a pretty business into his hand. he would have get a
good picking out of it; but I have no relation now who be a lawyer,
and why should I go to law for the benefit of stranger?" "Nay, to be
sure," answer she, "you must know well." "I believe I do," reply
he. "I fancy, when money be to be get, I can smell it out as well as
another. everybody, let I tell you, would not have talk people out
of this. mind that, I say; everybody would not have cajole this out
of she, mind that." the wife then join in the applause of her
husband's sagacity; and thus end the short dialogue between they on
this occasion.
we will therefore take our leave of these good people, and attend his
lordship and his fair companion, who make such good expedition that
they perform a journey of ninety mile in two day, and on the
second evening arrive in London, without have encounter any one
adventure on the road worthy the dignity of this history to relate.
our pen, therefore, shall imitate the expedition which it describe,
and our history shall keep pace with the traveller who be its
subject. good writer will, indeed, do well to imitate the ingenious
traveller in this instance, who always proportion his stay at any
place to the beauty, elegancie, and curiosity which it afford.
at Eshur, at Stowe, at Wilton, at eastbury, and at Prior's Park, day
be too short for the ravished imagination; while we admire the
wondrous power of art in improve nature. in some of these, art
chiefly engage our admiration; in other, nature and art contend for
our applause; but, in the last, the former seem to triumph. here
nature appear in her rich attire, and Art, dress with the
modest simplicity, attend her benignant mistress. here nature
indeed pour forth the choice treasure which she hath lavish on
this world; and here human nature present you with an object which
can be exceed only in the other.
the same taste, the same imagination, which luxuriously riot in these
elegant scene, can be amuse with object of far inferior note. the
wood, the river, the lawn of Devon and of Dorset, attract the eye
of the ingenious traveller, and retard his pace, which delay he
afterwards compensate by swiftly scour over the gloomy heath of
Bagshot, or that pleasant plain which extend itself westward from
Stockbridge, where no other object than one single tree only in
sixteen mile present itself to the view, unless the cloud, in
compassion to our tired spirit, kindly open their variegate mansion
to our prospect.
not so travel the money-meditate tradesman, the sagacious justice,
the dignified doctor, the warm-clothe grazier, with all the numerous
offspring of wealth and dulness. on they jog, with equal pace, through
the verdant meadow or over the barren heath, their horse measure
four mile and a half per hour with the utmost exactness; the eye of
the beast and of his master be alike direct forwards, and
employ in contemplate the same object in the same manner. with
equal rapture the good rider survey the proud boast of the
architect, and those fair building with which some unknown name hath
adorn the rich cloathing town; where heap of brick be pile up as
a kind of monument to show that heap of money have be pile there
before.
and now, reader, as we be in haste to attend our heroine, we will
leave to thy sagacity to apply all this to the boeotian writer, and
to those author who be their opposite. this thou wilt be abundantly
able to perform without our aid. Bestir thyself therefore on this
occasion; for, though we will always lend thee proper assistance in
difficult place, as we do not, like some other, expect thee to use
the art of divination to discover our meaning, yet we shall not
indulge thy laziness where nothing but thy own attention be require;
for thou art highly mistaken if thou dost imagine that we intend,
when we begin this great work, to leave thy sagacity nothing to do; or
that, without sometimes exercise this talent, thou wilt be able to
travel through our page with any pleasure or profit to thyself.
Chapter x.
contain a hint or two concern virtue, and a few more concern
suspicion.
our company, be arrive at London, be set down at his lordship's
house, where, while they refresh themselves after the fatigue of
their journey, servant be despatch to provide a lodging for the
two lady; for, as her ladyship be not then in town, Mrs Fitzpatrick
would by no mean consent to accept a bed in the mansion of the peer.
some reader will, perhaps, condemn this extraordinary delicacy, as I
may call it, of virtue, as too nice and scrupulous; but we must make
allowance for her situation, which must be own to have be very
ticklish; and, when we consider the malice of censorious tongue, we
must allow, if it be a fault, the fault be an excess on the right
side, and which every woman who be in the self-same situation will do
well to imitate. the most formal appearance of virtue, when it be only
an appearance, may, perhaps, in very abstracted consideration, seem
to be rather less commendable than virtue itself without this
formality; but it will, however, be always more commend; and this, I
believe, will be grant by all, that it be necessary, unless in some
very particular case, for every woman to support either the one or
the other.
a lodging be prepare, Sophia accompany her cousin for that
evening; but resolve early in the morning to enquire after the lady
into whose protection, as we have formerly mention, she have
determine to throw herself when she quit her father's house. and
this she be the more eager in do from some observation she have
make during her journey in the coach.
now, as we would by no mean fix the odious character of suspicion on
Sophia, we be almost afraid to open to our reader the conceit which
fill her mind concern Mrs Fitzpatrick; of whom she certainly
entertain at present some doubt; which, as they be very apt to
enter into the bosom of the bad of people, we think proper not to
mention more plainly till we have first suggest a word or two to our
reader touch suspicion in general.
of this there have always appear to I to be two degree. the first
of these I chuse to derive from the heart, as the extreme velocity of
its discernment seem to denote some previous inward impulse, and the
rather as this superlative degree often form its own object; see
what be not, and always more than really exist. this be that
quick-sighted penetration whose hawk's eye no symptom of evil can
escape; which observe not only upon the action, but upon the word
and look, of man; and, as it proceed from the heart of the observer,
so it dive into the heart of the observe, and there espy evil, as
it be, in the first embryo; nay, sometimes before it can be say to
be conceive. an admirable faculty, if it be infallible; but, as this
degree of perfection be not even claim by more than one mortal being;
so from the fallibility of such acute discernment have arise many sad
mischief and most grievous heart-ache to innocence and virtue. I
cannot help, therefore, regard this vast quick-sightedness into evil
as a vicious excess, and as a very pernicious evil in itself. and I be
the more inclined to this opinion, as I be afraid it always proceed
from a bad heart, for the reason I have above mention, and for one
more, namely, because I never know it the property of a good one. now,
from this degree of suspicion I entirely and absolutely acquit Sophia.
a second degree of this quality seem to arise from the head. this be,
indeed, no other than the faculty of see what be before your eye,
and of draw conclusion from what you see. the former of these be
unavoidable by those who have any eye, and the latter be perhaps no
less certain and necessary a consequence of our have any brain.
this be altogether as bitter an enemy to guilt as the former be to
innocence: nor can I see it in an unamiable light, even though,
through human fallibility, it should be sometimes mistake. for
instance, if a husband should accidentally surprize his wife in the
lap or in the embrace of some of those pretty young gentleman who
profess the art of cuckold-making, I should not highly, I think, blame
he for conclude something more than what he see, from the
familiarity which he really have see, and which we be at least
favourable enough to when we call they innocent freedom. the reader
will easily suggest great plenty of instance to himself; I shall add
but one more, which, however unchristian it may be think by some, I
cannot help esteem to be strictly justifiable; and this be a
suspicion that a man be capable of do what he hath do already,
and that it be possible for one who hath be a villain once to act
the same part again. and, to confess the truth, of this degree of
suspicion I believe Sophia be guilty. from this degree of suspicion
she have, in fact, conceive an opinion that her cousin be really not
well than she should be.
the case, it seem, be this: Mrs Fitzpatrick wisely consider that
the virtue of a young lady be, in the world, in the same situation
with a poor hare, which be certain, whenever it venture abroad, to
meet its enemy; for it can hardly meet any other. no soon
therefore be she determined to take the first opportunity of quit
the protection of her husband, than she resolve to cast herself under
the protection of some other man; and whom could she so properly
choose to be her guardian as a person of quality, of fortune, of
honour; and who, besides a gallant disposition which incline man to
knight-errantry, that is, to be the champion of lady in distress,
have often declare a violent attachment to herself, and have already
give she all the instance of it in his power?
but, as the law hath foolishly omit this office of vice-husband, or
guardian to an eloped lady, and as malice be apt to denominate he by
a more disagreeable appellation, it be conclude that his lordship
should perform all such kind office to the lady in secret, and
without publickly assume the character of her protector. Nay, to
prevent any other person from see he in this light, it be agree
that the lady should proceed directly to Bath, and that his lordship
should first go to London, and thence should go down to that place by
the advice of his physician.
now all this Sophia very plainly understand, not from the lip or
behaviour of Mrs Fitzpatrick, but from the peer, who be infinitely
less expert at retain a secret than be the good lady; and perhaps
the exact secrecy which Mrs Fitzpatrick have observe on this head in
her narrative serve not a little to heighten those suspicion which
be now rise in the mind of her cousin.
Sophia very easily find out the lady she seek; for indeed there be
not a chairman in town to whom her house be not perfectly well know;
and, as she receive, in return of her first message, a most pressing
invitation, she immediately accept it. Mrs Fitzpatrick, indeed, do
not desire her cousin to stay with she with more earnestness than
civility require. whether she have discern and resent the
suspicion above-mention, or from what other motive it arise, I
cannot say; but certain it be, she be full as desirous of part
with Sophia as Sophia herself could be of go.
the young lady, when she come to take leave of her cousin, could not
avoid give she a short hint of advice. she beg she, for heaven's
sake, to take care of herself, and to consider in how dangerous a
situation she stand; add, she hop some method would be find of
reconcile she to her husband. "you must remember, my dear," say
she, "the maxim which my aunt western hath so often repeat to we
both; that whenever the matrimonial alliance be break, and war
declare between husband and wife, she can hardly make a
disadvantageous peace for herself on any condition. these be my
aunt's very word, and she hath have a great deal of experience in the
world." Mrs Fitzpatrick answer, with a contemptuous smile, "never
fear I, child, take care of yourself; for you be young than I. I
will come and visit you in a few day; but, dear Sophy, let I give
you one piece of advice: leave the character of Graveairs in the
country, for, believe I, it will sit very awkwardly upon you in this
town."
thus the two cousin part, and Sophia repair directly to Lady
Bellaston, where she find a most hearty, as well as a most polite,
welcome. the lady have take a great fancy to she when she have see she
formerly with her aunt western. she be indeed extremely glad to see
she, and be no soon acquaint with the reason which induce she
to leave the squire and to fly to London than she highly applaud her
sense and resolution; and after express the high satisfaction in
the opinion which Sophia have declare she entertain of her ladyship,
by chuse her house for an asylum, she promise she all the
protection which it be in her power to give.
as we have now bring Sophia into safe hand, the reader will, I
apprehend, be content to deposit she there a while, and to look a
little after other personage, and particularly poor Jones, whom we
have leave long enough to do penance for his past offence, which, as
be the nature of vice, bring sufficient punishment upon he
themselves.
BOOK XII.
contain the same individual time with the FORMER.
Chapter i.
show what be to be deem plagiarism in a modern author, and what
be to be consider as lawful prize.
the learned reader must have observe that in the course of this
mighty work, I have often translate passage out of the good antient
author, without quote the original, or without take the least
notice of the book from whence they be borrow.
this conduct in writing be place in a very proper light by the
ingenious Abbé Bannier, in his preface to his mythology, a work of
great erudition and of equal judgment. "it will be easy," say he,
"for the reader to observe that I have frequently have great regard
to he than to my own reputation: for an author certainly pay he a
considerable compliment, when, for his sake, he suppress learn
quotation that come in his way, and which would have cost he but the
bare trouble of transcribe."
to fill up a work with these scrap may, indeed, be consider as a
downright cheat on the learn world, who be by such mean impose
upon to buy a second time, in fragment and by retail, what they have
already in gross, if not in their memory, upon their shelf; and it
be still more cruel upon the illiterate, who be draw in to pay for
what be of no manner of use to they. a writer who intermix great
quantity of Greek and Latin with his work, deal by the lady and
fine gentleman in the same paultry manner with which they be treat
by the auctioneer, who often endeavour so to confound and mix up
their lot, that, in order to purchase the commodity you want, you be
oblige at the same time to purchase that which will do you no
service.
and yet, as there be no conduct so fair and disinterested but that it
may be misunderstood by ignorance, and misrepresent by malice, I
have be sometimes tempt to preserve my own reputation at the
expense of my reader, and to transcribe the original, or at least to
quote chapter and verse, whenever I have make use either of the
thought or expression of another. I be, indeed, in some doubt that I
have often suffer by the contrary method; and that, by suppress
the original author's name, I have be rather suspect of plagiarism
than repute to act from the amiable motive assign by that justly
celebrated Frenchman.
now, to obviate all such imputation for the future, I do here confess
and justify the fact. the antient may be consider as a rich common,
where every person who hath the small tenement in Parnassus hath a
free right to fatten his muse. or, to place it in a clear light, we
modern be to the antient what the poor be to the rich. by the poor
here I mean that large and venerable body which, in English, we call
the mob. now, whoever hath have the honour to be admit to any degree
of intimacy with this mob, must well know that it be one of their
establish maxim to plunder and pillage their rich neighbour
without any reluctance; and that this be hold to be neither sin nor
shame among they. and so constantly do they abide and act by this
maxim, that, in every parish almost in the kingdom, there be a kind of
confederacy ever carry on against a certain person of opulence
call the squire, whose property be consider as free-booty by all
his poor neighbour; who, as they conclude that there be no manner of
guilt in such depredation, look upon it as a point of honour and
moral obligation to conceal, and to preserve each other from
punishment on all such occasion.
in like manner be the antient, such as Homer, Virgil, Horace,
Cicero, and the rest, to be esteem among us writer, as so many
wealthy squire, from whom we, the poor of Parnassus, claim an
immemorial custom of take whatever we can come at. this liberty I
demand, and this I be as ready to allow again to my poor neighbour in
their turn. all I profess, and all I require of my brother, be to
maintain the same strict honesty among ourselves which the mob show to
one another. to steal from one another be indeed highly criminal and
indecent; for this may be strictly stile defraud the poor
(sometimes perhaps those who be poor than ourselves), or, to set it
under the most opprobrious colour, rob the spittal.
since, therefore, upon the strict examination, my own conscience
cannot lay any such pitiful theft to my charge, I be content to
plead guilty to the former accusation; nor shall I ever scruple to
take to myself any passage which I shall find in an antient author to
my purpose, without set down the name of the author from whence it
be take. Nay, I absolutely claim a property in all such sentiment
the moment they be transcribe into my writing, and I expect all
reader henceforward to regard they as purely and entirely my own.
this claim, however, I desire to be allow I only on condition that
I preserve strict honesty towards my poor brother, from whom, if ever
I borrow any of that little of which they be possess, I shall never
fail to put their mark upon it, that it may be at all time ready to
be restore to the right owner.
the omission of this be highly blameable in one Mr Moore, who, have
formerly borrow some line of Pope and company, take the liberty to
transcribe six of they into his play of the Rival Modes. Mr Pope,
however, very luckily find they in the said play, and, lay violent
hand on his own property, transfer it back again into his own
work; and, for a further punishment, imprison the say Moore in the
loathsome dungeon of the Dunciad, where his unhappy memory now
remain, and eternally will remain, as a proper punishment for such
his unjust dealing in the poetical trade.
Chapter ii.
in which, though the squire doth not find his daughter, something be
find which put an end to his pursuit.
the history now return to the inn at Upton, whence we shall first
trace the footstep of Squire Western; for, as he will soon arrive at
an end of his journey, we shall have then full leisure to attend our
heroe.
the reader may be pleased to remember that the say squire depart
from the inn in great fury, and in that fury he pursue his daughter.
the hostler have inform he that she have cross the Severn, he
likewise past that river with his equipage, and ride full speed,
vow the utmost vengeance against poor Sophia, if he should but
overtake she.
he have not go far before he arrive at a crossway. here he call a
short council of war, in which, after hear different opinion, he
at last give the direction of his pursuit to fortune, and strike
directly into the Worcester road.
in this road he proceed about two mile, when he begin to bemoan
himself most bitterly, frequently cry out, "what pity be it! sure
never be so unlucky a dog as myself!" and then burst forth a volley
of oath and execration.
the parson attempt to administer comfort to he on this occasion.
"sorrow not, sir," say he, "like those without hope. Howbeit we have
not yet be able to overtake young madam, we may account it some good
fortune that we have hitherto trace her course aright. peradventure
she will soon be fatigate with her journey, and will tarry in some
inn, in order to renovate her corporeal function; and in that case,
in all moral certainty, you will very briefly be _compos voti_."
"Pogh! d--n the slut!" answer the squire, "I be lament the loss
of so fine a morning for hunting. it be confound hard to lose one of
the well scenting day, in all appearance, which hath be this
season, and especially after so long a frost."
whether Fortune, who now and then show some compassion in her
wanton trick, might not take pity of the squire; and, as she have
determine not to let he overtake his daughter, might not resolve to
make he amend some other way, I will not assert; but he have hardly
utter the word just before commemorate, and two or three oath at
their heel, when a pack of hound begin to open their melodious
throat at a small distance from they, which the squire's horse and
his rider both perceiving, both immediately prick up their ear, and
the squire, cry, "shebe go, shebe go! damn I if she be not
go!" instantly clap spur to the beast, who little need it,
have indeed the same inclination with his master; and now the whole
company, cross into a corn-field, ride directly towards the hound,
with much hallowing and whooping, while the poor parson, blessing
himself, bring up the rear.
thus fable report that the fair Grimalkin, whom Venus, at the desire
of a passionate lover, convert from a cat into a fine woman, no
soon perceive a mouse than, mindful of her former sport, and still
retain her pristine nature, she leap from the bed of her husband
to pursue the little animal.
what be we to understand by this? not that the bride be displeased
with the embrace of her amorous bridegroom; for, though some have
remark that cat be subject to ingratitude, yet woman and cat too
will be pleased and purr on certain occasion. the truth be, as the
sagacious Sir Roger L'Estrange observe, in his deep reflection,
that, "if we shut Nature out at the door, she will come in at the
window; and that puss, though a madam, will be a mouser still." in the
same manner we be not to arraign the squire of any want of love for
his daughter; for in reality he have a great deal; we be only to
consider that he be a squire and a sportsman, and then we may apply
the fable to he, and the judicious reflection likewise.
the hound run very hard, as it be call, and the squire pursue over
hedge and ditch, with all his usual vociferation and alacrity, and
with all his usual pleasure; nor do the thought of Sophia ever once
intrude themselves to allay the satisfaction he enjoy in the chace,
which, he say, be one of the fine he ever see, and which he swear
be very well worth go fifty mile for. as the squire forget his
daughter, the servant, we may easily believe, forget their mistress;
and the parson, after have express much astonishment, in Latin, to
himself, at length likewise abandon all farth thought of the
young lady, and, jog on at a distance behind, begin to meditate a
portion of doctrine for the ensue Sunday.
the squire who own the hound be highly pleased with the arrival of
his brother squire and sportsman; for all man approve merit in their
own way, and no man be more expert in the field than Mr Western, nor
do any other well know how to encourage the dog with his voice,
and to animate the hunt with his holla.
sportsman, in the warmth of a chace, be too much engage to attend to
any manner of ceremony, nay, even to the office of humanity: for, if
any of they meet with an accident by tumble into a ditch, or into a
river, the rest pass on regardless, and generally leave he to his
fate: during this time, therefore, the two squire, though often close
to each other, interchange not a single word. the master of the hunt,
however, often see and approve the great judgment of the stranger in
draw the dog when they be at a fault, and hence conceive a very
high opinion of his understanding, as the number of his attendant
inspire no small reverence to his quality. as soon, therefore, as the
sport be end by the death of the little animal which have occasion
it, the two squire meet, and in all squire-like greeting salute each
other.
the conversation be entertain enough, and what we may perhaps
relate in an appendix, or on some other occasion; but as it nowise
concern this history, we cannot prevail on ourselves to give it a
place here. it conclude with a second chace, and that with an
invitation to dinner. this be accept, be follow by a hearty
bout of drinking, which end in as hearty a nap on the part of squire
Western.
our squire be by no mean a match either for his host, or for parson
Supple, at his cup that evening; for which the violent fatigue of
mind as well as body that he have undergo, may very well account,
without the least derogation from his honour. he be indeed, accord
to the vulgar phrase, whistle drunk; for before he have swallow the
third bottle, he become so entirely overpowered that though he be not
carry off to bed till long after, the parson consider he as
absent, and have acquaint the other squire with all relate to
Sophia, he obtain his promise of second those argument which he
intend to urge the next morning for Mr Western's return.
no soon, therefore, have the good squire shake off his evening, and
begin to call for his morning draught, and to summon his horse in
order to renew his pursuit, than Mr Supple begin his dissuasive,
which the host so strongly seconded, that they at length prevail,
and Mr Western agree to return home; be principally move by one
argument, viz., that he know not which way to go, and might probably
be rid far from his daughter instead of towards she. he then
take leave of his brother sportsman, and express great joy that the
frost be break (which might perhaps be no small motive to his
hastening home), set forwards, or rather backwards, for Somersetshire;
but not before he have first despatch part of his retinue in quest of
his daughter, after whom he likewise send a volley of the most bitter
execration which he could invent.
Chapter iii.
the departure of Jones from Upton, with what pass between he and
Partridge on the road.
at length we be once more come to our heroe; and, to say truth, we
have be oblige to part with he so long, that, consider the
condition in which we leave he, I apprehend many of our reader have
conclude we intend to abandon he for ever; he be at present in
that situation in which prudent people usually desist from enquire
any far after their friend, lest they should be shock by
hear such friend have hang themselves.
but, in reality, if we have not all the virtue, I will boldly say,
neither have we all the vice of a prudent character; and though it be
not easy to conceive circumstance much more miserable than those of
poor Jones at present, we shall return to he, and attend upon he
with the same diligence as if he be wanton in the bright beam
of fortune.
Mr Jones, then, and his companion Partridge, leave the inn a few
minute after the departure of squire Western, and pursue the same
road on foot, for the hostler tell they that no horse be by any
mean to be at that time procure at Upton. on they march with heavy
heart; for though their disquiet proceed from very different
reason, yet displeased they be both; and if Jones sigh bitterly,
Partridge grunt altogether as sadly at every step.
when they come to the cross-road where the squire have stopt to take
counsel, Jones stopt likewise, and turn to Partridge, ask his
opinion which track they should pursue. "ah, sir," answer Partridge,
"I wish your honour would follow my advice." "why should I not?"
reply Jones; "for it be now indifferent to I whither I go, or what
become of I." "my advice, then," say Partridge, "be, that you
immediately face about and return home; for who that hath such a home
to return to as your honour, would travel thus about the country like
a vagabond? I ask pardon, _se vox ea sola reperta est_."
"alas!" cry Jones, "I have no home to return to;--but if my friend,
my father, would receive I, could I bear the country from which
Sophia be fly? Cruel Sophia! Cruel! no; let I blame myself!--no;
let I blame thee. D--nation seize thee--fool--blockhead! thou hast
undo I, and I will tear thy soul from thy body."--At which word he
lay violent hand on the collar of poor Partridge, and shake he more
heartily than an ague-fit, or his own fear have ever do before.
Partridge fall tremble on his knee, and beg for mercy, vow he
have mean no harm--when Jones, after star wildly on he for a
moment, quit his hold, and discharge a rage on himself, that, have
it fall on the other, would certainly have put an end to his being,
which indeed the very apprehension of it have almost effect.
we would bestow some pain here in minutely describe all the mad
prank which Jones play on this occasion, could we be well assure
that the reader would take the same pain in peruse they; but as we
be apprehensive that, after all the labour which we should employ in
paint this scene, the say reader would be very apt to skip it
entirely over, we have save ourselves that trouble. to say the truth,
we have, from this reason alone, often do great violence to the
luxuriance of our genius, and have leave many excellent description
out of our work, which would otherwise have be in it. and this
suspicion, to be honest, arise, as be generally the case, from our
own wicked heart; for we have, ourselves, be very often most
horridly give to jumping, as we have run through the page of
voluminous historian.
suffice it then simply to say, that Jones, after have play the
part of a madman for many minute, come, by degree, to himself; which
no soon happen, than, turn to Partridge, he very earnestly
beg his pardon for the attack he have make on he in the violence of
his passion; but conclude, by desire he never to mention his
return again; for he be resolve never to see that country any more.
Partridge easily forgave, and faithfully promise to obey the
injunction now lay upon he. and then Jones very briskly cry out,
"since it be absolutely impossible for I to pursue any far the
step of my angel--I will pursue those of glory. come on, my brave
lad, now for the army:--it be a glorious cause, and I would willingly
sacrifice my life in it, even though it be worth my preserving." and
so say, he immediately strike into the different road from that
which the squire have take, and, by mere chance, pursue the very same
through which Sophia have before pass.
our traveller now march a full mile, without speak a syllable to
each other, though Jones, indeed, mutter many thing to himself. as
to Partridge, he be profoundly silent; for he be not, perhaps,
perfectly recover from his former fright; besides, he have
apprehension of provoke his friend to a second fit of wrath,
especially as he now begin to entertain a conceit, which may not,
perhaps, create any great wonder in the reader. in short, he begin now
to suspect that Jones be absolutely out of his sens.
at length, Jones, be weary of soliloquy, address himself to his
companion, and blame he for his taciturnity; for which the poor man
very honestly account, from his fear of give offence. and now this
fear be pretty well remove, by the most absolute promise of
indemnity, Partridge again take the bridle from his tongue; which,
perhaps, rejoice no less at regain its liberty, than a young colt,
when the bridle be slipt from his neck, and he be turn loose into
the pasture.
as Partridge be inhibit from that topic which would have first
suggest itself, he fall upon that which be next uppermost in his
mind, namely, the Man of the Hill. "certainly, sir," say he, "that
could never be a man, who dress himself and live after such a
strange manner, and so unlike other folk. besides, his diet, as the
old woman tell I, be chiefly upon herb, which be a fitter food for a
horse than a Christian: nay, landlord at Upton say that the
neighbour thereabout have very fearful notion about he. it run
strangely in my head that it must have be some spirit, who, perhaps,
might be send to forewarn we: and who know but all that matter which
he tell we, of his go to fight, and of his be take prisoner,
and of the great danger he be in of be hang, might be intend
as a warning to we, consider what we be go about? besides, I
dream of nothing all last night but of fight; and methought the
blood run out of my nose, as liquor out of a tap. indeed, sir,
_infandum, regina, jubes renovare dolorem_."
"Thy story, Partridge," answer Jones, "be almost as ill apply as
thy Latin. nothing can be more likely to happen than death to man who
go into battle. perhaps we shall both fall in it--and what then?"
"what then?" reply Partridge; "why then there be an end of we, be
there not? when I be go, all be over with I. what matter the cause
to I, or who get the victory, if I be kill? I shall never enjoy
any advantage from it. what be all the ringing of bell, and
bonfire, to one that be six foot under ground? there will be an end
of poor Partridge." "and an end of poor Partridge," cry Jones,
"there must be, one time or other. if you love Latin, I will repeat
you some fine line out of Horace, which would inspire courage into a
coward.
`_Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori
Mors et fugacem persequitur virum
Nec parcit imbellis juventae
Poplitibus, timidoque tergo._'"
"I wish you would construe they," cry Partridge; "for Horace be a
hard author, and I cannot understand as you repeat they."
"I will repeat you a bad imitation, or rather paraphrase, of my own,"
say Jones; "for I be but an indifferent poet:
`who would not die in his dear country's cause? since, if base fear
his dastard step withdraw, from death he cannot fly:--One common
grave Receives, at last, the coward and the brave.'"
"thatbe very certain," cry Partridge. "ay, sure, _mor omnibus
communis:_ but there be a great difference between die in one's bed
a great many year hence, like a good Christian, with all our friend
cry about we, and be shoot to-day or to-morrow, like a mad dog;
or, perhaps, hack in twenty piece with the sword, and that too
before we have repent of all our sin. o Lord, have mercy upon we!
to be sure the soldier be a wicked kind of people. I never love to
have anything to do with they. I could hardly bring myself ever to
look upon they as Christians. there be nothing but curse and
swearing among they. I wish your honour would repent: I heartily wish
you would repent before it be too late; and not think of go among
them.--Evil communication corrupt good manner. that be my principal
reason. for as for that matter, I be no more afraid than another man,
not I; as to matter of that. I know all human flesh must die; but yet
a man may live many year, for all that. why, I be a middle-aged man
now, and yet I may live a great number of year. I have read of
several who have live to be above a hundred, and some a great deal
above a hundred. not that I hope, I mean that I promise myself, to
live to any such age as that, neither.--but if it be only to eighty or
ninety. Heaven be praise, that be a great way off yet; and I be not
afraid of die then, no more than another man; but, surely, to tempt
death before a man's time be come seem to I downright wickedness and
presumption. besides, if it be to do any good indeed; but, let the
cause be what it will, what mighty matter of good can two people do?
and, for my part, I understand nothing of it. I never fire off a gun
above ten time in my life; and then it be not charge with bullet.
and for the sword, I never learn to fence, and know nothing of the
matter. and then there be those cannon, which certainly it must be
think the high presumption to go in the way of; and nobody but a
madman--I ask pardon; upon my soul I mean no harm; I beg I may not
throw your honour into another passion."
"be under no apprehension, Partridge," cry Jones; "I be now so well
convinced of thy cowardice, that thou couldst not provoke I on any
account." "your honour," answer he, "may call I coward, or anything
else you please. if love to sleep in a whole skin make a man a
coward, _non immune ab illis malis sumus_. I never read in my grammar
that a man cannot be a good man without fight. _vir bonus est quis?
Qui consulta patrum, qui lege juraque servat_. not a word of
fight; and I be sure the scripture be so much against it, that a
man shall never persuade I he be a good Christian while he shed
christian blood."
Chapter iv.
the adventure of a beggar-man.
just as Partridge have utter that good and pious doctrine, with which
the last chapter conclude, they arrive at another cross-way, when a
lame fellow in rag ask they for alm; upon which Partridge give he
a severe rebuke, say, "every parish ought to keep their own poor."
Jones then fall a-laugh, and ask Partridge, "if he be not
ashamed, with so much charity in his mouth, to have no charity in his
heart. your religion," say he, "serve you only for an excuse for
your fault, but be no incentive to your virtue. can any man who be
really a Christian abstain from relieve one of his brother in such
a miserable condition?" and at the same time, put his hand in his
pocket, he give the poor object a shilling.
"Master," cry the fellow, after thank he, "I have a curious
thing here in my pocket, which I find about two mile off, if your
worship will please to buy it. I should not venture to pull it out to
every one; but, as you be so good a gentleman, and so kind to the
poor, you willnot suspect a man of be a thief only because he be
poor." he then pull out a little gilt pocket-book, and deliver it
into the hand of Jones.
Jones presently open it, and (guess, reader, what he feel) see in
the first page the word Sophia Western, write by her own fair hand.
he no soon read the name than he pr it close to his lip; nor
could he avoid fall into some very frantic rapture,
notwithstanding his company; but, perhaps, these very rapture make
he forget he be not alone.
while Jones be kiss and mumble the book, as if he have an
excellent brown buttered crust in his mouth or as if he have really
be a book-worm, or an author who have nothing to eat but his own
work, a piece of paper fall from its leaf to the ground, which
Partridge take up, and deliver to Jones, who presently perceive it
to be a bank-bill. it be, indeed, the very bill which Western have
give his daughter the night before her departure; and a Jew would
have jump to purchase it at five shilling less than £100.
the eye of Partridge sparkle at this news, which Jones now
proclaim aloud; and so do (though with somewhat a different aspect)
those of the poor fellow who have find the book; and who (I hope from
a principle of honesty) have never open it: but we should not deal
honestly by the reader if we omit to inform he of a circumstance
which may be here a little material, viz. that the fellow could not
read.
Jones, who have feel nothing but pure joy and transport from the
find the book, be affect with a mixture of concern at this new
discovery; for his imagination instantly suggest to he that the
owner of the bill might possibly want it before he should be able to
convey it to she. he then acquaint the finder that he know the lady
to whom the book belong, and would endeavour to find she out as soon
as possible, and return it she.
the pocket-book be a late present from Mrs Western to her niece; it
have cost five-and-twenty shilling, have be buy of a celebrated
toyman; but the real value of the silver which it contain in its
clasp be about eighteen-pence; and that price the said toyman, as it
be altogether as good as when it first issue from his shop, would
now have give for it. a prudent person would, however, have take
proper advantage of the ignorance of this fellow, and would not have
offer more than a shilling, or perhaps sixpence, for it; nay, some
perhaps would have give nothing, and leave the fellow to his action of
trover, which some learn serjeant may doubt whether he could, under
these circumstance, have maintain.
Jones, on the contrary, whose character be on the outside of
generosity, and may perhaps not very unjustly have be suspect of
extravagance, without any hesitation give a guinea in exchange for the
book. the poor man, who have not for a long time before be possess
of so much treasure, give Mr Jones a thousand thank, and discover
little less of transport in his muscle than Jones have before show
when he have first read the name of Sophia Western.
the fellow very readily agree to attend our traveller to the place
where he have find the pocket-book. together, therefore, they
proceed directly thither; but not so fast as Mr Jones desire; for
his guide unfortunately happen to be lame, and could not possibly
travel fast than a mile an hour. as this place, therefore, be at
above three mile' distance, though the fellow have say otherwise, the
reader need not be acquaint how long they be in walk it.
Jones open the book a hundred time during their walk, kiss it as
often, talk much to himself, and very little to his companion. at
all which the guide expr some sign of astonishment to Partridge;
who more than once shake his head, and cry, poor gentleman! _orandum
est ut sit men sana in corpore sano._
at length they arrive at the very spot where Sophia unhappily dropt
the pocket-book, and where the fellow have as happily find it. here
Jones offer to take leave of his guide, and to improve his pace; but
the fellow, in whom that violent surprize and joy which the first
receipt of the guinea have occasion be now considerably abate, and
who have now have sufficient time to recollect himself, put on a
discontent look, and, scratch his head, say, "he hop his
worship would give he something more. your worship," say he, "will,
I hope, take it into your consideration that if I have not be honest
I might have keep the whole." and, indeed, this the reader must
confess to have be true. "if the paper there," say he, "be worth
£100, I be sure the finding it deserve more than a guinea. besides,
suppose your worship should never see the lady, nor give it she--and,
though your worship look and talk very much like a gentleman, yet I
have only your worship's bare word; and, certainly, if the right owner
ben't to be find, it all belong to the first finder. I hope your
worship will consider of all these matter: I be but a poor man, and
therefore donot desire to have all; but it be but reasonable I should
have my share. your worship look like a good man, and, I hope, will
consider my honesty; for I might have keep every farthing, and nobody
ever the wiser." "I promise thee, upon my honour," cry Jones, "that
I know the right owner, and will restore it she." "Nay, your worship,"
answer the fellow, "may do as you please as to that; if you will but
give I my share, that is, one-half of the money, your honour may keep
the rest yourself if you please;" and conclude with swearing, by a
very vehement oath, "that he would never mention a syllable of it to
any man live."
"Lookee, friend," cry Jones, "the right owner shall certainly have
again all that she lose; and as for any farth gratuity, I really
cannot give it you at present; but let I know your name, and where
you live, and it be more than possible you may hereafter have further
reason to rejoice at this morning's adventure."
"I donot know what you mean by venture," cry the fellow; "it seem I
must venture whether you will return the lady her money or no; but I
hope your worship will consider--" "come, come," say Partridge, "tell
his honour your name, and where you may be find; I warrant you will
never repent have put the money into his hand." the fellow, see
no hope of recover the possession of the pocket-book, at last
comply in give in his name and place of abode, which Jones writ
upon a piece of paper with the pencil of Sophia; and then, place the
paper in the same page where she have writ her name, he cry out,
"there, friend, you be the happy man alive; I have join your
name to that of an angel." "I donot know anything about angel,"
answer the fellow; "but I wish you would give I a little more
money, or else return I the pocket-book." Partridge now wax wrath:
he call the poor cripple by several vile and opprobrious name, and
be absolutely proceed to beat he, but Jones would not suffer any
such thing: and now, tell the fellow he would certainly find some
opportunity of serve he, Mr Jones depart as fast as his heel
would carry he; and Partridge, into whom the thought of the hundred
pound have infuse new spirit, follow his leader; while the man, who
be oblige to stay behind, fall to curse they both, as well as his
parent; "for have they," say he, "send I to charity-school to learn
to write and read and cast account, I should have know the value of
these matter as well as other people."
Chapter v.
contain more adventure which Mr Jones and his companion meet on the
road.
our traveller now walk so fast, that they have very little time or
breath for conversation; Jones meditate all the way on Sophia, and
Partridge on the bank-bill, which, though it give he some pleasure,
cause he at the same time to repine at fortune, which, in all his
walk, have never give he such an opportunity of show his honesty.
they have proceed above three mile, when Partridge, be unable any
long to keep up with Jones, call to he, and beg he a little
to slacken his pace: with this he be the more ready to comply, as he
have for some time lose the footstep of the horse, which the thaw have
enable he to trace for several mile, and he be now upon a wide
common, where be several road.
he here therefore stopt to consider which of these road he should
pursue; when on a sudden they hear the noise of a drum, that seem
at no great distance. this sound presently alarm the fear of
Partridge, and he cry out, "Lord have mercy upon we all; they be
certainly a coming!" "who be come?" cry Jones; for fear have long
since give place to soft idea in his mind; and since his adventure
with the lame man, he have be totally intent on pursue Sophia,
without entertain one thought of an enemy. "who?" cry Partridge,
"why, the rebel: but why should I call they rebel? they may be very
honest gentleman, for anything I know to the contrary. the devil take
he that affront they, I say; I be sure, if they have nothing to say
to I, I will have nothing to say to they, but in a civil way. for
Heaven's sake, sir, donot affront they if they should come, and
perhaps they may do we no harm; but would it not be the wise way to
creep into some of yonder bush, till they be go by? what can two
unarmed man do perhaps against fifty thousand? certainly nobody but a
madman; I hope your honour be not offend; but certainly no man who
hath _mens sana in corpore sano_----" here Jones interrupt this
torrent of eloquence, which fear have inspire, say, "that by the
drum he perceive they be near some town." he then make directly
towards the place whence the noise proceed, bid Partridge "take
courage, for that he would lead he into no danger;" and add, "it
be impossible the rebel should be so near."
Partridge be a little comfort with this last assurance; and though
he would more gladly have go the contrary way, he follow his
leader, his heart beat time, but not after the manner of hero, to
the music of the drum, which cease not till they have traverse the
common, and be come into a narrow lane.
and now Partridge, who keep even pace with Jones, discover something
paint fly in the air, a very few yard before he, which fancy
to be the colour of the enemy, he fall a bellowing, "oh Lord, sir,
here they be; there be the crown and coffin. oh Lord! I never see
anything so terrible; and we be within gun-shot of they already."
Jones no soon look up, than he plainly perceive what it be which
Partridge have thus mistake. "Partridge," say he, "I fancy you will
be able to engage this whole army yourself; for by the colour I guess
what the drum be which we hear before, and which beat up for
recruit to a puppet-show."
"a puppet-show!" answer Partridge, with most eager transport. "and
be it really no more than that? I love a puppet-show of all the
pastime upon earth. do, good sir, let we tarry and see it. besides, I
be quite famished to death; for it be now almost dark, and I have not
eat a morsel since three o'clock in the morning."
they now arrive at an inn, or indeed an ale-house, where Jones be
prevail upon to stop, the rather as he have no long any assurance
of be in the road he desire. they walk both directly into the
kitchen, where Jones begin to enquire if no lady have pass that way
in the morning, and Partridge as eagerly examine into the state of
their provision; and indeed his enquiry meet with the well success;
for Jones could not hear news of Sophia; but Partridge, to his great
satisfaction, find good reason to expect very shortly the agreeable
sight of an excellent smoaking dish of egg and bacon.
in strong and healthy constitution love hath a very different effect
from what it cause in the puny part of the specie. in the latter it
generally destroy all that appetite which tend towards the
conservation of the individual; but in the former, though it often
induce forgetfulness, and a neglect of food, as well as of everything
else; yet place a good piece of well-powder buttock before a hungry
lover, and he seldom fail very handsomely to play his part. thus it
happen in the present case; for though Jones perhaps want a
prompter, and might have travel much far, have he be alone,
with an empty stomach; yet no soon do he sit down to the bacon and
egg, than he fall to as heartily and voraciously as Partridge
himself.
before our traveller have finish their dinner, night come on, and as
the moon be now past the full, it be extremely dark. partridge
therefore prevail on Jones to stay and see the puppet-show, which
be just go to begin, and to which they be very eagerly invite
by the master of the say show, who declare that his figure be the
fine which the world have ever produce, and that they have give
great satisfaction to all the quality in every town in England.
the puppet-show be perform with great regularity and decency. it
be call the fine and serious part of the Provoked Husband; and it
be indeed a very grave and solemn entertainment, without any low wit
or humour, or jest; or, to do it no more than justice, without
anything which could provoke a laugh. the audience be all highly
pleased. a grave matron tell the master she would bring her two
daughter the next night, as he do not show any stuff; and an
attorney's clerk and an exciseman both declare, that the character
of Lord and Lady Townley be well preserve, and highly in nature.
Partridge likewise concur with this opinion.
the master be so highly elated with these encomium, that he could
not refrain from add some more of his own. he say, "the present
age be not improve in anything so much as in their puppet-show;
which, by throw out Punch and his wife Joan, and such idle
trumpery, be at last bring to be a rational entertainment. I
remember," say he, "when I first take to the business, there be a
great deal of low stuff that do very well to make folk laugh; but
be never calculate to improve the moral of young people, which
certainly ought to be principally aim at in every puppet-show: for
why may not good and instructive lesson be convey this way, as well
as any other? my figure be as big as the life, and they represent
the life in every particular; and I question not but people rise from
my little drama as much improve as they do from the great." "I would
by no mean degrade the ingenuity of your profession," answer Jones,
"but I should have be glad to have see my old acquaintance master
Punch, for all that; and so far from improve, I think, by leave
out he and his merry wife Joan, you have spoil your puppet-show."
the dancer of wire conceive an immediate and high contempt for
Jones, from these word. and with much disdain in his countenance, he
reply, "very probably, sir, that may be your opinion; but I have the
satisfaction to know the good judge differ from you, and it be
impossible to please every taste. I confess, indeed, some of the
quality at Bath, two or three year ago, want mightily to bring
Punch again upon the stage. I believe I lose some money for not
agree to it; but let other do as they will; a little matter shall
never bribe I to degrade my own profession, nor will I ever willingly
consent to the spoil the decency and regularity of my stage, by
introduce any such low stuff upon it."
"right, friend," cry the clerk, "you be very right. always avoid
what be low. there be several of my acquaintance in London, who be
resolve to drive everything which be low from the stage." "nothing
can be more proper," cry the exciseman, pull his pipe from his
mouth. "I remember," add he, "(for I then live with my lord) I be
in the footman's gallery, the night when this play of the Provoked
Husband be act first. there be a great deal of low stuff in it
about a country gentleman come up to town to stand for parliament-man;
and there they bring a parcel of his servant upon the stage, his
coachman I remember particularly; but the gentleman in our gallery
could not bear anything so low, and they damn it. I observe, friend,
you have leave all that matter out, and you be to be commend for
it."
"Nay, gentleman," cry Jones, "I can never maintain my opinion
against so many; indeed, if the generality of his audience dislike
he, the learn gentleman who conduct the show might have do very
right in dismiss Punch from his service."
the master of the show then begin a second harangue, and say much of
the great force of example, and how much the inferior part of mankind
would be deter from vice, by observe how odious it be in their
superior; when he be unluckily interrupt by an incident, which,
though perhaps we might have omit it at another time, we cannot
help relate at present, but not in this chapter.
Chapter vi.
from which it may be infer that the good thing be liable to be
misunderstood and misinterpret.
a violent uproar now arise in the entry, where my landlady be well
cuff she maid both with her fist and tongue. she have indeed miss
the wench from her employment, and, after a little search, have find
she on the puppet-show stage in company with the Merry Andrew, and in
a situation not very proper to be describe.
Though Grace (for that be her name) have forfeit all title to
modesty; yet have she not impudence enough to deny a fact in which she
be actually surprize; she, therefore, take another turn, and
attempt to mitigate the offence. "why do you beat I in this manner,
mistress?" cry the wench. "if you donot like my doing, you may turn
I away. if I be a w--e" (for the other have liberally bestow that
appellation on she), "my better be so as well as I. what be the
fine lady in the puppet-show just now? I suppose she do not lie all
night out from her husband for nothing."
the landlady now burst into the kitchen, and fall foul on both her
husband and the poor puppet-mover. "here, husband," say she, "you see
the consequence of harbour these people in your house. if one doth
draw a little drink the more for they, one be hardly make amend for
the litter they make; and then to have one's house make a bawdy-house
of by such lousy vermin. in short, I desire you would be go
to-morrow morning; for I will tolerate no more such doing. it be only
the way to teach our servant idleness and nonsense; for to be sure
nothing well can be learn by such idle show as these. I remember
when puppet-show be make of good scripture story, as Jephthah's
Rash Vow, and such good thing, and when wicked people be carry
away by the devil. there be some sense in those matter; but as the
parson tell we last Sunday, nobody believe in the devil now-a-day;
and here you bring about a parcel of puppet drest up like lord and
lady, only to turn the head of poor country wench; and when their
head be once turn topsy-turvy, no wonder everything else be so."
Virgil, I think, tell we, that when the mob be assemble in a
riotous and tumultuous manner, and all sort of missile weapon fly
about, if a man of gravity and authority appear amongst they, the
tumult be presently appease, and the mob, which when collect into
one body, may be well compare to an ass, erect their long ear at the
grave man's discourse.
on the contrary, when a set of grave man and philosopher be
dispute; when wisdom herself may in a manner be consider as
present, and administer argument to the disputant; should a
tumult arise among the mob, or should one scold, who be herself equal
in noise to a mighty mob, appear among the say philosopher; their
dispute cease in a moment, wisdom no long perform her ministerial
office, and the attention of every one be immediately attract by the
scold alone.
thus the uproar aforesaid, and the arrival of the landlady, silence
the master of the puppet-show, and put a speedy and final end to that
grave and solemn harangue, of which we have give the reader a
sufficient taste already. nothing indeed could have happen so very
inopportune as this accident; the most wanton malice of fortune could
not have contrive such another stratagem to confound the poor fellow,
while he be so triumphantly descant on the good moral inculcate
by his exhibition. his mouth be now as effectually stopt, as that of
quack must be, if, in the midst of a declamation on the great virtue
of his pill and powder, the corpse of one of his martyr should be
bring forth, and deposit before the stage, as a testimony of his
skill.
instead, therefore, of answer my landlady, the puppet-show man run
out to punish his Merry Andrew; and now the moon begin to put
forth her silver light, as the poet call it (though she look at
that time more like a piece of copper), Jones call for his
reckoning, and order Partridge, whom my landlady have just awake
from a profound nap, to prepare for his journey; but Partridge, have
lately carry two point, as my reader hath see before, be
embolden to attempt a third, which be to prevail with Jones to take
up a lodging that evening in the house where he then be. he
introduce this with an affected surprize at the intention which Mr
Jones declare of remove; and, after urge many excellent argument
against it, he at last insist strongly that it could be to no manner
of purpose whatever; for that, unless Jones know which way the lady
be go, every step he take might very possibly lead he the far
from she; "for you find, sir," say he, "by all the people in the
house, that she be not go this way. how much well, therefore,
would it be to stay till the morning, when we may expect to meet with
somebody to enquire of?"
this last argument have indeed some effect on Jones, and while he be
weigh it the landlord throw all the rhetoric of which he be master
into the same scale. "sure, sir," say he, "your servant give you
most excellent advice; for who would travel by night at this time of
the year?" he then begin in the usual stile to trumpet forth the
excellent accommodation which his house afford; and my landlady
likewise open on the occasion----but, not to detain the reader with
what be common to every host and hostess, it be sufficient to tell he
Jones be at last prevail on to stay and refresh himself with a few
hour' rest, which indeed he very much want; for he have hardly shut
his eye since he have leave the inn where the accident of the break
head have happen.
as soon as Jones have take a resolution to proceed no far that
night, he presently retire to rest, with his two bedfellow, the
pocket-book and the muff; but Partridge, who at several time have
refresh himself with several nap, be more inclined to eat than
to sleep, and more to drink than to either.
and now the storm which Grace have raise be at an end, and my
landlady be again reconcile to the puppet-man, who on his side
forgave the indecent reflection which the good woman in her passion
have cast on his performance, a face of perfect peace and tranquillity
reign in the kitchen; where sit assemble round the fire the
landlord and landlady of the house, the master of the puppet-show, the
attorney's clerk, the exciseman, and the ingenious Mr Partridge; in
which company past the agreeable conversation which will be find in
the next chapter.
Chapter vii.
contain a remark or two of our own and many more of the good
company assemble in the kitchen.
though the pride of Partridge do not submit to acknowledge himself a
servant, yet he condescend in most particular to imitate the
manner of that rank. one instance of this be, his greatly magnify
the fortune of his companion, as he call Jones: such be a general
custom with all servant among stranger, as none of they would
willingly be think the attendant on a beggar: for, the high the
situation of the master be, the high consequently be that of the man
in his own opinion; the truth of which observation appear from the
behaviour of all the footman of the nobility.
but, though title and fortune communicate a splendor all around they,
and the footman of man of quality and of estate think themselves
entitle to a part of that respect which be pay to the quality and
estate of their master, it be clearly otherwise with regard to virtue
and understanding. these advantage be strictly personal, and swallow
themselves all the respect which be pay to they. to say the truth,
this be so very little, that they cannot well afford to let any other
partake with they. as these therefore reflect no honour on the
domestic, so neither be he at all dishonour by the most deplorable
want of both in his master. indeed it be otherwise in the want of what
be call virtue in a mistress, the consequence of which we have
before see: for in this dishonour there be a kind of contagion,
which, like that of poverty, communicate itself to all who approach
it.
now for these reason we be not to wonder that servant (I mean among
the man only) should have so great regard for the reputation of the
wealth of their master, and little or none at all for their character
in other point, and that, though they would be ashamed to be the
footman of a beggar, they be not so to attend upon a rogue or a
blockhead; and do consequently make no scruple to spread the fame of
the iniquity and folly of their say master as far as possible,
and this often with great humour and merriment. in reality, a footman
be often a wit as well as a beau, at the expence of the gentleman
whose livery he wear.
After Partridge, therefore, have enlarge greatly on the vast fortune
to which Mr Jones be heir, he very freely communicate an
apprehension, which he have begin to conceive the day before, and for
which, as we hint at that very time, the behaviour of Jones seem
to have furnish a sufficient foundation. in short, he be now pretty
well confirm in an opinion that his master be out of his wit, with
which opinion he very bluntly acquaint the good company round the
fire.
with this sentiment the puppet-show man immediately coincide. "I
own," say he, "the gentleman surprize I very much, when he talk
so absurdly about puppet-show. it be indeed hardly to be conceive
that any man in his sens should be so much mistaken; what you say
now account very well for all his monstrous notion. poor gentleman!
I be heartily concerned for he; indeed he hath a strange wildness
about his eye, which I take notice of before, though I do not
mention it."
the landlord agree with this last assertion, and likewise claim the
sagacity of have observe it. "and certainly," add he, "it must be
so; for no one but a madman would have think of leave so good a
house to ramble about the country at that time of night."
the exciseman, pull his pipe from his mouth, say, "he think the
gentleman look and talk a little wildly;" and then turn to
Partridge, "if he be a madman," say he, "he should not be suffer to
travel thus about the country; for possibly he may do some mischief.
it be a pity he be not secure and send home to his relation."
now some conceit of this kind be likewise lurk in the mind of
Partridge; for, as he be now persuade that Jones have run away from
Mr Allworthy, he promise himself the high reward if he could by
any mean convey he back. but fear of Jones, of whose fierceness and
strength he have see, and indeed feel, some instance, have however
represent any such scheme as impossible to be execute, and have
discourage he from apply himself to form any regular plan for the
purpose. but no soon do he hear the sentiment of the exciseman
than he embrace that opportunity of declare his own, and express
a hearty wish that such a matter could be bring about.
"could be bring about!" say the exciseman: "why, there be nothing
easy."
"ah! sir," answer Partridge, "you donot know what a devil of a
fellow he be. he can take I up with one hand, and throw I out at
window; and he would, too, if he do but imagine--"
"Pogh!" say the exciseman, "I believe I be as good a man as he.
besides, here be five of we."
"I donot know what five," cry the landlady, "my husband shall have
nothing to do in it. nor shall any violent hand be lay upon anybody
in my house. the young gentleman be as pretty a young gentleman as
ever I see in my life, and I believe he be no more mad than any of we.
what do you tell of his have a wild look with his eye? they be the
prettiest eye I ever see, and he hath the prettiest look with they;
and a very modest civil young man he be. I be sure I have bepitie he
heartily ever since the gentleman there in the corner tell we he be
crost in love. certainly that be enough to make any man, especially
such a sweet young gentleman as he be, to look a little otherwise than
he do before. Lady, indeed! what the devil would the lady have well
than such a handsome man with a great estate? I suppose she be one of
your quality folk, one of your townly lady that we see last night
in the puppet-show, who donot know what they would be at."
the attorney's clerk likewise declare he would have no concern in the
business without the advice of counsel. "suppose," say he, "an action
of false imprisonment should be bring against we, what defence could
we make? who know what may be sufficient evidence of madness to a
jury? but I only speak upon my own account; for it donot look well for
a lawyer to be concern in these matter, unless it be as a lawyer.
jury be always less favourable to we than to other people. I donot
therefore dissuade you, Mr Thomson (to the exciseman), nor the
gentleman, nor anybody else."
the exciseman shake his head at this speech, and the puppet-show man
say, "Madness be sometimes a difficult matter for a jury to decide:
for I remember," say he, "I be once present at a tryal of madness,
where twenty witness swear that the person be as mad as a March
hare; and twenty other, that he be as much in his sens as any man
in england.--and indeed it be the opinion of most people, that it be
only a trick of his relation to rob the poor man of his right."
"very likely!" cry the landlady. "I myself know a poor gentleman who
be keep in a mad-house all his life by his family, and they enjoy
his estate, but it do they no good; for though the law give it they,
it be the right of another."
"Pogh!" cry the clerk, with great contempt, "who hath any right but
what the law give they? if the law give I the good estate in the
country, I should never trouble myself much who have the right."
"if it be so," say Partridge, "_Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula
cautum."_
my landlord, who have be call out by the arrival of a horseman at
the gate, now return into the kitchen, and with an affrighted
countenance cry out, "what do you think, gentleman? the rebel have
give the duke the slip, and be get almost to London. it be certainly
true, for a man on horseback just now tell I so."
"I be glad of it with all my heart," cry Partridge; "then there will
be no fighting in these part."
"I be glad," cry the clerk, "for a well reason; for I would always
have right take place."
"ay, but," answer the landlord, "I have hear some people say this
man hath no right."
"I will prove the contrary in a moment," cry the clerk: "if my
father die seize of a right; do you mind I, seize of a right, I
say; doth not that right descend to his son; and doth not one right
descend as well as another?"
"but how can he have any right to make we papishe?" say the
landlord.
"never fear that," cry Partridge. "as to the matter of right, the
gentleman there hath prove it as clear as the sun; and as to the
matter of religion, it be quite out of the case. the papist
themselves donot expect any such thing. a popish priest, whom I know
very well, and who be a very honest man, tell I upon his word and
honour they have no such design."
"and another priest, of my acquaintance," say the landlady, "hath
tell I the same thing; but my husband be always so afraid of
papishe. I know a great many papishe that be very honest sort of
people, and spend their money very freely; and it be always a maxim
with I, that one man's money be as good as another's."
"very true, mistress," say the puppet-show man, "I donot care what
religion come; provide the Presbyterians be not uppermost; for they
be enemy to puppet-show."
"and so you would sacrifice your religion to your interest," cry the
exciseman; "and be desirous to see popery bring in, be you?"
"not I, truly," answer the other; "I hate popery as much as any man;
but yet it be a comfort to one, that one should be able to live under
it, which I could not do among Presbyterians. to be sure, every man
value his livelihood first; that must be grant; and I warrant, if
you would confess the truth, you be more afraid of lose your place
than anything else; but never fear, friend, there will be an excise
under another government as well as under this."
"why, certainly," reply the exciseman, "I should be a very ill man
if I do not honour the king, whose bread I eat. that be no more than
natural, as a man may say: for what signify it to I that there
would be an excise-office under another government, since my friend
would be out, and I could expect no well than to follow they? no,
no, friend, I shall never be bubble out of my religion in hope only
of keep my place under another government; for I should certainly
be no well, and very probably might be bad."
"why, that be what I say," cry the landlord, "whenever folk say who
know what may happen! odsook! should not I be a blockhead to lend my
money to I know not who, because mayhap he may return it again? I be
sure it be safe in my own bureau, and there I will keep it."
the attorney's clerk have take a great fancy to the sagacity of
Partridge. whether this proceed from the great discernment which the
former have into man, as well as thing, or whether it arise from the
sympathy between their mind; for they be both truly Jacobites in
principle; they now shake hand heartily, and drink bumper of strong
beer to health which we think proper to bury in oblivion.
these health be afterwards pledge by all present, and even by my
landlord himself, though reluctantly; but he could not withstand the
menace of the clerk, who swear he would never set his foot within his
house again, if he refuse. the bumper which be swallow on this
occasion soon put an end to the conversation. here, therefore, we will
put an end to the chapter.
Chapter viii.
in which fortune seem to have be in a well humour with Jones than
we have hitherto see she.
as there be no wholesomer, so perhaps there be few strong, sleep
potion than fatigue. of this Jones might be say to have take a very
large dose, and it operate very forcibly upon he. he have already
sleep nine hour, and might perhaps have sleep long, have he not be
awaken by a most violent noise at his chamber-door, where the sound
of many heavy blow be accompany with many exclamation of murder.
Jones presently leapt from his bed, where he find the master of the
puppet-show belabour the back and rib of his poor Merry-Andrew,
without either mercy or moderation.
Jones instantly interpose on behalf of the suffer party, and
pin the insulting conqueror up to the wall: for the puppet-show man
be no more able to contend with Jones than the poor party-colour
jester have be to contend with this puppet-man.
but though the Merry-Andrew be a little fellow, and not very strong,
he have nevertheless some choler about he. he therefore no soon
find himself deliver from the enemy, than he begin to attack he
with the only weapon at which he be his equal. from this he first
discharge a volley of general abusive word, and thence proceed to
some particular accusations--"d--n your bl--d, you rascal," say he,
"I have not only support you (for to I you owe all the money you
get), but I have save you from the gallow. do you not want to rob
the lady of her fine riding-habit, no long ago than yesterday, in
the back-lane here? can you deny that you wish to have she alone in
a wood to strip she--to strip one of the prettiest lady that ever
be see in the world? and here you have fall upon I, and have
almost murder I, for do no harm to a girl as willing as myself,
only because she like I well than you."
Jones no soon hear this than he quit the master, lay on he
at the same time the most violent injunction of forbearance from any
further insult on the Merry-Andrew; and then take the poor wretch
with he into his own apartment, he soon learn tiding of his
Sophia, whom the fellow, as he be attend his master with his drum
the day before, have see pass by. he easily prevail with the lad to
show he the exact place, and then have summon Partridge, he
depart with the utmost expedition.
it be almost eight of the clock before all matter could be get ready
for his departure: for Partridge be not in any haste, nor could the
reckoning be presently adjust; and when both these be settle and
over, Jones would not quit the place before he have perfectly
reconcile all difference between the master and the man.
when this be happily accomplish, he set forwards, and be by the
trusty Merry-Andrew conduct to the spot by which Sophia have past;
and then have handsomely reward his conductor, he again push on
with the utmost eagerness, be highly delighted with the
extraordinary manner in which he receive his intelligence. of this
Partridge be no soon acquaint, than he, with great earnestness,
begin to prophesy, and assure Jones that he would certainly have good
success in the end: for, he say, "two such accident could never have
happen to direct he after his mistress, if Providence have not
design to bring they together at last." and this be the first time
that Jones lend any attention to the superstitious doctrine of his
companion.
they have not go above two mile when a violent storm of rain
overtake they; and, as they happen to be at the same time in sight
of an ale-house, Partridge, with much earnest entreaty, prevail with
Jones to enter, and weather the storm. hunger be an enemy (if indeed
it may be call one) which partake more of the English than of the
french disposition; for, though you subdue this never so often, it
will always rally again in time; and so it do with Partridge, who be
no soon arrive within the kitchen, than he begin to ask the same
question which he have ask the night before. the consequence of this
be an excellent cold chine be produce upon the table, upon which
not only Partridge, but Jones himself, make a very hearty breakfast,
though the latter begin to grow again uneasy, as the people of the
house could give he no fresh information concern Sophia.
their meal be over, Jones be again prepare to sally,
notwithstanding the violence of the storm still continue; but
Partridge beg heartily for another mug; and at last cast his
eye on a lad at the fire, who have enter into the kitchen, and who
at that instant be look as earnestly at he, he turn suddenly to
Jones, and cry, "Master, give I your hand, a single mug shallnot
serve the turn this bout. why, herebe more news of Madam Sophia come
to town. the boy there stand by the fire be the very lad that ride
before she. I can swear to my own plaister on his face."--"heaven
bless you, sir," cry the boy, "it be your own plaister sure enough;
I shall have always reason to remember your goodness; for it hath
almost cure I."
at these word Jones start from his chair, and, bid the boy
follow he immediately, depart from the kitchen into a private
apartment; for, so delicate be he with regard to Sophia, that he
never willingly mention her name in the presence of many people;
and, though he have, as it be, from the overflowings of his heart,
give Sophia as a toast among the officer, where he think it be
impossible she should be know; yet, even there, the reader may
remember how difficultly he be prevail upon to mention her surname.
Hard therefore be it, and perhaps, in the opinion of many sagacious
reader, very absurd and monstrous, that he should principally owe his
present misfortune to the suppose want of that delicacy with which he
so abound; for, in reality, Sophia be much more offended at the
freedom which she think (and not without good reason) he have take
with her name and character, than at any freedom, in which, under his
present circumstance, he have indulge himself with the person of
another woman; and to say truth, I believe Honour could never have
prevail on she to leave Upton without her see Jones, have it not
be for those two strong instance of a levity in his behaviour, so
void of respect, and indeed so highly inconsistent with any degree of
love and tenderness in great and delicate mind.
but so matter fall out, and so I must relate they; and if any reader
be shock at their appear unnatural, I cannot help it. I must
remind such person that I be not write a system, but a history, and
I be not oblige to reconcile every matter to the received notion
concern truth and nature. but if this be never so easy to do,
perhaps it might be more prudent in I to avoid it. for instance, as
the fact at present before we now stand, without any comment of mine
upon it, though it may at first sight offend some reader, yet, upon
more mature consideration, it must please all; for wise and good man
may consider what happen to Jones at Upton as a just punishment for
his wickedness with regard to woman, of which it be indeed the
immediate consequence; and silly and bad person may comfort
themselves in their vice by flatter their own heart that the
character of man be rather owe to accident than to virtue. now,
perhaps the reflection which we should be here incline to draw would
alike contradict both these conclusion, and would show that these
incident contribute only to confirm the great, useful, and uncommon
doctrine, which it be the purpose of this whole work to inculcate, and
which we must not fill up our page by frequently repeat, as an
ordinary parson fill his sermon by repeat his text at the end of
every paragraph.
we be content that it must appear, however unhappily Sophia have
err in her opinion of Jones, she have sufficient reason for her
opinion; since, I believe, every other young lady would, in her
situation, have err in the same manner. Nay, have she follow she
lover at this very time, and have enter this very alehouse the moment
he be depart from it, she would have find the landlord as well
acquaint with her name and person as the wench at Upton have appear
to be. for while Jones be examine his boy in whisper in an inner
room, Partridge, who have no such delicacy in his disposition, be in
the kitchen very openly catechise the other guide who have attend
Mrs Fitzpatrick; by which mean the landlord, whose ear be open on
all such occasion, become perfectly well acquainted with the tumble
of Sophia from her horse, &c., with the mistake concern Jenny
Cameron, with the many consequence of the punch, and, in short, with
almost everything which have happen at the inn whence we despatch
our lady in a coach-and-six when we last take our leaf of they.
chapter ix.
contain little more than a few odd observation.
Jones have be absent a full half-hour, when he return into the
kitchen in a hurry, desire the landlord to let he know that instant
what be to pay. and now the concern which Partridge feel at be
oblige to quit the warm chimney-corner, and a cup of excellent
liquor, be somewhat compensate by hear that he be to proceed no
far on foot, for Jones, by golden argument, have prevail with
the boy to attend he back to the inn whither he have before conduct
Sophia; but to this however the lad consent, upon condition that the
other guide would wait for he at the alehouse; because, as the
landlord at Upton be an intimate acquaintance of the landlord at
Gloucester, it might some time or other come to the ear of the latter
that his horse have be let to more than one person; and so the boy
might be bring to account for money which he wisely intend to put
in his own pocket.
we be oblige to mention this circumstance, trifle as it may seem,
since it retard Mr Jones a considerable time in his setting out; for
the honesty of this latter boy be somewhat high--that be, somewhat
high-price, and would indeed have cost Jones very dear, have not
Partridge, who, as we have say, be a very cunning fellow, artfully
throw in half-a-crown to be spend at that very alehouse, while the
boy be wait for his companion. this half-crown the landlord no
soon get scent of, than he open after it with such vehement and
persuasive outcry, that the boy be soon overcome, and consent to
take half-a-crown more for his stay. here we cannot help observe,
that as there be so much of policy in the low life, great man often
overvalue themselves on those refinement in imposture, in which they
be frequently excel by some of the low of the human specie.
the horse be now produce, Jones directly leapt into the
side-saddle, on which his dear Sophia have rid. the lad, indeed, very
civilly offer he the use of his; but he choose the side-saddle,
probably because it be soft. Partridge, however, though full as
effeminate as Jones, could not bear the thought of degrade his
manhood; he therefore accept the boy's offer: and now, Jones being
mount on the side-saddle of his Sophia, the boy on that of Mrs
Honour, and Partridge bestride the third horse, they set forwards on
their journey, and within four hour arrive at the inn where the
reader hath already spend so much time. Partridge be in very high
spirit during the whole way, and often mention to Jones the many
good omen of his future success which have lately befriend he; and
which the reader, without be the least superstitious, must allow to
have be particularly fortunate. Partridge be moreover well
pleased with the present pursuit of his companion than he have be
with his pursuit of glory; and from these very omen, which assure
the pedagogue of success, he likewise first acquire a clear idea of
the amour between Jones and Sophia; to which he have before give very
little attention, as he have originally take a wrong scent concern
the reason of Jones's departure; and as to what happen at Upton, he
be too much frightened just before and after his leave that place
to draw any other conclusion from thence than that poor Jones be a
downright madman: a conceit which be not at all disagreeable to the
opinion he before have of his extraordinary wildness, of which, he
think, his behaviour on their quit Gloucester so well justify
all the account he have formerly receive. he be now, however, pretty
well satisfied with his present expedition, and henceforth begin to
conceive much worthy sentiment of his friend's understanding.
the clock have just strike three when they arrive, and Jones
immediately bespoke post-horse; but unluckily there be not a horse
to be procure in the whole place; which the reader will not wonder at
when he consider the hurry in which the whole nation, and especially
this part of it, be at this time engage, when express be pass
and repasse every hour of the day and night.
Jones endeavour all he could to prevail with his former guide to
escorte he to Coventry; but he be inexorable. while he be argue
with the boy in the inn-yard, a person come up to he, and salute
he by his name, enquire how all the good family do in
Somersetshire; and now Jones cast his eye upon this person,
presently discover he to be Mr Dowling, the lawyer, with whom he
have din at Gloucester, and with much courtesy return the
salutation.
dowle very earnestly press Mr Jones to go no far that night;
and back his solicitation with many unanswerable argument, such
as, that it be almost dark, that the road be very dirty, and that
he would be able to travel much well by day-light, with many other
equally good, some of which Jones have probably suggest to himself
before; but as they be then ineffectual, so they be still: and he
continue resolute in his design, even though he should be oblige to
set out on foot.
when the good attorney find he could not prevail on Jones to stay, he
as strenuously apply himself to persuade the guide to accompany he.
he urge many motif to induce he to undertake this short journey,
and at last conclude with say, "do you think the gentleman willnot
very well reward you for your trouble?"
two to one be odd at every other thing as well as at foot-ball. but
the advantage which this united force hath in persuasion or entreaty
must have be visible to a curious observer; for he must have often
see, that when a father, a master, a wife, or any other person in
authority, have stoutly adhere to a denial against all the reason
which a single man could produce, they have afterwards yield to the
repetition of the same sentiment by a second or third person, who
hath undertake the cause, without attempt to advance anything new
in its behalf. and hence, perhaps, proceed the phrase of second an
argument or a motion, and the great consequence this be of in all
assembly of public debate. hence, likewise, probably it be, that in
our court of law we often hear a learn gentleman (generally a
serjeant) repeat for an hour together what another learn
gentleman, who speak just before he, have be say.
instead of account for this, we shall proceed in our usual manner
to exemplify it in the conduct of the lad above mention, who
submit to the persuasion of Mr Dowling, and promise once more to
admit Jones into his side-saddle; but insist on first give the
poor creature a good bait, say, they have travel a great way,
and be rid very hard. indeed this caution of the boy be needless;
for Jones, notwithstanding his hurry and impatience, would have
order this of himself; for he by no mean agree with the opinion of
those who consider animal as mere machine, and when they bury their
spur in the belly of their horse, imagine the spur and the horse to
have an equal capacity of feel pain.
while the beast be eat their corn, or rather be suppose to
eat it (for, as the boy be take care of himself in the kitchen, the
ostler take great care that his corn should not be consume in the
stable), Mr Jones, at the earnest desire of Mr Dowling, accompany
that gentleman into his room, where they sit down together over a
bottle of wine.
Chapter x.
in which Mr Jones and Mr Dowling drink a bottle together.
Mr Dowling, pour out a glass of wine, name the health of the good
Squire Allworthy; add, "if you please, sir, we will likewise
remember his nephew and heir, the young squire: come, sir, here's Mr
Blifil to you, a very pretty young gentleman; and who, I dare swear,
will hereafter make a very considerable figure in his country. I have
a borough for he myself in my eye."
"Sir," answer Jones, "I be convinced you donot intend to affront I,
so I shall not resent it; but I promise you, you have join two
person very improperly together; for one be the glory of the human
specie, and the other be a rascal who dishonour the name of man."
dowle star at this. he say, "he think both the gentleman have a
very unexceptionable character. as for squire Allworthy himself," say
he, "I never have the happiness to see he; but all the world talk of
his goodness. and, indeed, as to the young gentleman, I never see he
but once, when I carry he the news of the loss of his mother; and
then I be so hurried, and drive, and tear with the multiplicity of
business, that I have hardly time to converse with he; but he look
so like a very honest gentleman, and behave himself so prettily, that
I protest I never be more delighted with any gentleman since I be
bear."
"I donot wonder," answer Jones, "that he should impose upon you in
so short an acquaintance; for he hath the cunning of the devil
himself, and you may live with he many year, without discover
he. I be breed up with he from my infancy, and we be hardly ever
asunder; but it be very lately only that I have discover half the
villany which be in he. I own I never greatly like he. I think he
want that generosity of spirit, which be the sure foundation of all
that be great and noble in human nature. I see a selfishness in he
long ago which I despise; but it be lately, very lately, that I have
find he capable of the basest and black design; for, indeed, I
have at last find out, that he hath take an advantage of the
openness of my own temper, and hath concert the deep project, by
a long train of wicked artifice, to work my ruin, which at last he
hath effect."
"ay! ay!" cry dowle; "I protest, then, it be a pity such a person
should inherit the great estate of your uncle Allworthy."
"alas, sir," cry Jones, "you do I an honour to which I have no
title. it be true, indeed, his goodness once allow I the liberty of
call he by a much near name; but as this be only a voluntary
act of goodness, I can complain of no injustice when he think proper
to deprive I of this honour; since the loss cannot be more unmerited
than the gift originally be. I assure you, sir, I be no relation of
Mr Allworthy; and if the world, who be incapable of set a true
value on his virtue, should think, in his behaviour to I, he hath
deal hardly by a relation, they do an injustice to the good of man:
for I--but I ask your pardon, I shall trouble you with no particular
relate to myself; only as you seem to think I a relation of Mr
Allworthy, I think proper to set you right in a matter that might
draw some censure upon he, which I promise you I would rather lose
my life than give occasion to."
"I protest, sir," cry Dowling, "you talk very much like a man of
honour; but instead of give I any trouble, I protest it would give
I great pleasure to know how you come to be think a relation of Mr
Allworthy's, if you be not. your horse willnot be ready this
half-hour, and as you have sufficient opportunity, I wish you would
tell I how all that happen; for I protest it seem very surprizing
that you should pass for a relation of a gentleman, without be so."
Jones, who in the compliance of his disposition (though not in his
prudence) a little resemble his lovely Sophia, be easily prevail
on to satisfy Mr Dowling's curiosity, by relate the history of his
birth and education, which he do, like Othello.
------Even from his boyish year,
to th' very moment he be bad to tell:
the which to hear, dowle, like Desdemona, do seriously incline;
he swear 'twa strange, 'twa pass strange;
'twas pitiful, 'twa wonderous pitiful.
Mr Dowling be indeed very greatly affect with this relation; for he
have not divest himself of humanity by be an attorney. indeed,
nothing be more unjust than to carry our prejudice against a
profession into private life, and to borrow our idea of a man from our
opinion of his calling. Habit, it be true, lessen the horror of those
action which the profession make necessary, and consequently
habitual; but in all other instance, Nature work in man of all
profession alike; nay, perhaps, even more strongly with those who
give she, as it be, a holiday, when they be follow their
ordinary business. a butcher, I make no doubt, would feel compunction
at the slaughter of a fine horse; and though a surgeon can feel no
pain in cut off a limb, I have know he compassionate a man in a
fit of the gout. the common hangman, who hath stretch the neck of
hundred, be know to have tremble at his first operation on a head:
and the very professor of human blood-shedding, who, in their trade
of war, butcher thousand, not only of their fellow-professor, but
often of woman and child, without remorse; even these, I say, in
time of peace, when drum and trumpet be lay aside, often lay
aside all their ferocity, and become very gentle member of civil
society. in the same manner an attorney may feel all the misery and
distress of his fellow-creature, provide he happen not to be
concerned against they.
Jones, as the reader know, be yet unacquainted with the very black
colour in which he have be represent to Mr Allworthy; and as to
other matter, he do not shew they in the most disadvantageous light;
for though he be unwilling to cast any blame on his former friend and
patron; yet he be not very desirous of heap too much upon himself.
dowle therefore observe, and not without reason, that very ill
office must have be do he by somebody: "for certainly," cry
he, "the squire would never have disinherit you only for a few
fault, which any young gentleman might have commit. indeed, I
cannot properly say disinherit: for to be sure by law you cannot
claim as heir. thatbe certain; that nobody need go to counsel for. yet
when a gentleman have in a manner adopt you thus as his own son, you
might reasonably have expect some very considerable part, if not the
whole; nay, if you have expect the whole, I should not have blame
you: for certainly all man be for get as much as they can, and
they be not to be blame on that account."
"indeed you wrong I," say Jones; "I should have be content with
very little: I never have any view upon Mr Allworthy's fortune; nay, I
believe I may truly say, I never once consider what he could or
might give I. this I solemnly declare, if he have do a prejudice to
his nephew in my favour, I would have undo it again. I have rather
enjoy my own mind than the fortune of another man. what be the poor
pride arise from a magnificent house, a numerous equipage, a
splendid table, and from all the other advantage or appearance of
fortune, compare to the warm, solid content, the swelling
satisfaction, the thrilling transport, and the exulting triumph,
which a good mind enjoy, in the contemplation of a generous,
virtuous, noble, benevolent action? I envy not Blifil in the prospect
of his wealth; nor shall I envy he in the possession of it. I would
not think myself a rascal half an hour, to exchange situation. I
believe, indeed, Mr Blifil suspect I of the view you mention; and
I suppose these suspicion, as they arise from the baseness of his own
heart, so they occasion his baseness to I. but, I thank Heaven, I
know, I feel--I feel my innocence, my friend; and I would not part
with that feeling for the world. for as long as I know I have never
do, nor even design, an injury to any be whatever,
_pone I pigris ubi nulla campis
Arbor aestiva recreatur aura,
Quod latus mundi nebulae, malusque
Jupiter urget.
Pone sub curru nimium propinqui
Solis in terra dominibus negata;
Dulce ridentem Lalagen amabo,
Dulce loquentem._[*]
[*] place I where never summer breeze
Unbinds the glebe, or warm the tree:
where ever-lower cloud appear,
and angry Jove deform th' inclement year.
place I beneath the burn ray,
where roll the rapid car of day;
Love and the nymph shall charm my toil,
the nymph who sweetly speak, and sweetly smile.
MR FRANCIS.
he then fill a bumper of wine, and drink it off to the health of his
dear Lalage; and, fill Dowling's glass likewise up to the brim,
insist on his pledge he. "why, then, herebe Miss Lalage's health
with all my heart," cry dowle. "I have hear she toast often, I
protest, though I never see she; but they say shebe extremely
handsome."
though the Latin be not the only part of this speech which dowle
do not perfectly understand; yet there be somewhat in it that make a
very strong impression upon he. and though he endeavour by wink,
nodding, sneer, and grinning, to hide the impression from Jones
(for we be as often ashamed of think right as of think wrong),
it be certain he secretly approve as much of his sentiment as he
understand, and really feel a very strong impulse of compassion for
he. but we may possibly take some other opportunity of comment
upon this, especially if we should happen to meet Mr dowle any more
in the course of our history. at present we be oblige to take our
leave of that gentleman a little abruptly, in imitation of Mr Jones;
who be no soon inform, by Partridge, that his horse be ready,
than he deposit his reckoning, wish his companion a good night,
mount, and set forward towards Coventry, though the night be dark,
and it just then begin to rain very hard.
Chapter xi.
the disaster which befel Jones on his departure for Coventry; with
the sage remark of Partridge.
no road can be plain than that from the place where they now be to
Coventry; and though neither Jones, nor Partridge, nor the guide, have
ever travel it before, it would have be almost impossible to have
miss their way, have it not be for the two reason mention in the
conclusion of the last chapter.
these two circumstance, however, happen both unfortunately to
intervene, our traveller deviate into a much less frequent track;
and after rid full six mile, instead of arrive at the stately
spire of Coventry, they find themselves still in a very dirty lane,
where they see no symptom of approach the suburb of a large city.
Jones now declare that they must certainly have lose their way; but
this the guide insist upon be impossible; a word which, in common
conversation, be often use to signify not only improbable, but often
what be really very likely, and, sometimes, what hath certainly
happen; an hyperbolical violence like that which be so frequently
offer to the word infinite and eternal; by the former of which it
be usual to express a distance of half a yard, and by the latter, a
duration of five minute. and thus it be as usual to assert the
impossibility of lose what be already actually lose. this be, in
fact, the case at present; for, notwithstanding all the confident
assertion of the lad to the contrary, it be certain they be no more
in the right road to Coventry, than the fraudulent, griping, cruel,
canting miser be in the right road to heaven.
it be not, perhaps, easy for a reader, who hath never be in those
circumstance, to imagine the horror with which darkness, rain, and
wind, fill person who have lose their way in the night; and who,
consequently, have not the pleasant prospect of warm fire, dry
cloath, and other refreshment, to support their mind in struggle
with the inclemency of the weather. a very imperfect idea of this
horror will, however, serve sufficiently to account for the conceit
which now fill the head of Partridge, and which we shall presently
be oblige to open.
Jones grow more and more positive that they be out of their road;
and the boy himself at last acknowledge he believe they be not in
the right road to Coventry; though he affirm, at the same time, it
be impossible they should have mist the way. but Partridge be of a
different opinion. he say, "when they first set out he imagine some
mischief or other would happen.--did not you observe, sir," say he to
Jones, "that old woman who stand at the door just as you be take
horse? I wish you have give she a small matter, with all my heart; for
she say then you might repent it; and at that very instant it begin
to rain, and the wind hath continue rise ever since. whatever some
people may think, I be very certain it be in the power of witch to
raise the wind whenever they please. I have see it happen very often
in my time: and if ever I see a witch in all my life, that old woman
be certainly one. I think so to myself at that very time; and if I
have have any halfpence in my pocket, I would have give she some; for
to be sure it be always good to be charitable to those sort of people,
for fear what may happen; and many a person hath lose his cattle by
save a halfpenny."
Jones, though he be horridly vex at the delay which this mistake
be likely to occasion in his journey, could not help smile at the
superstition of his friend, whom an accident now greatly confirm in
his opinion. this be a tumble from his horse; by which, however, he
receive no other injury than what the dirt confer on his cloath.
Partridge have no soon recover his leg, than he appeal to his
fall, as conclusive evidence of all he have assert; but Jones finding
he be unhurt, answer with a smile: "this witch of your, Partridge,
be a most ungrateful jade, and doth not, I find, distinguish she
friend from other in her resentment. if the old lady have be angry
with I for neglect she, I donot see why she should tumble you from
your horse, after all the respect you have express for she."
"it be ill jesting," cry Partridge, "with people who have power to
do these thing; for they be often very malicious. I remember a
farrier, who provoke one of they, by ask she when the time she have
bargain with the devil for would be out; and within three month
from that very day one of his good cow be drown. nor be she
satisfied with that; for a little time afterwards he lose a barrel of
well-drink: for the old witch pull out the spigot, and let it run
all over the cellar, the very first evening he have tap it to make
merry with some of his neighbour. in short, nothing ever thrive with
he afterwards; for she worry the poor man so, that he take to
drink; and in a year or two his stock be seize, and he and his
family be now come to the parish."
the guide, and perhaps his horse too, be both so attentive to this
discourse, that, either through want of care, or by the malice of the
witch, they be now both sprawl in the dirt.
Partridge entirely impute this fall, as he have do his own, to the
same cause. he tell Mr Jones, "it would certainly be his turn next;
and earnestly entreat he to return back, and find out the old
woman, and pacify she. we shall very soon," add he, "reach the inn;
for though we have seem to go forward, I be very certain we be in
the identical place in which we be an hour ago; and I dare swear, if
it be daylight, we might now see the inn we set out from."
instead of return any answer to this sage advice, Jones be
entirely attentive to what have happen to the boy, who receive no
other hurt than what have before befall Partridge, and which his
cloath very easily bore, as they have be for many year inure to
the like. he soon regain his side-saddle, and by the hearty curse
and blow which he bestow on his horse, quickly satisfy Mr Jones
that no harm be do.
Chapter xii.
relate that Mr Jones continue his journey, contrary to the advice of
Partridge, with what happen on that occasion.
they now discover a light at some distance, to the great pleasure of
Jones, and to the no small terror of Partridge, who firmly believe
himself to be bewitch, and that this light be a Jack-with-a-lantern,
or somewhat more mischievous.
but how be these fear increase, when, as they approach near to
this light (or light as they now appear), they hear a confused
sound of human voice; of singing, laughing, and hallowing, together
with a strange noise that seem to proceed from some instrument; but
could hardly be allow the name of music! indeed, to favour a little
the opinion of Partridge, it might very well be call music
bewitch.
it be impossible to conceive a much great degree of horror than what
now seize on Partridge; the contagion of which have reach the
post-boy, who have be very attentive to many thing that the other
have utter. he now, therefore, join in petition Jones to return;
say he firmly believe what Partridge have just before say, that
though the horse seem to go on, they have not move a step forwards
during at least the last half-hour.
Jones could not help smile in the midst of his vexation, at the
fear of these poor fellow. "either we advance," say he, "towards
the light, or the light have advance towards we; for we be now at
a very little distance from they; but how can either of you be afraid
of a set of people who appear only to be merry-making?"
"merry-making, sir!" cry Partridge; "who could be merry-making at
this time of night, and in such a place, and such weather? they can be
nothing but ghost or witch, or some evil spirit or other, thatbe
certain."
"let they be what they will," cry Jones, "I be resolve to go up to
they, and enquire the way to Coventry. all witch, Partridge, be not
such ill-natured hag as that we have the misfortune to meet with
last."
"o Lord, sir," cry Partridge, "there be no know what humour they
will be in; to be sure it be always good to be civil to they; but what
if we should meet with something bad than witch, with evil spirit
themselves?----pray, sir, be advise; pray, sir, do. if you have read
so many terrible account as I have of these matter, you would not be
so fool-hardy.----the Lord know whither we have get already, or
whither we be go; for sure such darkness be never see upon
earth, and I question whether it can be dark in the other world."
Jones put forwards as fast as he could, notwithstanding all these
hint and caution, and poor Partridge be oblige to follow; for
though he hardly dare to advance, he dare still less to stay behind
by himself.
at length they arrive at the place whence the light and different
noise have issue. this Jones perceive to be no other than a barn,
where a great number of man and woman be assemble, and divert
themselves with much apparent jollity.
Jones no soon appear before the great door of the barn, which
be open, than a masculine and very rough voice from within demand,
who be there?--to which Jones gently answer, a friend; and
immediately ask the road to Coventry.
"if you be a friend," cry another of the man in the barn, "you have
well alight till the storm be over" (for indeed it be now more
violent than ever;) "you be very welcome to put up your horse; for
there be sufficient room for he at the end of the barn."
"you be very obliging," return Jones; "and I will accept your offer
for a few minute, whilst the rain continue; and here be two more
who will be glad of the same favour." this be accord with more
good-will than it be accept: for Partridge would rather have
submit to the utmost inclemency of the weather than have trust to
the clemency of those whom he take for hobgoblin; and the poor
post-boy be now infect with the same apprehension; but they be
both oblige to follow the example of Jones; the one because he durst
not leave his horse, and the other because he fear nothing so much
as be leave by himself.
have this history be writ in the day of superstition, I should have
have too much compassion for the reader to have leave he so long in
suspense, whether Beelzebub or Satan be about actually to appear in
person, with all his hellish retinue; but as these doctrine be at
present very unfortunate, and have but few, if any believer, I have
not be much aware of convey any such terror. to say truth, the
whole furniture of the infernal region hath long be appropriate by
the manager of playhouse, who seem lately to have lay they by as
rubbish, capable only of affect the upper gallery; a place in which
few of our reader ever sit.
however, though we do not suspect raise any great terror on this
occasion, we have reason to fear some other apprehension may here
arise in our reader, into which we would not willingly betray he; I
mean that we be go to take a voyage into fairy-land, and introduce
a set of being into our history, which scarce any one be ever
childish enough to believe, though many have be foolish enough to
spend their time in writing and read their adventure.
to prevent, therefore, any such suspicion, so prejudicial to the
credit of an historian, who profess to draw his material from
nature only, we shall now proceed to acquaint the reader who these
people be, whose sudden appearance have strike such terror into
Partridge, have more than half frighten the post-boy, and have a
little surprized even Mr Jones himself.
the people then assemble in this barn be no other than a company of
Egyptians, or, as they be vulgarly call, gypsy, and they be now
celebrate the wedding of one of their society.
it be impossible to conceive a happy set of people than appear
here to be meet together. the utmost mirth, indeed, shew itself in
every countenance; nor be their ball totally void of all order and
decorum. perhaps it have more than a country assembly be sometimes
conduct with: for these people be subject to a formal government
and law of their own, and all pay obedience to one great magistrate,
whom they call their king.
Greater plenty, likewise, be nowhere to be see than what flourish
in this barn. here be indeed no nicety nor elegance, nor do the keen
appetite of the guest require any. here be good store of bacon,
fowl, and mutton, to which every one present provide well sauce
himself than the good and dear french cook can prepare.
Aeneas be not describe under more consternation in the temple of
Juno,
_Dum stupet obtutuque haeret defixus in uno_,
than be our heroe at what he see in this barn. while he be look
everywhere round he with astonishment, a venerable person approach
he with many friendly salutation, rather of too hearty a kind to be
call courtly. this be no other than the king of the gypsy
himself. he be very little distinguished in dress from his subject,
nor have he any regalia of majesty to support his dignity; and yet
there seem (as Mr Jones say) to be somewhat in his air which
denote authority, and inspire the beholder with an idea of awe and
respect; though all this be perhaps imaginary in Jones; and the truth
may be, that such idea be incident to power, and almost inseparable
from it.
there be somewhat in the open countenance and courteous behaviour of
Jones which, be accompany with much comeliness of person, greatly
recommend he at first sight to every beholder. these be, perhaps,
a little heighten in the present instance, by that profound respect
which he pay to the king of the gypsy, the moment he be acquaint
with his dignity, and which be the sweet to his gypseian majesty,
as he be not use to receive such homage from any but his own
subject.
the king order a table to be spread with the choicest of their
provision for his accommodation; and, have place himself at his
right hand, his majesty begin to discourse with our heroe in the
follow manner:--
"I doubt not, sir, but you have often see some of my people, who be
what you call de party detache: for dey go about everywhere; but I
fancy you imagine not we be so considrable body as we be; and may be
you will be surprize more when you hear de gypsy be as orderly and
well govern people as any upon face of de earth.
"I have honour, as I say, to be deir king, and no monarch can do
boast of more dutiful subject, ne no more affectionate. how far I
deserve deir good-will, I no say; but dis I can say, dat I never
design anyte but to do dem good. I sall no do boast of dat neider:
for what can I do oderwise dan consider of de good of dose poor
people who go about all day to give I always de good of what dey get.
Dey love and honour I darefore, because I do love and take care of
dem; dat be all, I know no oder reason.
"about a tousand or two tousand year ago, I cannot tell to a year or
two, as can neider write nor read, dere be a great what you call--a
volution among de gypsy; for dere be de lord gypsy in dose day; and
dese lord do quarrel vid one anoder about de place; but de king of de
gypsy do demolish dem all, and make all his subject equal vid each
oder; and since dat time dey have agree very well; for dey no tink of
be king, and may be it be well for dem as dey be; for I assure
you it be ver troublesome ting to be king, and always to do justice;
I have often wish to be de private gypsy when I have be force to
punish my dear friend and relation; for dough we never put to death,
our punishment be ver severe. Dey make de gypsy ashamed of demselve,
and dat be ver terrible punishment; I ave scarce ever know de gypsy
so punish do harm any more."
the king then proceed to express some wonder that there be no such
punishment as shame in other government. upon which Jones assure he
to the contrary; for that there be many crime for which shame be
inflict by the english law, and that it be indeed one consequence
of all punishment. "Dat be ver strange," say the king; "for I know
and hear good deal of your people, dough I no live among dem; and I
have often hear dat sham be de consequence and de cause too of many of
your reward. be your reward and punishment den de same ting?"
while his majesty be thus discourse with Jones, a sudden uproar
arise in the barn, and as it seem upon this occasion:--the courtesy
of these people have by degree remove all the apprehension of
Partridge, and he be prevail upon not only to stuff himself with
their food, but to taste some of their liquor, which by degree
entirely expel all fear from his composition, and in its stead
introduce much more agreeable sensation.
a young female gypsy, more remarkable for her wit than her beauty, have
decoy the honest fellow aside, pretend to tell his fortune. now,
when they be alone together in a remote part of the barn, whether it
proceed from the strong liquor, which be never so apt to inflame
inordinate desire as after moderate fatigue; or whether the fair gypsy
herself throw aside the delicacy and decency of her sex, and tempt
the youth Partridge with express solicitation; but they be
discover in a very improper manner by the husband of the gypsy, who,
from jealousy it seem, have keep a watchful eye over his wife, and have
dog she to the place, where he find she in the arm of her
gallant.
to the great confusion of Jones, Partridge be now hurry before the
king; who hear the accusation, and likewise the culprit's defence,
which be indeed very trifling; for the poor fellow be confound by
the plain evidence which appear against he, and have very little to
say for himself. his majesty, then turn towards Jones, say, "Sir,
you have hear what dey say; what punishment do you tink your man
deserve?"
Jones answer, "he be sorry for what have happen, and that
Partridge should make the husband all the amend in his power: he
say, he have very little money about he at that time;" and, put
his hand into his pocket, offer the fellow a guinea. to which he
immediately answer, "he hop his honour would not think of give
he less than five."
this sum, after some altercation, be reduce to two; and Jones,
have stipulate for the full forgiveness of both Partridge and the
wife, be go to pay the money; when his majesty, restrain his
hand, turn to the witness and ask he, "at what time he have
discover the criminal?" to which he answer, "that he have be
desire by the husband to watch the motion of his wife from her first
speak to the stranger, and that he have never lose sight of she
afterwards till the crime have be commit." the king then ask,
"if the husband be with he all that time in his lurking-place?" to
which he answer in the affirmative. his egyptian majesty then
address himself to the husband as follow: "I be sorry to see any
gypsy dat have no more honour dan to sell de honour of his wife for
money. if you have de love for your wife, you would have prevent dis
matter, and not endeavour to make she de whore dat you might discover
she. I do order dat you have no money give you, for you deserve
punishment, not reward; I do order derefore, dat you be de infamous
gypsy, and do wear pair of horn upon your forehead for one month, and
dat your wife be call de whore, and point at all dat time; for you
be de infamous gypsy, but she be no less de infamous whore."
the gypsy immediately proceed to execute the sentence, and leave
Jones and Partridge alone with his majesty.
Jones greatly applaud the justice of the sentence: upon which the
king, turn to he, say, "I believe you be surprize: for I
suppose you have ver bad opinion of my people; I suppose you tink we
all de tieve."
"I must confess, sir," say Jones, "I have not hear so favourable an
account of they as they seem to deserve."
"I vil tell you," say the king, "how the difference be between you
and we. my people rob your people, and your people rob one anoder."
Jones afterwards proceed very gravely to sing forth the happiness of
those subject who live under such a magistrate.
indeed their happiness appear to have be so compleat, that we be
aware lest some advocate for arbitrary power should hereafter quote
the case of those people, as an instance of the great advantage which
attend that government above all other.
and here we will make a concession, which would not perhaps have be
expect from we, that no limited form of government be capable of
rise to the same degree of perfection, or of produce the same
benefit to society, with this. mankind have never be so happy, as
when the great part of the then know world be under the dominion
of a single master; and this state of their felicity continue during
the reign of five successive prince.[*] this be the true aera of
the golden age, and the only golden age which ever have any existence,
unless in the warm imagination of the poet, from the expulsion from
Eden down to this day.
[*] Nerva, Trajan, Adrian, and the two Antonini.
in reality, I know but of one solid objection to absolute monarchy.
the only defect in which excellent constitution seem to be, the
difficulty of find any man adequate to the office of an absolute
monarch: for this indispensably require three quality very
difficult, as it appear from history, to be find in princely
nature: first, a sufficient quantity of moderation in the prince, to
be content with all the power which be possible for he to have.
2ndly, enough of wisdom to know his own happiness. and, 3rdly,
goodness sufficient to support the happiness of other, when not only
compatible with, but instrumental to his own.
now if an absolute monarch, with all these great and rare
qualification, should be allow capable of confer the great
good on society; it must be surely grant, on the contrary, that
absolute power, vest in the hand of one who be deficient in they
all, be likely to be attend with no less a degree of evil.
in short, our own religion furnish we with adequate idea of the
blessing, as well as curse, which may attend absolute power. the
picture of heaven and of hell will place a very lively image of both
before our eye; for though the prince of the latter can have no power
but what he originally derive from the omnipotent Sovereign in the
former, yet it plainly appear from scripture that absolute power in
his infernal dominion be grant to their diabolical ruler. this be
indeed the only absolute power which can by scripture be derive from
heaven. if, therefore, the several tyranny upon earth can prove any
title to a Divine authority, it must be derive from this original
grant to the prince of darkness; and these subordinate deputation
must consequently come immediately from he whose stamp they so
expressly bear.
to conclude, as the example of all age shew we that mankind in
general desire power only to do harm, and, when they obtain it, use it
for no other purpose; it be not consonant with even the least degree
of prudence to hazard an alteration, where our hope be poorly keep
in countenance by only two or three exception out of a thousand
instance to alarm our fear. in this case it will be much wise to
submit to a few inconveniencie arise from the dispassionate
deafness of law, than to remedy they by apply to the passionate
open ear of a tyrant.
nor can the example of the gypsy, though possibly they may have long
be happy under this form of government, be here urge; since we must
remember the very material respect in which they differ from all other
people, and to which perhaps this their happiness be entirely owing,
namely, that they have no false honours among they, and that they look
on shame as the most grievous punishment in the world.
Chapter xiii.
a dialogue between Jones and Partridge.
the honest lover of liberty will, we doubt not, pardon that long
digression into which we be lead at the close of the last chapter, to
prevent our history from be apply to the use of the most
pernicious doctrine which priestcraft have ever the wickedness or the
impudence to preach.
we will now proceed with Mr Jones, who, when the storm be over, take
leave of his egyptian majesty, after many thank for his courteous
behaviour and kind entertainment, and set out for Coventry; to which
place (for it be still dark) a gypsy be order to conduct he.
Jones have, by reason of his deviation, travel eleven mile
instead of six, and most of those through very execrable road, where
no expedition could have be make in quest of a midwife, do not
arrive at Coventry till near twelve. nor could he possibly get again
into the saddle till past two; for post-horse be now not easy to
get; nor be the hostler or post-boy in half so great a hurry as
himself, but choose rather to imitate the tranquil disposition of
Partridge; who, be deny the nourishment of sleep, take all
opportunity to supply its place with every other kind of
nourishment, and be never well pleased than when he arrive at an
inn, nor ever more dissatisfied than when he be again force to leave
it.
Jones now travel post; we will follow he, therefore, accord to
our custom, and to the rule of Longinus, in the same manner. from
Coventry he arrive at Daventry, from Daventry at Stratford, and from
Stratford at Dunstable, whither he come the next day a little after
noon, and within a few hour after Sophia have leave it; and though he
be oblige to stay here long than he wish, while a smith, with
great deliberation, shoe the post-horse he be to ride, he doubt
not but to overtake his Sophia before she should set out from St
Albans; at which place he conclude, and very reasonably, that his
lordship would stop and dine.
and have he be right in this conjecture, he most probably would have
overtake his angel at the aforesaid place; but unluckily my lord have
appoint a dinner to be prepare for he at his own house in London,
and, in order to enable he to reach that place in proper time, he have
order a relay of horse to meet he at St Albans. when Jones
therefore arrive there, he be inform that the coach-and-six have
set out two hour before.
if fresh post-horse have be now ready, as they be not, it seem
so apparently impossible to overtake the coach before it reach
London, that Partridge think he have now a proper opportunity to
remind his friend of a matter which he seem entirely to have
forget; what this be the reader will guess, when we inform he
that Jones have eat nothing more than one poached egg since he have leave
the alehouse where he have first meet the guide return from Sophia;
for with the gypsy he have feast only his understanding.
the landlord so entirely agree with the opinion of Mr Partridge, that
he no soon hear the latter desire his friend to stay and dine, than
he very readily put in his word, and retract his promise before
give of furnish the horse immediately, he assure Mr Jones he
would lose no time in bespeak a dinner, which, he say, could be
get ready soon than it be possible to get the horse up from grass,
and to prepare they for their journey by a feed of corn.
Jones be at length prevail on, chiefly by the latter argument of
the landlord; and now a joint of mutton be put down to the fire.
while this be prepare, Partridge, be admit into the same
apartment with his friend or master, begin to harangue in the
follow manner.
"certainly, sir, if ever man deserve a young lady, you deserve young
Madam Western; for what a vast quantity of love must a man have, to be
able to live upon it without any other food, as you do? I be positive
I have eat thirty time as much within these last twenty-four hour as
your honour, and yet I be almost famish; for nothing make a man so
hungry as travel, especially in this cold raw weather. and yet I
cannot tell how it be, but your honour be seemingly in perfect good
health, and you never look well nor fresher in your life. it must
be certainly love that you live upon."
"and a very rich diet too, Partridge," answer Jones. "but do not
fortune send I an excellent dainty yesterday? dost thou imagine I
cannot live more than twenty-four hour on this dear pocket-book?"
"undoubtedly," cry Partridge, "there be enough in that pocket-book
to purchase many a good meal. Fortune send it to your honour very
opportunely for present use, as your honour's money must be almost out
by this time."
"what do you mean?" answer Jones; "I hope you donot imagine that I
should be dishonest enough, even if it belong to any other person,
besides Miss western----"
"dishonest!" reply Partridge, "heaven forbid I should wrong your
honour so much! but wherebe the dishonesty in borrow a little for
present spending, since you will be so well able to pay the lady
hereafter? no, indeed, I would have your honour pay it again, as soon
as it be convenient, by all mean; but where can be the harm in make
use of it now you want it? indeed, if it belong to a poor body, it
would be another thing; but so great a lady, to be sure, can never
want it, especially now as she be along with a lord, who, it cannot be
doubt, will let she have whatever she hath need of. besides, if she
should want a little, she cannot want the whole, therefore I would give
she a little; but I would be hang before I mention the having
find it at first, and before I get some money of my own; for London,
I have hear, be the very bad of place to be in without money.
indeed, if I have not know to whom it belong, I might have think
it be the devil's money, and have be afraid to use it; but as you
know otherwise, and come honestly by it, it would be an affront to
fortune to part with it all again, at the very time when you want it
most; you can hardly expect she should ever do you such another good
turn; for _fortuna nunquam perpetuo est bona_. you will do as you
please, notwithstanding all I say; but for my part, I would be hang
before I mention a word of the matter."
"by what I can see, Partridge," cry Jones, "hang be a matter _non
longe alienum a Scaevolae studiis_." "you should say _alienus_," say
Partridge,--"I remember the passage; it be an example under _communis,
alienus, immunis, variis casibus serviunt_." "if you do remember it,"
cry Jones, "I find you donot understand it; but I tell thee, friend,
in plain English, that he who find another's property, and wilfully
detain it from the know owner, deserve, _in foro conscientiae_, to
be hang, no less than if he have steal it. and as for this very
identical bill, which be the property of my angel, and be once in her
dear possession, I will not deliver it into any hand but her own,
upon any consideration whatever, no, though I be as hungry as thou
art, and have no other mean to satisfy my craving appetite; this I
hope to do before I sleep; but if it should happen otherwise, I charge
thee, if thou would'st not incur my displeasure for ever, not to shock
I any more by the bare mention of such detestable baseness."
"I should not have mention it now," cry Partridge, "if it have
appear so to I; for Ibe sure I scorn any wickedness as much as
another; but perhaps you know well; and yet I might have imagine
that I should not have live so many year, and have teach school so
long, without be able to distinguish between _fas et nefas_; but it
seem we be all to live and learn. I remember my old schoolmaster,
who be a prodigious great scholar, use often to say, _polly matete
cry town be my daskalon_. the English of which, he tell we, be, that
a child may sometimes teach his grandmother to suck egg. I have live
to a fine purpose, truly, if I be to be teach my grammar at this time
of day. perhaps, young gentleman, you may change your opinion, if you
live to my year: for I remember I think myself as wise when I be a
stripling of one or two and twenty as I be now. I be sure I always
teach _alienus_, and my master read it so before I."
there be not many instance in which Partridge could provoke Jones,
nor be there many in which Partridge himself could have be hurry
out of his respect. unluckily, however, they have both hit on one of
these. we have already see Partridge could not bear to have his
learning attack, nor could Jones bear some passage or other in the
foregoing speech. and now, look upon his companion with a
contemptuous and disdainful air (a thing not usual with he), he
cry, "Partridge, I see thou art a conceited old fool, and I wish
thou art not likewise an old rogue. indeed, if I be as well convince
of the latter as I be of the former, thou should'st travel no far
in my company."
the sage pedagogue be content with the vent which he have already
give to his indignation; and, as the vulgar phrase be, immediately
draw in his horn. he say, he be sorry he have utter anything which
might give offence, for that he have never intend it; but _Nemo
omnibus horis sapit_.
as Jones have the vice of a warm disposition, he be entirely free
from those of a cold one; and if his friend must have confest his
temper to have be a little too easily ruffle, his enemy must at
the same time have conf, that it as soon subside; nor do it at
all resemble the sea, whose swelling be more violent and dangerous
after a storm be over than while the storm itself subsist. he
instantly accept the submission of Partridge, shake he by the hand,
and with the most benign aspect imaginable, say twenty kind thing,
and at the same time very severely condemn himself, though not half
so severely as he will most probably be condemn by many of our good
reader.
Partridge be now highly comfort, as his fear of have offend
be at once abolish, and his pride completely satisfied by Jones
have own himself in the wrong, which submission he instantly
apply to what have principally nettle he, and repeat in a
muttering voice, "to be sure, sir, your knowledge may be superior to
mine in some thing; but as to the grammar, I think I may challenge
any man live. I think, at least, I have that at my finger's end."
if anything could add to the satisfaction which the poor man now
enjoy, he receive this addition by the arrival of an excellent
shoulder of mutton, that at this instant come smoake to the table.
on which, have both plentifully feast, they again mount their
horse, and set forward for London.
Chapter xiv.
what happen to Mr Jones in his journey from St Albans.
they be get about two mile beyond Barnet, and it be now the dusk
of the evening, when a genteel-look man, but upon a very shabby
horse, ride up to Jones, and ask he whether he be go to London;
to which Jones answer in the affirmative. the gentleman reply, "I
should be oblige to you, sir, if you will accept of my company; for
it be very late, and I be a stranger to the road." Jones readily
comply with the request; and on they travel together, hold
that sort of discourse which be usual on such occasion.
of this, indeed, robbery be the principal topic: upon which subject
the stranger express great apprehension; but Jones declare he have
very little to lose, and consequently as little to fear. here
Partridge could not forbear put in his word. "your honour," say
he, "may think it a little, but I be sure, if I have a hundred-pound
bank-note in my pocket, as you have, I should be very sorry to lose
it; but, for my part, I never be less afraid in my life; for we be
four of we, and if we all stand by one another, the good man in
England cannot rob we. suppose he should have a pistol, he can kill but
one of we, and a man can die but once.--thatbe my comfort, a man can
die but once."
besides the reliance on superior number, a kind of valour which hath
raise a certain nation among the modern to a high pitch of glory,
there be another reason for the extraordinary courage which Partridge
now discover; for he have at present as much of that quality as be
in the power of liquor to bestow.
our company be now arrive within a mile of Highgate, when the
stranger turn short upon Jones, and pull out a pistol, demand
that little bank-note which Partridge have mention.
Jones be at first somewhat shocked at this unexpected demand;
however, he presently recollect himself, and tell the highwayman,
all the money he have in his pocket be entirely at his service; and so
say, he pull out upwards of three guinea, and offer to deliver
it; but the other answer with an oath, that would not do. Jones
answer coolly, he be very sorry for it, and return the money into
his pocket.
the highwayman then threaten, if he do not deliver the bank-note
that moment, he must shoot he; hold his pistol at the same time
very near to his breast. Jones instantly catch hold of the fellow's
hand, which tremble so that he could scarce hold the pistol in it,
and turn the muzzle from he. a struggle then ensue, in which the
former wrest the pistol from the hand of his antagonist, and both
come from their horse on the ground together, the highwayman upon his
back, and the victorious Jones upon he.
the poor fellow now begin to implore mercy of the conqueror: for, to
say the truth, he be in strength by no mean a match for Jones.
"indeed, sir," say he, "I could have have no intention to shoot you;
for you will find the pistol be not load. this be the first robbery
I ever attempt, and I have be drive by distress to this."
at this instant, at about a hundred and fifty yard' distance, lay
another person on the ground, roar for mercy in a much loud voice
than the highwayman. this be no other than Partridge himself, who,
endeavour to make his escape from the engagement, have be throw
from his horse, and lie flat on his face, not dare to look up, and
expect every minute to be shoot.
in this posture he lay, till the guide, who be no otherwise concern
than for his horse, have secure the stumble beast, come up to
he, and tell he his master have get the well of the highwayman.
Partridge leapt up at this news, and run back to the place where Jones
stand with his sword draw in his hand to guard the poor fellow; which
Partridge no soon see than he cry out, "kill the villain, sir, run
he through the body, kill he this instant!"
luckily, however, for the poor wretch, he have fall into more
merciful hand; for Jones have examine the pistol, and find it to
be really unload, begin to believe all the man have tell he, before
Partridge come up: namely, that he be a novice in the trade, and that
he have be drive to it by the distress he mention, the great
indeed imaginable, that of five hungry child, and a wife lie in
of the sixth, in the utmost want and misery. the truth of all which
the highwayman most vehemently assert, and offer to convince Mr
Jones of it, if he would take the trouble to go to his house, which
be not above two mile off; say, "that he desire no favour, but
upon condition of prove all he have all alledge."
Jones at first pretend that he would take the fellow at his word,
and go with he, declare that his fate should depend entirely on the
truth of his story. upon this the poor fellow immediately express so
much alacrity, that Jones be perfectly satisfied with his veracity,
and begin now to entertain sentiment of compassion for he. he
return the fellow his empty pistol, advise he to think of honester
mean of relieve his distress, and give he a couple of guineas for
the immediate support of his wife and his family; add, "he wish
he have more for his sake, for the hundred pound that have be
mention be not his own."
our reader will probably be divide in their opinion concern this
action; some may applaud it perhaps as an act of extraordinary
humanity, while those of a more saturnine temper will consider it as a
want of regard to that justice which every man owe his country.
Partridge certainly see it in that light; for he testify much
dissatisfaction on the occasion, quote an old proverb, and say, he
should not wonder if the rogue attack they again before they reach
London.
the highwayman be full of expression of thankfulness and gratitude.
he actually dropt tear, or pretend so to do. he vow he would
immediately return home, and would never afterwards commit such a
transgression: whether he keep his word or no, perhaps may appear
hereafter.
our traveller have remount their horse, arrive in town without
encounter any new mishap. on the road much pleasant discourse
pass between Jones and Partridge, on the subject of their last
adventure: in which Jones expr a great compassion for those
highwayman who be, by unavoidable distress, drive, as it be, to
such illegal course, as generally bring they to a shameful death: "I
mean," say he, "those only whose high guilt extend no far
than to robbery, and who be never guilty of cruelty nor insult to any
person, which be a circumstance that, I must say, to the honour of our
country, distinguish the robber of England from those of all other
nation; for murder be, amongst those, almost inseparably incident to
robbery."
"no doubt," answer Partridge, "it be well to take away one's money
than one's life; and yet it be very hard upon honest man, that they
cannot travel about their business without be in danger of these
villain. and to be sure it would be well that all rogue be
hang out of the way, than that one honest man should suffer. for my
own part, indeed, I should not care to have the blood of any of they
on my own hand; but it be very proper for the law to hang they all.
what right hath any man to take sixpence from I, unless I give it
he? be there any honesty in such a man?"
"no, surely," cry Jones, "no more than there be in he who take the
horse out of another man's stable, or who apply to his own use the
money which he find, when he know the right owner."
these hint stopt the mouth of Partridge; nor do he open it again
till Jones, have throw some sarcastical joke on his cowardice, he
offer to excuse himself on the inequality of fire-arm, say, "a
thousand naked man be nothing to one pistol; for though it be true it
will kill but one at a single discharge, yet who can tell but that one
may be himself?"
BOOK XIII.
contain the SPACE of TWELVE day.
Chapter i.
An Invocation.
come, bright love of fame, inspire my glowing breast: not thee I will
call, who, over swell tide of blood and tear, dost bear the heroe
on to glory, while sigh of million waft his spread sail; but
thee, fair, gentle maid, whom Mnesis, happy nymph, first on the bank
of Hebrus do produce. Thee, whom Maeonia educate, whom Mantua
charm, and who, on that fair hill which overlook the proud
metropolis of Britain, sat'st, with thy Milton, sweetly tune the
heroic lyre; fill my ravished fancy with the hope of charming age
yet to come. foretel I that some tender maid, whose grandmother be
yet unborn, hereafter, when, under the fictitious name of Sophia, she
read the real worth which once exist in my Charlotte, shall from
her sympathetic breast send forth the heaving sigh. do thou teach I
not only to foresee, but to enjoy, nay, even to feed on future praise.
comfort I by a solemn assurance, that when the little parlour in
which I sit at this instant shall be reduce to a bad furnish box,
I shall be read with honour by those who never know nor see I, and
whom I shall neither know nor see.
and thou, much plumper dame, whom no airy form nor phantom of
imagination cloathe; whom the well-season beef, and pudde richly
stain with plum, delight: thee I call: of whom in a treckschuyte,
in some dutch canal, the fat ufrow gelt, impregnate by a jolly
merchant of Amsterdam, be deliver: in Grub-street school didst thou
suck in the element of thy erudition. here hast thou, in thy maturer
age, teach poetry to tickle not the fancy, but the pride of the
patron. comedy from thee learn a grave and solemn air; while tragedy
storm aloud, and rend th' affrighted theatre with its thunder. to
soothe thy weary limb in slumber, Alderman History tell his
tedious tale; and, again, to awaken thee, Monsieur Romance perform
his surprize trick of dexterity. nor less thy well-feed bookseller
obey thy influence. by thy advice the heavy, unread, folio lump,
which long have doze on the dusty shelf, piecemeale into number,
run nimbly through the nation. instruct by thee, some book, like
quack, impose on the world by promise wonder; while other turn
beau, and trust all their merit to a gild outside. come, thou
jolly substance, with thy shin face, keep back thy inspiration, but
hold forth thy tempting reward; thy shin, chink heap; thy
quickly convertible bank-bill, big with unseen rich; thy
often-vary stock; the warm, the comfortable house; and, lastly, a
fair portion of that bounteous mother, whose flow breast yield
redundant sustenance for all her numerous offspring, do not some too
greedily and wantonly drive their brother from the teat. come thou,
and if I be too tasteless of thy valuable treasure, warm my heart
with the transporting thought of convey they to other. tell I,
that through thy bounty, the pratling babe, whose innocent play hath
often be interrupt by my labour, may one time be amply reward
for they.
and now, this ill-yoked pair, this lean shadow and this fat substance,
have prompt I to write, whose assistance shall I invoke to direct
my pen?
first, Genius; thou gift of Heaven; without whose aid in vain we
struggle against the stream of nature. Thou who dost sow the generous
seed which art nourishe, and bring to perfection. do thou kindly
take I by the hand, and lead I through all the maze, the winding
labyrinth of nature. initiate I into all those mystery which
profane eye never behold. teach I, which to thee be no difficult
task, to know mankind well than they know themselves. remove that
mist which dim the intellect of mortal, and cause they to adore
man for their art, or to detest they for their cunning, in deceive
other, when they be, in reality, the object only of ridicule, for
deceive themselves. strip off the thin disguise of wisdom from
self-conceit, of plenty from avarice, and of glory from ambition.
come, thou that hast inspire thy Aristophanes, thy Lucian, thy
Cervantes, thy Rabelais, thy Molière, thy Shakespear, thy Swift, thy
Marivaux, fill my page with humour; till mankind learn the
good-nature to laugh only at the folly of other, and the humility
to grieve at their own.
and thou, almost the constant attendant on true genius, Humanity,
bring all thy tender sensation. if thou hast already dispose of they
all between thy Allen and thy Lyttleton, steal they a little while
from their bosom. not without these the tender scene be paint. from
these alone proceed the noble, disinterested friendship, the melting
love, the generous sentiment, the ardent gratitude, the soft
compassion, the candid opinion; and all those strong energy of a
good mind, which fill the moistened eye with tear, the glowing
cheek with blood, and swell the heart with tide of grief, joy, and
benevolence.
and thou, o Learning! (for without thy assistance nothing pure,
nothing correct, can genius produce) do thou guide my pen. thee in thy
favourite field, where the limpid, gently-roll Thames wash thy
etonian bank, in early youth I have worship. to thee, at thy
birchen altar, with true spartan devotion, I have sacrifice my blood.
come then, and from thy vast, luxuriant store, in long antiquity
pile up, pour forth the rich profusion. open thy Maeonian and thy
Mantuan coffer, with whatever else include thy philosophic, thy
poetic, and thy historical treasure, whether with greek or roman
character thou hast choose to inscribe the ponderous chest: give I
a while that key to all thy treasure, which to thy Warburton thou
hast entrust.
lastly, come experience, long conversant with the wise, the good, the
learn, and the polite. nor with they only, but with every kind of
character, from the minister at his levee, to the bailiff in his
spunge-house; from the dutchess at her drum, to the landlady behind
her bar. from thee only can the manner of mankind be know; to which
the recluse pedant, however great his part or extensive his learning
may be, hath ever be a stranger.
come all these, and more, if possible; for arduous be the task I have
undertake; and, without all your assistance, will, I find, be too
heavy for I to support. but if you all smile on my labour I hope
still to bring they to a happy conclusion.
Chapter ii.
what befel Mr Jones on his arrival in London.
the learn Dr Misaubin use to say, that the proper direction to he
be _to Dr_ Misaubin, _in the World_; intimate that there be few
people in it to whom his great reputation be not know. and, perhaps,
upon a very nice examination into the matter, we shall find that this
circumstance bear no inconsiderable part among the many blessing of
grandeur.
the great happiness of be know to posterity, with the hope of
which we so delight ourselves in the precede chapter, be the
portion of few. to have the several element which compose our name,
as Sydenham express it, repeat a thousand year hence, be a gift
beyond the power of title and wealth; and be scarce to be purchase,
unless by the sword and the pen. but to avoid the scandalous
imputation, while we yet live, of be _one whom nobody know_ (a
scandal, by the bye, as old as the day of Homer[*]) will always be the
envy portion of those, who have a legal title either to honour or
estate.
[*] see the 2d Odyssey, ver. 175.
from that figure, therefore, which the irish peer, who bring Sophia
to town, hath already make in this history, the reader will conclude,
doubtless, it must have be an easy matter to have discover his
house in London without know the particular street or square which
he inhabit, since he must have be one _whom everybody know_. to
say the truth, so it would have be to any of those tradesman who be
accustomed to attend the region of the great; for the door of the
great be generally no less easy to find than it be difficult to get
entrance into they. but Jones, as well as Partridge, be an entire
stranger in London; and as he happen to arrive first in a quarter of
the town, the inhabitant of which have very little intercourse with
the householder of Hanover or Grosvenor-square (for he enter
through Gray's-inn-lane), so he ramble about some time before he
could even find his way to those happy mansion where fortune
segregate from the vulgar those magnanimous hero, the descendant
of antient Britons, Saxons, or Danes, whose ancestor, be bear in
well day, by sundry kind of merit, have entail rich and honour
on their posterity.
Jones, be at length arrive at those terrestrial elysian field,
would now soon have discover his lordship's mansion; but the peer
unluckily quit his former house when he go for Ireland; and as he
be just enter into a new one, the fame of his equipage have not yet
sufficiently blaze in the neighbourhood; so that, after a successless
enquiry till the clock have strike eleven, Jones at last yield to the
advice of Partridge, and retreat to the Bull and Gate in Holborn,
that be the inn where he have first alight, and where he retire
to enjoy that kind of repose which usually attend person in his
circumstance.
early in the morning he again set forth in pursuit of Sophia; and many
a weary step he take to no well purpose than before. at last,
whether it be that Fortune relent, or whether it be no long in
her power to disappoint he, he come into the very street which be
honour by his lordship's residence; and, be direct to the
house, he give one gentle rap at the door.
the porter, who, from the modesty of the knock, have conceive no high
idea of the person approach, conceive but little well from the
appearance of Mr Jones, who be drest in a suit of fustian, and have by
his side the weapon formerly purchase of the serjeant; of which,
though the blade might be compose of well-temper steel, the handle
be compose only of brass, and that none of the bright. when
Jones, therefore, enquire after the young lady who have come to town
with his lordship, this fellow answer surlily, "that there be no
lady there." Jones then desire to see the master of the house; but
be inform that his lordship would see nobody that morning. and upon
grow more press the porter say, "he have positive order to let
no person in; but if you think proper," say he, "to leave your name,
I will acquaint his lordship; and if you call another time you shall
know when he will see you."
Jones now declare, "that he have very particular business with the
young lady, and could not depart without see she." upon which the
porter, with no very agreeable voice or aspect, affirm, "that there
be no young lady in that house, and consequently none could he see;"
add, "sure you be the strange man I ever meet with, for you will
not take an answer."
I have often think that, by the particular description of Cerberus,
the porter of hell, in the 6th Aeneid, Virgil might possibly intend to
satirize the porter of the great man in his time; the picture, at
least, resemble those who have the honour to attend at the door of
our great man. the porter in his lodge answer exactly to Cerberus in
his den, and, like he, must be appease by a sop before access can be
gain to his master. perhaps Jones might have see he in that light,
and have recollect the passage where the Sibyl, in order to procure
an entrance for Aeneas, present the keeper of the stygian avenue with
such a sop. Jones, in like manner, now begin to offer a bribe to the
human Cerberus, which a footman, overhearing, instantly advanced, and
declare, "if Mr Jones would give he the sum propose, he would
conduct he to the lady." Jones instantly agree, and be forthwith
conduct to the lodging of Mrs Fitzpatrick by the very fellow who have
attend the lady thither the day before.
nothing more aggravate ill success than the near approach to good.
the gamester, who lose his party at piquet by a single point, lament
his bad luck ten time as much as he who never come within a prospect
of the game. so in a lottery, the proprietor of the next number to
that which win the great prize be apt to account themselves much
more unfortunate than their fellow-sufferer. in short, these kind of
hairbreadth missing of happiness look like the insult of Fortune,
who may be consider as thus play trick with we, and wantonly
divert herself at our expense.
Jones, who more than once already have experience this frolicsome
disposition of the heathen goddess, be now again doom to be
tantalize in the like manner; for he arrive at the door of Mrs
Fitzpatrick about ten minute after the departure of Sophia. he now
address himself to the waiting-woman belong to Mrs Fitzpatrick;
who tell he the disagreeable news that the lady be go, but could
not tell he whither; and the same answer he afterwards receive from
Mrs Fitzpatrick herself. for as that lady make no doubt but that Mr
Jones be a person detach from her uncle Western, in pursuit of his
daughter, so she be too generous to betray she.
Though Jones have never see Mrs Fitzpatrick, yet he have hear that a
cousin of Sophia be married to a gentleman of that name. this,
however, in the present tumult of his mind, never once recur to his
memory; but when the footman, who have conduct he from his
lordship's, acquaint he with the great intimacy between the lady,
and with their call each other cousin, he then recollect the
story of the marriage which he have formerly hear; and as he be
presently convince that this be the same woman, he become more
surprize at the answer which he have receive, and very earnestly
desire leave to wait on the lady herself; but she as positively
refuse he that honour.
Jones, who, though he have never see a court, be well breed than
most who frequent it, be incapable of any rude or abrupt behaviour to
a lady. when he have receive, therefore, a peremptory denial, he
retire for the present, say to the waiting-woman, "that if this
be an improper hour to wait on her lady, he would return in the
afternoon; and that he then hop to have the honour of see she."
the civility with which he utter this, add to the great comeliness
of his person, make an impression on the waiting-woman, and she could
not help answer; "perhaps, sir, you may;" and, indeed, she
afterwards say everything to her mistress, which she think most
likely to prevail on she to admit a visit from the handsome young
gentleman; for so she call he.
Jones very shrewdly suspect that Sophia herself be now with her
cousin, and be deny to he; which he impute to her resentment of
what have happen at Upton. have, therefore, dispatch Partridge to
procure he lodging, he remain all day in the street, watch the
door where he think his angel lie conceal; but no person do he
see issue forth, except a servant of the house, and in the evening he
return to pay his visit to Mrs Fitzpatrick, which that good lady at
last condescend to admit.
there be a certain air of natural gentility, which it be neither in
the power of dress to give, nor to conceal. Mr Jones, as hath be
before hint, be possess of this in a very eminent degree. he meet,
therefore, with a reception from the lady somewhat different from what
his apparel seem to demand; and after he have pay she his proper
respect, be desire to sit down.
the reader will not, I believe, be desirous of know all the
particular of this conversation, which end very little to the
satisfaction of poor Jones. for though Mrs Fitzpatrick soon discover
the lover (as all woman have the eye of hawk in those matter), yet
she still think it be such a lover, as a generous friend of the
lady should not betray she to. in short, she suspect this be the
very Mr Blifil, from whom Sophia have fly; and all the answer which
she artfully draw from Jones, concern Mr Allworthy's family,
confirm she in this opinion. she therefore strictly deny any
knowledge concern the place whither Sophia be go; nor could
Jones obtain more than a permission to wait on she again the next
evening.
when Jones be depart Mrs Fitzpatrick communicate her suspicion
concern Mr Blifil to she maid; who answer, "sure, madam, he be
too pretty a man, in my opinion, for any woman in the world to run
away from. I have rather fancy it be Mr Jones."--"Mr Jones!" say the
lady, "what Jones?" for Sophia have not give the least hint of any
such person in all their conversation; but Mrs Honour have be much
more communicative, and have acquaint her sister Abigail with the
whole history of Jones, which this now again related to her mistress.
Mrs Fitzpatrick no soon receive this information, than she
immediately agree with the opinion of she maid; and, what be very
unaccountable, see charm in the gallant, happy lover, which she have
overlook in the slight squire. "Betty," say she, "you be
certainly in the right: he be a very pretty fellow, and I donot wonder
that my cousin's maid should tell you so many woman be fond of he. I
be sorry now I do not inform he where my cousin be; and yet, if he
be so terrible a rake as you tell I, it be a pity she should ever see
he any more; for what but her ruin can happen from marry a rake
and a beggar against her father's consent? I protest, if he be such a
man as the wench describe he to you, it be but an office of charity
to keep she from he; and I be sure it would be unpardonable in I to
do otherwise, who have taste so bitterly of the misfortune attend
such marriage."
here she be interrupt by the arrival of a visitor, which be no
other than his lordship; and as nothing pass at this visit either
new or extraordinary, or any way material to this history, we shall
here put an end to this chapter.
Chapter iii.
a project of Mrs Fitzpatrick, and her visit to Lady Bellaston.
when Mrs Fitzpatrick retire to rest, her thought be entirely take
up by her cousin Sophia and Mr Jones. she be, indeed, a little
offend with the former, for the disingenuity which she now
discover. in which meditation she have not long exercise her
imagination before the follow conceit suggest itself; that could
she possibly become the mean of preserve Sophia from this man, and
of restore she to her father, she should, in all human probability,
by so great a service to the family, reconcile to herself both her
uncle and her aunt western.
as this be one of her most favourite wish, so the hope of success
seem so reasonable, that nothing remain but to consider of proper
method to accomplish her scheme. to attempt to reason the case with
Sophia do not appear to her one of those method: for as Betty have
report from Mrs Honour, that Sophia have a violent inclination to
Jones, she conceive that to dissuade she from the match be an
endeavour of the same kind, as it would be very heartily and earnestly
to entreat a moth not to fly into a candle.
if the reader will please to remember that the acquaintance which
Sophia have with Lady Bellaston be contract at the house of Mrs
Western, and must have grow at the very time when Mrs Fitzpatrick
live with this latter lady, he will want no information, that Mrs
Fitzpatrick must have be acquaint with she likewise. they be,
besides, both equally her distant relation.
after much consideration, therefore, she resolve to go early in the
morning to that lady, and endeavour to see she, unknown to Sophia, and
to acquaint she with the whole affair. for she do not in the least
doubt, but that the prudent lady, who have often ridicule romantic
love, and indiscreet marriage, in her conversation, would very
readily concur in her sentiment concern this match, and would lend
her utmost assistance to prevent it.
this resolution she accordingly execute; and the next morning before
the sun, she huddle on her cloath, and at a very unfashionable,
unseasonable, unvisitable hour, go to Lady Bellaston, to whom she
get access, without the least knowledge or suspicion of Sophia, who,
though not asleep, lie at that time awake in her bed, with Honour
snoring by her side.
Mrs Fitzpatrick make many apology for an early, abrupt visit, at an
hour when, she say, "she should not have think of disturb she
ladyship, but upon business of the utmost consequence." she then
open the whole affair, tell all she have hear from Betty; and do
not forget the visit which Jones have pay to herself the precede
evening.
Lady Bellaston answer with a smile, "then you have see this
terrible man, madam; pray, be he so very fine a figure as he be
represent? for Etoff entertain I last night almost two hour with
he. the wench I believe be in love with he by reputation." here the
reader will be apt to wonder; but the truth be, that Mrs Etoff, who
have the honour to pin and unpin the Lady Bellaston, have receive
compleat information concern the say Mr Jones, and have faithfully
convey the same to her lady last night (or rather that morning)
while she be undressing; on which account she have be detain in
her office above the space of an hour and a half.
the lady indeed, though generally well enough please with the
narrative of Mrs Etoff at those season, give an extraordinary
attention to her account of Jones; for Honour have describe he as a
very handsome fellow, and Mrs Etoff, in her hurry, add so much to
the beauty of his person to her report, that Lady Bellaston begin to
conceive he to be a kind of miracle in nature.
the curiosity which her woman have inspire be now greatly increase
by Mrs Fitzpatrick, who speak as much in favour of the person of Jones
as she have before speak in dispraise of his birth, character, and
fortune.
when Lady Bellaston have hear the whole, she answer gravely,
"indeed, madam, this be a matter of great consequence. nothing can
certainly be more commendable than the part you act; and I shall be
very glad to have my share in the preservation of a young lady of so
much merit, and for whom I have so much esteem."
"Doth not your ladyship think," say Mrs Fitzpatrick eagerly, "that it
would be the good way to write immediately to my uncle, and acquaint
he where my cousin be?"
the lady ponder a little upon this, and thus answered--"why, no,
madam, I think not. Di western hath describe her brother to I to be
such a brute, that I cannot consent to put any woman under his power
who hath escape from it. I have hear he behave like a monster to
his own wife, for he be one of those wretch who think they have a
right to tyrannise over we, and from such I shall ever esteem it the
cause of my sex to rescue any woman who be so unfortunate to be under
their power.--the business, dear cousin, will be only to keep Miss
Western from see this young fellow, till the good company, which
she will have an opportunity of meeting here, give she a properer
turn."
"if he should find she out, madam," answer the other, "your ladyship
may be assure he will leave nothing unattempted to come at she."
"but, madam," reply the lady, "it be impossible he should come
here--though indeed it be possible he may get some intelligence where
she be, and then may lurk about the house--I wish therefore I know his
person.
"be there no way, madam, by which I could have a sight of he? for,
otherwise, you know, cousin, she may contrive to see he here without
my knowledge." Mrs Fitzpatrick answer, "that he have threaten she
with another visit that afternoon, and that, if her ladyship please
to do she the honour of call upon she then, she would hardly fail
of see he between six and seven; and if he come early she would,
by some mean or other, detain he till her ladyship's arrival."--Lady
Bellaston reply, "she would come the moment she could get from
dinner, which she suppose would be by seven at farth; for that it
be absolutely necessary she should be acquaint with his person.
upon my word, madam," say she, "it be very good to take this care of
Miss Western; but common humanity, as well as regard to our family,
require it of we both; for it would be a dreadful match indeed."
Mrs Fitzpatrick fail not to make a proper return to the compliment
which Lady Bellaston have bestow on her cousin, and, after some
little immaterial conversation, withdraw; and, get as fast as she
could into her chair, unseen by Sophia or Honour, return home.
chapter iv.
which consist of visit.
Mr Jones have walk within sight of a certain door during the whole
day, which, though one of the short, appear to he to be one of
the long in the whole year. at length, the clock have strike
five, he return to Mrs Fitzpatrick, who, though it be a full hour
early than the decent time of visit, receive he very civilly;
but still persist in her ignorance concern Sophia.
Jones, in ask for his angel, have drop the word cousin, upon
which Mrs Fitzpatrick say, "then, sir, you know we be relate: and,
as we be, you will permit I the right of enquire into the
particular of your business with my cousin." here Jones hesitate a
good while, and at last answer, "he have a considerable sum of money
of her in his hand, which he desire to deliver to she." he then
produce the pocket-book, and acquaint Mrs Fitzpatrick with the
content, and with the method in which they come into his hand. he
have scarce finish his story, when a most violent noise shake the
whole house. to attempt to describe this noise to those who have hear
it would be in vain; and to aim at give any idea of it to those who
have never hear the like, would be still more vain: for it may be
truly said--
_--Non acuta
Sic geminant Corybantes aera._
the priest of Cybele do not so rattle their sound brass.
in short, a footman knock, or rather thunder, at the door. Jones
be a little surprized at the sound, have never hear it before; but
Mrs Fitzpatrick very calmly say, that, as some company be come,
she could not make he any answer now; but if he please to stay till
they be go, she intimate she have something to say to he.
the door of the room now fly open, and, after push in her hoop
sideways before she, enter Lady Bellaston, who have first make a
very low courtesy to Mrs Fitzpatrick, and as low a one to Mr Jones,
be usher to the upper end of the room.
we mention these minute matter for the sake of some country lady of
our acquaintance, who think it contrary to the rule of modesty to
bend their knee to a man.
the company be hardly well settle, before the arrival of the peer
lately mention, cause a fresh disturbance, and a repetition of
ceremonial.
these be over, the conversation begin to be (as the phrase be)
extremely brilliant. however, as nothing past in it which can be
think material to this history, or, indeed, very material in itself,
I shall omit the relation; the rather, as I have know some very fine
polite conversation grow extremely dull, when transcribe into book,
or repeat on the stage. indeed, this mental repast be a dainty, of
which those who be exclude from polite assembly must be content
to remain as ignorant as they must of the several dainty of french
cookery, which be serve only at the table of the great. to say the
truth, as neither of these be adapt to every taste, they might both
be often throw away on the vulgar.
Poor Jones be rather a spectator of this elegant scene, than an actor
in it; for though, in the short interval before the peer's arrival,
Lady Bellaston first, and afterwards Mrs Fitzpatrick, have address
some of their discourse to he; yet no soon be the noble lord
enter, than he engross the whole attention of the two lady to
himself; and as he take no more notice of Jones than if no such person
have be present, unless by now and then star at he, the lady
follow his example.
the company have now staid so long, that Mrs Fitzpatrick plainly
perceive they all design to stay out each other. she therefore
resolve to rid herself of Jones, he be the visitant to whom she
think the least ceremony be due. take therefore an opportunity of
a cessation of chat, she address herself gravely to he, and say,
"Sir, I shall not possibly be able to give you an answer to-night as
to that business; but if you please to leave word where I may send to
you to-morrow---"
Jones have natural, but not artificial good-breeding. instead therefore
of communicate the secret of his lodging to a servant, he
acquaint the lady herself with it particularly, and soon after very
ceremoniously withdraw.
he be no soon go than the great personage, who have take no
notice of he present, begin to take much notice of he in his
absence; but if the reader hath already excuse we from relate the
more brilliant part of this conversation, he will surely be very ready
to excuse the repetition of what may be call vulgar abuse; though,
perhaps, it may be material to our history to mention an observation
of Lady Bellaston, who take her leave in a few minute after he, and
then say to Mrs Fitzpatrick, at her departure, "I be satisfied on the
account of my cousin; she can be in no danger from this fellow."
our history shall follow the example of Lady Bellaston, and take leave
of the present company, which be now reduce to two person; between
whom, as nothing pass, which in the least concern we or our reader,
we shall not suffer ourselves to be divert by it from matter which
must seem of more consequence to all those who be at all interested
in the affair of our heroe.
Chapter v.
an adventure which happen to Mr Jones at his lodging, with some
account of a young gentleman who lodge there, and of the mistress of
the house, and her two daughter.
the next morning, as early as it be decent, Jones attend at Mrs
Fitzpatrick's door, where he be answer that the lady be not at
home; an answer which surprize he the more, as he have walk
backwards and forwards in the street from break of day; and if she have
go out, he must have see she. this answer, however, he be oblige
to receive, and not only now, but to five several visit which he make
she that day.
to be plain with the reader, the noble peer have from some reason or
other, perhaps from a regard for the lady's honour, insist that she
should not see Mr Jones, whom he look on as a scrub, any more; and
the lady have comply in make that promise to which we now see she
so strictly adhere.
but as our gentle reader may possibly have a well opinion of the
young gentleman than her ladyship, and may even have some concern,
should it be apprehend that, during this unhappy separation from
Sophia, he take up his residence either at an inn, or in the street;
we shall now give an account of his lodging, which be indeed in a
very reputable house, and in a very good part of the town.
Mr Jones, then, have often hear Mr Allworthy mention the gentlewoman
at whose house he use to lodge when he be in town. this person, who,
as Jones likewise know, live in Bond-street, be the widow of a
clergyman, and be leave by he, at his decease, in possession of two
daughter, and of a compleat set of manuscript sermon.
of these two daughter, Nancy, the elder, be now arrive at the age
of seventeen, and Betty, the young, at that of ten.
Hither Jones have despatch Partridge, and in this house he be
provide with a room for himself in the second floor, and with one for
Partridge in the fourth.
the first floor be inhabit by one of those young gentleman, who, in
the last age, be call man of wit and pleasure about town, and
properly enough; for as man be usually denominate from their
business or profession, so pleasure may be say to have be the only
business or profession of those gentleman to whom fortune have make all
useful occupation unnecessary. playhouse, coffeehouse, and tavern
be the scene of their rendezvous. wit and humour be the
entertainment of their loose hour, and love be the business of
their more serious moment. Wine and the mus conspire to kindle the
bright flame in their breast; nor do they only admire, but some
be able to celebrate the beauty they admire, and all to judge of
the merit of such composition.
such, therefore, be properly call the man of wit and pleasure; but
I question whether the same appellation may, with the same propriety,
be give to those young gentleman of our time, who have the same
ambition to be distinguish for part. wit certainly they have
nothing to do with. to give they their due, they soar a step high
than their predecessor, and may be call man of wisdom and vertù
(take heed you do not read virtue). thus at an age when the gentleman
above mention employ their time in toast the charm of a woman,
or in make sonnet in her praise; in give their opinion of a play
at the theatre, or of a poem at Will's or Button's; these gentleman
be consider the method to bribe a corporation, or meditating
speech for the House of Commons, or rather for the magazine. but
the science of gaming be that which above all other employ their
thought. these be the study of their graver hour, while for their
amusement they have the vast circle of connoisseurship, painting,
music, statuary, and natural philosophy, or rather _unnatural_, which
deal in the wonderful, and know nothing of Nature, except her
monster and imperfection.
when Jones have spend the whole day in vain enquiry after Mrs
Fitzpatrick, he return at last disconsolate to his apartment. here,
while he be vent his grief in private, he hear a violent uproar
below-stair; and soon after a female voice beg he for heaven's
sake to come and prevent murder. Jones, who be never backward on any
occasion to help the distressed, immediately run down-stair; when
step into the dining-room, whence all the noise issue, he behold
the young gentleman of wisdom and vertù just before mention, pin
close to the wall by his footman, and a young woman stand by,
wring her hand, and cry out, "he will be murder! he will be
murder!" and, indeed, the poor gentleman seem in some danger of
be choake, when Jones fly hastily to his assistance, and rescue
he, just as he be breathe his last, from the unmerciful clutch
of the enemy.
though the fellow have receive several kick and cuff from the little
gentleman, who have more spirit than strength, he have make it a kind of
scruple of conscience to strike his master, and would have content
himself with only choake he; but towards Jones he bear no such
respect; he no soon therefore find himself a little roughly handle
by his new antagonist, than he give he one of those punch in the
gut which, though the spectator at Broughton's amphitheatre have
such exquisite delight in see they, convey but very little pleasure
in the feeling.
the lusty youth have no soon receive this blow, than he meditate a
most grateful return; and now ensue a combat between Jones and the
footman, which be very fierce, but short; for this fellow be no more
able to contend with Jones than his master have before be to contend
with he.
and now, Fortune, accord to her usual custom, reverse the face of
affair. the former victor lie breathless on the ground, and the
vanquish gentleman have recover breath enough to thank Mr Jones for
his seasonable assistance; he receive likewise the hearty thank of
the young woman present, who be indeed no other than Miss Nancy, the
eld daughter of the house.
the footman, have now recover his leg, shake his head at Jones,
and, with a sagacious look, cried--"O d--n I, Iwill have nothing more
to do with you; you have be upon the stage, or Ibe d--nably
mistaken." and indeed we may forgive this his suspicion; for such be
the agility and strength of our heroe, that he be, perhaps, a match
for one of the first-rate boxer, and could, with great ease, have
beat all the muffled[*] graduate of Mr Broughton's school.
[*] lest posterity should be puzzle by this epithet, I think proper
to explain it by an advertisement which be publish Feb. 1, 1747.
N.B.--Mr Broughton propose, with proper assistance, to open an
academy at his house in the Haymarket, for the instruction of those
who be willing to be initiate in the mystery of boxing: where the
whole theory and practice of that truly british art, with all the
various stop, blow, cross-buttock, &c., incident to combatant,
will be fully teach and explain; and that person of quality and
distinction may not be deter from enter into _a course of
those lecture_, they will be give with the utmost tenderness and
regard to the delicacy of the frame and constitution of the pupil,
for which reason muffle be provide, that will effectually secure
they from the inconveniency of black eye, broken jaw, and bloody
nose.
the master, foam with wrath, order his man immediately to strip,
to which the latter very readily agree, on condition of receive his
wage. this condition be presently comply with, and the fellow be
discharge.
and now the young gentleman, whose name be Nightingale, very
strenuously insist that his deliverer should take part of a bottle
of wine with he; to which Jones, after much entreaty, consent,
though more out of complacence than inclination; for the uneasiness of
his mind fit he very little for conversation at this time. Miss
Nancy likewise, who be the only female then in the house, her mamma
and sister be both go to the play, condescend to favour they
with her company.
when the bottle and glass be on the table the gentleman begin to
relate the occasion of the precede disturbance.
"I hope, sir," say he to Jones, "you will not from this accident
conclude, that I make a custom of strike my servant, for I assure
you this be the first time I have be guilty of it in my remembrance,
and I have pass by many provoking fault in this very fellow, before
he could provoke I to it; but when you hear what hath happen this
evening, you will, I believe, think I excusable. I happen to come
home several hour before my usual time, when I find four gentleman
of the cloth at whist by my fire;--and my Hoyle, sir--my good Hoyle,
which cost I a guinea, lie open on the table, with a quantity of
porter spill on one of the most material leaf of the whole book.
this, you will allow, be provoke; but I say nothing till the rest
of the honest company be go, and then give the fellow a gentle
rebuke, who, instead of express any concern, make I a pert answer,
`that servant must have their diversion as well as other people;
that he be sorry for the accident which have happen to the book, but
that several of his acquaintance have buy the same for a shilling,
and that I might stop as much in his wage, if I please.' I now give
he a severer reprimand than before, when the rascal have the insolence
to---in short, he impute my early come home to----In short, he cast
a reflection----He mention the name of a young lady, in a manner--in
such a manner that incense I beyond all patience, and, in my
passion, I strike he."
Jones answer, "that he believe no person live would blame he;
for my part," say he, "I confess I should, on the last-mention
provocation, have do the same thing."
our company have not sit long before they be join by the mother and
daughter, at their return from the play. and now they all spend a very
chearful evening together; for all but Jones be heartily merry, and
even he put on as much constrain mirth as possible. indeed, half his
natural flow of animal spirit, join to the sweetness of his temper,
be sufficient to make a most amiable companion; and notwithstanding
the heaviness of his heart, so agreeable do he make himself on the
present occasion, that, at their break up, the young gentleman
earnestly desire his further acquaintance. Miss Nancy be well
pleased with he; and the widow, quite charm with her new lodger,
invite he, with the other, next morning to breakfast.
Jones on his part be no less satisfied. as for Miss Nancy, though a
very little creature, she be extremely pretty, and the widow have all
the charm which can adorn a woman near fifty. as she be one of the
most innocent creature in the world, so she be one of the most
chearful. she never think, nor speak, nor wish any ill, and have
constantly that desire of pleasing, which may be call the happy
of all desire in this, that it scarce ever fail of attain its
end, when not disgrace by affectation. in short, though her power
be very small, she be in her heart one of the warm friend. she
have be a most affectionate wife, and be a most fond and tender
mother. as our history doth not, like a newspaper, give great
character to people who never be hear of before, nor will ever be
hear of again, the reader may hence conclude, that this excellent
woman will hereafter appear to be of some importance in our history.
nor be Jones a little pleased with the young gentleman himself, whose
wine he have be drink. he think he discern in he much good
sense, though a little too much taint with town-foppery; but what
recommend he most to Jones be some sentiment of great generosity
and humanity, which occasionally dropt from he; and particularly many
expression of the high disinterestedness in the affair of love. on
which subject the young gentleman deliver himself in a language
which might have very well become an arcadian shepherd of old, and
which appear very extraordinary when proceed from the lip of a
modern fine gentleman; but he be only one by imitation, and mean by
nature for a much well character.
Chapter vi.
what arrive while the company be at breakfast, with some hint
concern the government of daughter.
our company bring together in the morning the same good inclination
towards each other, with which they have separate the evening before;
but poor Jones be extremely disconsolate; for he have just receive
information from Partridge, that Mrs Fitzpatrick have leave she lodging,
and that he could not learn whither she be go. this news highly
afflict he, and his countenance, as well as his behaviour, in
defiance of all his endeavour to the contrary, betray manifest
indication of a disorder mind.
the discourse turn at present, as before, on love; and Mr
Nightingale again express many of those warm, generous, and
disintereste sentiment upon this subject, which wise and sober man
call romantic, but which wise and sober woman generally regard in a
well light. Mrs Miller (for so the mistress of the house be call)
greatly approve these sentiment; but when the young gentleman
appeal to Miss Nancy, she answer only, "that she believe the
gentleman who have speak the least be capable of feel most."
this compliment be so apparently direct to Jones, that we should
have be sorry have he pass it by unregarded. he make she indeed a
very polite answer, and conclude with an oblique hint, that her own
silence subject she to a suspicion of the same kind: for indeed she
have scarce open her lip either now or the last evening.
"I be glad, nanny," say Mrs Miller, "the gentleman hath make the
observation; I protest I be almost of his opinion. what can be the
matter with you, child? I never see such an alteration. what be become
of all your gaiety? would you think, sir, I use to call she my little
prattler? she hath not speak twenty word this week."
here their conversation be interrupt by the entrance of a
maid-servant, who bring a bundle in her hand, which, she say, "be
deliver by a porter for Mr Jones." she add, "that the man
immediately go away, say, it require no answer."
Jones express some surprize on this occasion, and declare it must
be some mistake; but the maid persist that she be certain of the
name, all the woman be desirous of have the bundle immediately
open; which operation be at length perform by little Betsy, with
the consent of Mr Jones: and the content be find to be a domino, a
mask, and a masquerade ticket.
Jones be now more positive than ever in assert, that these thing
must have be deliver by mistake; and Mrs Miller herself express
some doubt, and say, "she know not what to think." but when Mr
Nightingale be ask, he deliver a very different opinion. "all I
can conclude from it, sir," say he, "be, that you be a very happy
man; for I make no doubt but these be send you by some lady whom you
will have the happiness of meeting at the masquerade."
Jones have not a sufficient degree of vanity to entertain any such
flattering imagination; nor do Mrs Miller herself give much assent to
what Mr Nightingale have say, till Miss Nancy have lift up the
domino, a card dropt from the sleeve, in which be write as
follows:--
to MR JONES.
the queen of the fairy send you this;
use she favour not amiss.
Mrs Miller and Miss Nancy now both agree with Mr Nightingale; nay,
Jones himself be almost persuade to be of the same opinion. and as
no other lady but Mrs Fitzpatrick, he think, know his lodging, he
begin to flatter himself with some hope, that it come from she, and
that he might possibly see his Sophia. these hope have surely very
little foundation; but as the conduct of Mrs Fitzpatrick, in not
see he accord to her promise, and in quit her lodging, have
be very odd and unaccountable, he conceive some faint hope, that
she (of whom he have formerly hear a very whimsical character) might
possibly intend to do he that service in a strange manner, which she
decline do by more ordinary method. to say the truth, as nothing
certain could be conclude from so odd and uncommon an incident, he
have the great latitude to draw what imaginary conclusion from it he
please. as his temper therefore be naturally sanguine, he indulge
it on this occasion, and his imagination work up a thousand
conceit, to favour and support his expectation of meet his dear
Sophia in the evening.
Reader, if thou hast any good wish towards I, I will fully repay
they by wish thee to be possess of this sanguine disposition of
mind; since, after have read much and consider long on that
subject of happiness which hath employ so many great pen, I be
almost inclined to fix it in the possession of this temper; which put
we, in a manner, out of the reach of Fortune, and make we happy
without her assistance. indeed, the sensation of pleasure it give
be much more constant as well as much keener, than those which that
blind lady bestow; nature have wisely contrive, that some satiety
and languor should be annex to all our real enjoyment, lest we
should be so take up by they, as to be stopt from further pursuit. I
make no manner of doubt but that, in this light, we may see the
imaginary future chancellor just call to the bar, the archbishop in
crape, and the prime minister at the tail of an opposition, more truly
happy than those who be invest with all the power and profit of
those respective office.
Mr Jones have now determine to go to the masquerade that evening,
Mr Nightingale offer to conduct he thither. the young gentleman, at
the same time, offer ticket to Miss Nancy and her mother; but the
good woman would not accept they. she say, "she do not conceive the
harm which some people imagine in a masquerade; but that such
extravagant diversion be proper only for person of quality and
fortune, and not for young woman who be to get their living, and
could, at good, hope to be married to a good tradesman."----"a
tradesman!" cry Nightingale, "you shallnot undervalue my Nancy. there
be not a nobleman upon earth above her merit." "o fie! Mr
Nightingale," answer Mrs Miller, "you must not fill the girl's head
with such fancy: but if it be her good luck" (say the mother with
a simper) "to find a gentleman of your generous way of thinking, I
hope she would make a well return to his generosity than to give she
mind up to extravagant pleasure. indeed, where young lady bring
great fortune themselves, they have some right to insist on spend
what be their own; and on that account I have hear the gentleman say,
a man have sometimes a well bargain with a poor wife, than with a
rich one.----but let my daughter marry whom they will, I shall
endeavour to make they blessing to their husbands:----I beg,
therefore, I may hear of no more masquerade. Nancy be, I be certain,
too good a girl to desire to go; for she must remember when you
carry she thither last year, it almost turn her head; and she do
not return to herself, or to her needle, in a month afterwards."
though a gentle sigh, which steal from the bosom of Nancy, seem to
argue some secret disapprobation of these sentiment, she do not dare
openly to oppose they. for as this good woman have all the tenderness,
so she have preserve all the authority of a parent; and as her
indulgence to the desire of her child be restrain only by she
fear for their safety and future welfare, so she never suffer those
command which proceed from such fear to be either disobey or
dispute. and this the young gentleman, who have lodge two year in
the house, know so well, that he presently acquiesce in the refusal.
Mr Nightingale, who grow every minute fonder of Jones, be very
desirous of his company that day to dinner at the tavern, where he
offer to introduce he to some of his acquaintance; but Jones beg
to be excuse, "as his cloath," he say, "be not yet come to town."
to confess the truth, Mr Jones be now in a situation, which sometimes
happen to be the case of young gentleman of much well figure than
himself. in short, he have not one penny in his pocket; a situation in
much great credit among the antient philosopher than among the
modern wise man who live in Lombard-street, or those who frequent
White's chocolate-house. and, perhaps, the great honour which those
philosopher have ascribe to an empty pocket may be one of the
reason of that high contempt in which they be hold in the aforesaid
street and chocolate-house.
now if the antient opinion, that man might live very comfortably on
virtue only, be, as the modern wise man just above-mention pretend
to have discover, a notorious error; no less false be, I apprehend,
that position of some writer of romance, that a man can live
altogether on love; for however delicious repast this may afford to
some of our sens or appetite, it be most certain it can afford none
to other. those, therefore, who have place too great a confidence in
such writer, have experience their error when it be too late; and
have find that love be no more capable of allay hunger, than a
rise be capable of delight the ear, or a violin of gratify the
smell.
Notwithstanding, therefore, all the delicacy which love have set
before he, namely, the hope of see Sophia at the masquerade; on
which, however ill-found his imagination might be, he have
voluptuously feast during the whole day, the evening no soon come
than Mr Jones begin to languish for some food of a gross kind.
Partridge discover this by intuition, and take the occasion to give
some oblique hint concern the bank-bill; and, when these be
reject with disdain, he collect courage enough once more to
mention a return to Mr Allworthy.
"Partridge," cry Jones, "you cannot see my fortune in a more
desperate light than I see it myself; and I begin heartily to repent
that I suffer you to leave a place where you be settle, and to
follow I. however, I insist now on your return home; and for the
expense and trouble which you have so kindly put yourself to on my
account, all the cloath I leave behind in your care I desire you would
take as your own. I be sorry I can make you no other acknowledgment."
he speak these word with so pathetic an accent, that Partridge, among
whose vice ill-nature or hardness of heart be not number, burst
into tear; and after swear he would not quit he in his distress,
he begin with the most earnest entreaty to urge his return home.
"for heaven's sake, sir," say he, "do but consider; what can your
honour do?--how be it possible you can live in this town without
money? do what you will, sir, or go wherever you please, I be resolve
not to desert you. but pray, sir, consider--do pray, sir, for your own
sake, take it into your consideration; and Ibe sure," say he, "that
your own good sense will bid you return home."
"how often shall I tell thee," answer Jones, "that I have no home to
return to? have I any hope that Mr Allworthy's door would be open to
receive I, I want no distress to urge I--nay, there be no other
cause upon earth, which could detain I a moment from fly to his
presence; but, alas! that I be for ever banish from. his last word
be--o, Partridge, they still ring in my ear--his last word be,
when he give I a sum of money--what it be I know not, but
considerable Ibe sure it be--his last word were--`i be resolve from
this day forward, on no account to converse with you any more.'"
here passion stopt the mouth of Jones, as surprize for a moment do
that of Partridge; but he soon recover the use of speech, and after
a short preface, in which he declare he have no inquisitiveness in his
temper, enquire what Jones mean by a considerable sum--he know not
how much--and what be become of the money.
in both these point he now receive full satisfaction; on which he
be proceed to comment, when he be interrupt by a message from
Mr Nightingale, who desire his master's company in his apartment.
when the two gentleman be both attire for the masquerade, and Mr
Nightingale have give order for chair to be send for, a circumstance
of distress occur to Jones, which will appear very ridiculous to
many of my reader. this be how to procure a shilling; but if such
reader will reflect a little on what they have themselves feel from
the want of a thousand pound, or, perhaps, of ten or twenty, to
execute a favourite scheme, they will have a perfect idea of what Mr
Jones feel on this occasion. for this sum, therefore, he apply to
Partridge, which be the first he have permit he to advance, and
be the last he intend that poor fellow should advance in his
service. to say the truth, Partridge have lately make no offer of this
kind. whether it be that he desire to see the bank-bill break in
upon, or that distress should prevail on Jones to return home, or from
what other motive it proceed, I will not determine.
Chapter vii.
contain the whole humour of a masquerade.
our cavalier now arrive at that temple, where Heydegger, the great
Arbiter Deliciarum, the great high-priest of pleasure, preside; and,
like other heathen priest, impose on his votary by the pretended
presence of the deity, when in reality no such deity be there.
Mr Nightingale, have take a turn or two with his companion, soon
leave he, and walk off with a female, say, "now you be here,
sir, you must beat about for your own game."
Jones begin to entertain strong hope that his Sophia be present; and
these hope give he more spirit than the light, the music, and the
company; though these be pretty strong antidote against the spleen.
he now accost every woman he see, whose stature, shape, or air, bore
any resemblance to his angel. to all of whom he endeavour to say
something smart, in order to engage an answer, by which he might
discover that voice which he think it impossible he should mistake.
some of these answer by a question, in a squeaking voice, do you
know I? much the great number say, I donot know you, sir, and
nothing more. some call he an impertinent fellow; some make he no
answer at all; some say, indeed I donot know your voice, and I shall
have nothing to say to you; and many give he as kind answer as he
could wish, but not in the voice he desire to hear.
whilst he be talk with one of these last (who be in the habit of
a shepherdess) a lady in a domino come up to he, and slap he on
the shoulder, whisper he, at the same time, in the ear, "if you
talk any long with that trollop, I will acquaint Miss Western."
Jones no soon hear that name, than, immediately quit his former
companion, he apply to the domino, beg and entreat she to
show he the lady she have mention, if she be then in the room.
the mask walk hastily to the upper end of the innermost apartment
before she speak; and then, instead of answer he, sit down, and
declare she be tired. Jones sit down by she, and still persist in
his entreaty; at last the lady coldly answer, "I imagine Mr Jones
have be a more discerning lover, than to suffer any disguise to
conceal his mistress from he." "be she here, then, madam?" reply
Jones, with some vehemence. upon which the lady cried--"Hush, sir, you
will be observe. I promise you, upon my honour, Miss Western be not
here."
Jones, now take the mask by the hand, fall to entreat she in the
most earnest manner, to acquaint he where he might find Sophia; and
when he could obtain no direct answer, he begin to upbraid she gently
for have disappoint he the day before; and conclude, say,
"indeed, my good fairy queen, I know your majesty very well,
notwithstanding the affect disguise of your voice. indeed, Mrs
Fitzpatrick, it be a little cruel to divert yourself at the expense of
my torment."
the mask answer, "though you have so ingeniously discover I, I
must still speak in the same voice, lest I should be know by other.
and do you think, good sir, that I have no great regard for my
cousin, than to assist in carry on an affair between you two, which
must end in her ruin, as well as your own? besides, I promise you, my
cousin be not mad enough to consent to her own destruction, if you be
so much her enemy as to tempt she to it."
"alas, madam!" say Jones, "you little know my heart, when you call I
an enemy of Sophia."
"and yet to ruin any one," cry the other, "you will allow, be the
act of an enemy; and when by the same act you must knowingly and
certainly bring ruin on yourself, be it not folly or madness, as well
as guilt? now, sir, my cousin hath very little more than her father
will please to give she; very little for one of her fashion--you know
he, and you know your own situation."
Jones vow he have no such design on Sophia, "that he would rather
suffer the most violent of death than sacrifice her interest to his
desire." he say, "he know how unworthy he be of she, every way,
that he have long ago resolve to quit all such aspire thought, but
that some strange accident have make he desirous to see she once
more, when he promise he would take leave of she for ever. no,
madam," conclude he, "my love be not of that base kind which seek
its own satisfaction at the expense of what be most dear to its
object. I would sacrifice everything to the possession of my Sophia,
but Sophia herself."
though the reader may have already conceive no very sublime idea of
the virtue of the lady in the mask; and though possibly she may
hereafter appear not to deserve one of the first character of her
sex; yet, it be certain, these generous sentiment make a strong
impression upon she, and greatly add to the affection she have before
conceive for our young heroe.
the lady now, after silence of a few moment, say, "she do not see
his pretension to Sophia so much in the light of presumption, as of
imprudence. young fellow," say she, "can never have too aspiring
thought. I love ambition in a young man, and I would have you
cultivate it as much as possible. perhaps you may succeed with those
who be infinitely superior in fortune; nay, I be convinced there be
women----but donot you think I a strange creature, Mr Jones, to be
thus give advice to a man with whom I be so little acquainted, and
one with whose behaviour to I I have so little reason to be please?"
here Jones begin to apologize, and to hope he have not offend in
anything he have say of her cousin.--to which the mask answer, "and
be you so little verse in the sex, to imagine you can well affront a
lady more than by entertain she with your passion for another
woman? if the fairy queen have conceive no well opinion of your
gallantry, she would scarce have appoint you to meet she at the
masquerade."
Jones have never less inclination to an amour than at present; but
gallantry to the lady be among his principle of honour; and he
hold it as much incumbent on he to accept a challenge to love, as if
it have be a challenge to fight. Nay, his very love to Sophia make it
necessary for he to keep well with the lady, as he make no doubt but
she be capable of bring he into the presence of the other.
he begin therefore to make a very warm answer to her last speech, when
a mask, in the character of an old woman, join they. this mask be
one of those lady who go to a masquerade only to vent ill-nature, by
tell people rude truth, and by endeavour, as the phrase be, to
spoil as much sport as they be able. this good lady, therefore,
have observe Jones, and his friend, whom she well know, in close
consultation together in a corner of the room, conclude she could
nowhere satisfy her spleen well than by interrupt they. she
attack they, therefore, and soon drive they from their retirement;
nor be she content with this, but pursue they to every place which
they shift to avoid she; till Mr Nightingale, see the distress of
his friend, at last relieve he, and engage the old woman in another
pursuit.
while Jones and his mask be walk together about the room, to rid
themselves of the teazer, he observe his lady speak to several mask,
with the same freedom of acquaintance as if they have be bareface.
he could not help express his surprize at this; say, "sure,
madam, you must have infinite discernment, to know people in all
disguise." to which the lady answer, "you cannot conceive anything
more insipid and childish than a masquerade to the people of fashion,
who in general know one another as well here as when they meet in an
assembly or a drawing-room; nor will any woman of condition converse
with a person with whom she be not acquaint. in short, the
generality of person whom you see here may more properly be say to
kill time in this place than in any other; and generally retire from
hence more tired than from the long sermon. to say the truth, I
begin to be in that situation myself; and if I have any faculty at
guess, you be not much well pleased. I protest it would be
almost charity in I to go home for your sake." "I know but one
charity equal to it," cry Jones, "and that be to suffer I to wait
on you home." "sure," answer the lady, "you have a strange opinion
of I, to imagine, that upon such an acquaintance, I would let you
into my door at this time of night. I fancy you impute the friendship
I have show my cousin to some other motive. Confess honestly; donot
you consider this contrived interview as little well than a
downright assignation? be you use, Mr Jones, to make these sudden
conquest?" "I be not use, madam," say Jones, "to submit to such
sudden conquest; but as you have take my heart by surprize, the rest
of my body hath a right to follow; so you must pardon I if I resolve
to attend you wherever you go." he accompany these word with some
proper action; upon which the lady, after a gentle rebuke, and say
their familiarity would be observe, tell he, "she be go to sup
with an acquaintance, whither she hop he would not follow she; for
if you should," say she, "I shall be think an unaccountable
creature, though my friend indeed be not censorious: yet I hope you
willnot follow I; I protest I shall not know what to say if you do."
the lady presently after quit the masquerade, and Jones,
notwithstanding the severe prohibition he have receive, presume to
attend she. he be now reduce to the same dilemma we have mention
before, namely, the want of a shilling, and could not relieve it by
borrowing as before. he therefore walk boldly on after the chair in
which his lady rode, pursue by a grand huzza, from all the chairman
present, who wisely take the good care they can to discountenance all
walk afoot by their better. luckily, however, the gentry who
attend at the Opera-house be too busy to quit their station, and as
the lateness of the hour prevent he from meet many of their
brother in the street, he proceed without molestation, in a dress,
which, at another season, would have certainly raise a mob at his
heel.
the lady be set down in a street not far from Hanover-square, where
the door be presently open, she be carry in, and the
gentleman, without any ceremony, walk in after she.
Jones and his companion be now together in a very well-furnish and
well-warm room; when the female, still speak in her masquerade
voice, say she be surprize at her friend, who must absolutely have
forget her appointment; at which, after vent much resentment, she
suddenly expr some apprehension from Jones, and ask he what the
world would think of their have be alone together in a house at
that time of night? but instead of a direct answer to so important a
question, Jones begin to be very importunate with the lady to unmask;
and at length have prevail, there appear not Mrs Fitzpatrick,
but the Lady Bellaston herself.
it would be tedious to give the particular conversation, which
consist of very common and ordinary occurrence, and which last
from two till six o'clock in the morning. it be sufficient to mention
all of it that be anywise material to this history. and this be a
promise that the lady would endeavour to find out Sophia, and in a few
day bring he to an interview with she, on condition that he would
then take his leave of she. when this be thoroughly settle, and a
second meeting in the evening appoint at the same place, they
separate; the lady return to her house, and Jones to his lodging.
Chapter viii.
contain a scene of distress, which will appear very extraordinary
to most of our reader.
Jones have refresh himself with a few hour' sleep, summon
Partridge to his presence; and deliver he a bank-note of fifty
pound, order he to go and change it. Partridge receive this with
sparkle eye, though, when he come to reflect far, it raise in
he some suspicion not very advantageous to the honour of his master:
to these the dreadful idea he have of the masquerade, the disguise in
which his master have go out and return, and his have be abroad
all night, contribute. in plain language, the only way he could
possibly find to account for the possession of this note, be by
robbery: and, to confess the truth, the reader, unless he should
suspect it be owe to the generosity of Lady Bellaston, can hardly
imagine any other.
to clear, therefore, the honour of Mr Jones, and to do justice to the
liberality of the lady, he have really receive this present from she,
who, though she do not give much into the hackney charity of the
age, such as building hospital, &c., be not, however, entirely void
of that Christian virtue; and conceive (very rightly I think) that a
young fellow of merit, without a shilling in the world, be no
improper object of this virtue.
Mr Jones and Mr Nightingale have be invite to dine this day with Mrs
Miller. at the appoint hour, therefore, the two young gentleman,
with the two girl, attend in the parlour, where they wait from
three till almost five before the good woman appear. she have be
out of town to visit a relation, of whom, at her return, she give the
follow account.
"I hope, gentleman, you will pardon my making you wait; I be sure if
you know the occasion--I have be to see a cousin of mine, about six
mile off, who now lie in.--it should be a warning to all person
(say she, look at her daughter) how they marry indiscreetly.
there be no happiness in this world without a competency. o nancy! how
shall I describe the wretched condition in which I find your poor
cousin? she hath scarce lain in a week, and there be she, this
dreadful weather, in a cold room, without any curtain to her bed, and
not a bushel of coal in her house to supply she with fire; her second
son, that sweet little fellow, lie ill of a quinzy in the same bed
with his mother; for there be no other bed in the house. poor little
Tommy! I believe, Nancy, you will never see your favourite any more;
for he be really very ill. the rest of the child be in pretty good
health: but molly, I be afraid, will do herself an injury: she be but
thirteen year old, Mr Nightingale, and yet, in my life, I never see a
well nurse: she tend both her mother and her brother; and, what be
wonderful in a creature so young, she show all the chearfulness in
the world to her mother; and yet I see she--I see the poor child, Mr
Nightingale, turn about, and privately wipe the tear from her eye."
here Mrs Miller be prevent, by her own tear, from go on, and
there be not, I believe, a person present who do not accompany she
in they; at length she a little recover herself, and proceed thus:
"in all this distress the mother support her spirit in a surprizing
manner. the danger of her son sit heavy upon she, and yet she
endeavour as much as possible to conceal even this concern, on her
husband's account. her grief, however, sometimes get the well of
all her endeavour; for she be always extravagantly fond of this boy,
and a most sensible, sweet-temper creature it be. I protest I be
never more affected in my life than when I hear the little wretch,
who be hardly yet seven year old, while his mother be wet he
with her tear, beg she to be comfort. `indeed, mamma,' cry the
child, `I shallnot die; God Almighty, Ibe sure, willnot take Tommy away;
let heaven be ever so fine a place, I have rather stay here and starve
with you and my papa than go to it.' pardon I, gentleman, I cannot
help it" (say she, wipe her eye), "such sensibility and affection
in a child.--And yet, perhaps, he be least the object of pity; for a
day or two will, most probably, place he beyond the reach of all
human evil. the father be, indeed, most worthy of compassion. poor
man, his countenance be the very picture of horror, and he look like
one rather dead than alive. oh heaven! what a scene do I behold at
my first come into the room! the good creature be lie behind the
bolster, support at once both his child and his wife. he have
nothing on but a thin waistcoat; for his coat be spread over the bed,
to supply the want of blankets.--when he rise up at my entrance, I
scarce know he. as comely a man, Mr Jones, within this fortnight, as
you ever beheld; Mr Nightingale hath see he. his eye sunk, his face
pale, with a long beard. his body shiver with cold, and wear with
hunger too; for my cousin say she can hardly prevail upon he to
eat.--He tell I himself in a whisper--he tell I--I cannot repeat
it--he say he could not bear to eat the bread his child want.
and yet, can you believe it, gentleman? in all this misery his wife
have as good caudle as if she lie in the midst of the great
affluence; I taste it, and I scarce ever taste better.--the mean of
procure she this, he say, he believe be send he by an angel from
heaven. I know not what he mean; for I have not spirit enough to ask
a single question.
"this be a love-match, as they call it, on both side; that be, a
match between two beggar. I must, indeed, say, I never see a fonder
couple; but what be their fondness good for, but to torment each
other?" "indeed, mamma," cry Nancy, "I have always look on my
cousin Anderson" (for that be her name) "as one of the happy of
woman." "I be sure," say Mrs Miller, "the case at present be much
otherwise; for any one might have discern that the tender
consideration of each other's suffering make the most intolerable
part of their calamity, both to the husband and wife. compare to
which, hunger and cold, as they affect their own person only, be
scarce evil. Nay, the very child, the young, which be not two
year old, excepted, feel in the same manner; for they be a most
love family, and, if they have but a bare competency, would be the
happy people in the world." "I never see the least sign of misery
at her house," reply Nancy; "I be sure my heart bleed for what you
now tell I."--"O child," answer the mother, "she hath always
endeavour to make the good of everything. they have always be in
great distress; but, indeed, this absolute ruin hath be bring upon
they by other. the poor man be bail for the villain his brother; and
about a week ago, the very day before her lie-in, their good be
all carry away, and sell by an execution. he send a letter to I of
it by one of the bailiff, which the villain never delivered.--what
must he think of my suffering a week to pass before he hear of I?"
it be not with dry eye that Jones hear this narrative; when it be
end he take Mrs Miller apart with he into another room, and,
deliver she his purse, in which be the sum of £50, desire she to
send as much of it as she think proper to these poor people. the
look which Mrs Miller give Jones, on this occasion, be not easy to be
describe. she burst into a kind of agony of transport, and cry
out--"good heaven! be there such a man in the world?"--But
recollect herself, she say, "indeed I know one such; but can there
be another?" "I hope, madam," cry Jones, "there be many who have
common humanity; for to relieve such distress in our fellow-creature,
can hardly be call more." Mrs Miller then take ten guinea, which
be the utmost he could prevail with she to accept, and say, "she
would find some mean of convey they early the next morning;"
add, "that she have herself do some little matter for the poor
people, and have not leave they in quite so much misery as she find
they."
they then return to the parlour, where Nightingale express much
concern at the dreadful situation of these wretch, whom indeed he
know; for he have see they more than once at Mrs Miller's. he
inveigh against the folly of make oneself liable for the debt of
other; vent many bitter execration against the brother; and
conclude with wish something could be do for the unfortunate
family. "suppose, madam," say he, "you should recommend they to Mr
Allworthy? or what think you of a collection? I will give they a
guinea with all my heart."
Mrs Miller make no answer; and Nancy, to whom her mother have whisper
the generosity of Jones, turn pale upon the occasion; though, if
either of they be angry with Nightingale, it be surely without
reason. for the liberality of Jones, if he have know it, be not an
example which he have any obligation to follow; and there be thousand
who would not have contribute a single halfpenny, as indeed he do
not in effect, for he make no tender of anything; and therefore, as
the other think proper to make no demand, he keep his money in his
pocket.
I have, in truth, observe, and shall never have a well opportunity
than at present to communicate my observation, that the world be in
general divide into two opinion concern charity, which be the
very reverse of each other. one party seem to hold, that all act of
this kind be to be esteem as voluntary gift, and, however little
you give (if indeed no more than your good wish), you acquire a
great degree of merit in so do. other, on the contrary, appear to
be as firmly persuade, that beneficence be a positive duty, and that
whenever the rich fall greatly short of their ability in relieve the
distress of the poor, their pitiful largess be so far from be
meritorious, that they have only perform their duty by half, and
be in some sense more contemptible than those who have entirely
neglect it.
to reconcile these different opinion be not in my power. I shall only
add, that the giver be generally of the former sentiment, and the
receiver be almost universally inclined to the latter.
Chapter ix.
which treat of matter of a very different kind from those in the
precede chapter.
in the evening Jones meet his lady again, and a long conversation again
ensue between they: but as it consist only of the same ordinary
occurrence as before, we shall avoid mention particular, which we
despair of render agreeable to the reader; unless he be one whose
devotion to the fair sex, like that of the papist to their saint,
want to be raise by the help of picture. but I be so far from
desire to exhibit such picture to the public, that I would wish to
draw a curtain over those that have be lately set forth in certain
french novel; very bungling copy of which have be present we
here under the name of translation.
Jones grow still more and more impatient to see Sophia; and find,
after repeat interview with Lady Bellaston, no likelihood of
obtain this by her mean (for, on the contrary, the lady begin to
treat even the mention of the name of Sophia with resentment), he
resolve to try some other method. he make no doubt but that Lady
Bellaston know where his angel be, so he think it most likely that
some of her servant should be acquaint with the same secret.
Partridge therefore be employ to get acquaint with those
servant, in order to fish this secret out of they.
few situation can be imagine more uneasy than that to which his poor
master be at present reduce; for besides the difficulty he meet
with in discover Sophia, besides the fear he have of have
disoblige she, and the assurance he have receive from Lady Bellaston
of the resolution which Sophia have take against he, and of she
have purposely conceal herself from he, which he have sufficient
reason to believe might be true; he have still a difficulty to combat
which it be not in the power of his mistress to remove, however kind
her inclination might have be. this be the exposing of she to be
disinherit of all her father's estate, the almost inevitable
consequence of their come together without a consent, which he have
no hope of ever obtain.
add to all these the many obligation which Lady Bellaston, whose
violent fondness we can no long conceal, have heap upon he; so
that by her mean he be now become one of the well-dress man about
town; and be not only relieve from those ridiculous distress we
have before mention, but be actually raise to a state of affluence
beyond what he have ever know.
now, though there be many gentleman who very well reconcile it to
their conscience to possess themselves of the whole fortune of a
woman, without make she any kind of return; yet to a mind, the
proprietor of which doth not deserve to be hang, nothing be, I
believe, more irksome than to support love with gratitude only;
especially where inclination pull the heart a contrary way. such be
the unhappy case of Jones; for though the virtuous love he bear to
Sophia, and which leave very little affection for any other woman, have
be entirely out of the question, he could never have be able to
have make any adequate return to the generous passion of this lady,
who have indeed be once an object of desire, but be now enter at
least into the autumn of life, though she wear all the gaiety of
youth, both in her dress and manner; nay, she contrive still to
maintain the rose in her cheek; but these, like flower force out
of season by art, have none of that lively bloom freshness with
which nature, at the proper time, bedeck her own production. she
have, besides, a certain imperfection, which render some flower,
though very beautiful to the eye, very improper to be place in a
wilderness of sweet, and what above all other be most disagreeable
to the breath of love.
Though Jones see all these discouragement on the one side, he feel
his obligation full as strongly on the other; nor do he less plainly
discern the ardent passion whence those obligation proceed, the
extreme violence of which if he fail to equal, he well know the lady
would think he ungrateful; and, what be bad, he would have think
himself so. he know the tacit consideration upon which all her favour
be confer; and as his necessity oblige he to accept they, so
his honour, he conclude, force he to pay the price. this therefore
he resolve to do, whatever misery it cost he, and to devote himself
to she, from that great principle of justice, by which the law of
some country oblige a debtor, who be no otherwise capable of
discharge his debt, to become the slave of his creditor.
while he be meditate on these matter, he receive the follow
note from the lady:--
"a very foolish, but a very perverse accident hath happen since
our last meeting, which make it improper I should see you any more
at the usual place. I will, if possible, contrive some other place
by to-morrow. in the meantime, adieu."
this disappointment, perhaps, the reader may conclude be not very
great; but if it be, he be quickly relieve; for in less than an
hour afterwards another note be bring he from the same hand, which
contain as follows:--
"I have alter my mind since I write; a change which, if you be no
strange to the tender of all passion, you will not wonder at. I
be now resolve to see you this evening at my own house, whatever
may be the consequence. come to I exactly at seven; I dine abroad,
but will be at home by that time. a day, I find, to those that
sincerely love, seem long than I imagine.
"if you should accidentally be a few moment before I, bid they
show you into the drawing-room."
to confess the truth, Jones be less pleased with this last epistle
than he have be with the former, as he be prevent by it from
comply with the earnest entreaty of Mr Nightingale, with whom he
have now contract much intimacy and friendship. these entreaty be
to go with that young gentleman and his company to a new play, which
be to be act that evening, and which a very large party have agree
to damn, from some dislike they have take to the author, who be a
friend to one of Mr Nightingale's acquaintance. and this sort of fun,
our heroe, we be ashamed to confess, would willingly have prefer
to the above kind appointment; but his honour get the well of his
inclination.
before we attend he to this intended interview with the lady, we
think proper to account for both the precede note, as the reader
may possibly be not a little surprized at the imprudence of Lady
Bellaston, in bring her lover to the very house where her rival be
lodge.
first, then, the mistress of the house where these lover have hitherto
meet, and who have be for some year a pensioner to that lady, be now
become a methodist, and have that very morning wait upon her
ladyship, and after rebuke she very severely for her past life, have
positively declare that she would, on no account, be instrumental in
carry on any of her affair for the future.
the hurry of spirit into which this accident throw the lady make she
despair of possibly find any other convenience to meet Jones that
evening; but as she begin a little to recover from her uneasiness at
the disappointment, she set her thought to work, when luckily it come
into her head to propose to Sophia to go to the play, which be
immediately consent to, and a proper lady provide for her
companion. Mrs Honour be likewise despatch with Mrs Etoff on the
same errand of pleasure; and thus her own house be leave free for the
safe reception of Mr Jones, with whom she promise herself two or
three hour of uninterrupted conversation after her return from the
place where she din, which be at a friend's house in a pretty
distant part of the town, near her old place of assignation, where she
have engage herself before she be well apprized of the revolution
that have happen in the mind and moral of her late confidante.
Chapter x.
a chapter which, though short, may draw tear from some eye.
Mr Jones be just dressed to wait on Lady Bellaston, when Mrs Miller
rap at his door; and, be admit, very earnestly desire his
company below-stair, to drink tea in the parlour.
upon his entrance into the room, she presently introduce a person to
he, say, "this, sir, be my cousin, who hath be so greatly
beholden to your goodness, for which he beg to return you his
sincere thank."
the man have scarce enter upon that speech which Mrs Miller have so
kindly preface, when both Jones and he, look stedfastly at each
other, show at once the utmost token of surprize. the voice of the
latter begin instantly to faulter; and, instead of finish his
speech, he sink down into a chair, cry, "it be so, I be convince
it be so!"
"bless I! whatbe the meaning of this?" cry Mrs Miller; "you be not
ill, I hope, cousin? some water, a dram this instant."
"be not fright, madam," cry Jones, "I have almost as much need of
a dram as your cousin. we be equally surprize at this unexpected
meeting. your cousin be an acquaintance of mine, Mrs Miller."
"an acquaintance!" cry the man.--"Oh, heaven!"
"ay, an acquaintance," repeat Jones, "and an honour acquaintance
too. when I do not love and honour the man who dare venture
everything to preserve his wife and child from instant destruction,
may I have a friend capable of disown I in adversity!"
"oh, you be an excellent young man," cry Mrs Miller:--"Yes, indeed,
poor creature! he hath venture everything.--if he have not have one of
the good of constitution, it must have kill he."
"Cousin," cry the man, who have now pretty well recover himself,
"this be the angel from heaven whom I mean. this be he to whom,
before I see you, I owe the preservation of my Peggy. he it be to
whose generosity every comfort, every support which I have procure
for she, be owe. he be, indeed, the worthy, bravest, noblest; of
all human being. o cousin, I have obligation to this gentleman of
such a nature!"
"mention nothing of obligation," cry Jones eagerly; "not a word, I
insist upon it, not a word" (meaning, I suppose, that he would not
have he betray the affair of the robbery to any person). "if, by the
trifle you have receive from I, I have preserve a whole family,
sure pleasure be never buy so cheap."
"oh, sir!" cry the man, "I wish you could this instant see my house.
if any person have ever a right to the pleasure you mention, I be
convince it be yourself. my cousin tell I she acquaint you with
the distress in which she find we. that, sir, be all greatly remove,
and chiefly by your goodness.----My child have now a bed to lie
on----and they have----they have----eternal blessing reward you for
it!----they have bread to eat. my little boy be recover; my wife be
out of danger, and I be happy. all, all owe to you, sir, and to my
cousin here, one of the good of woman. indeed, sir, I must see you at
my house.--indeed my wife must see you, and thank you.--My child
too must express their gratitude.----indeed, sir, they be not without
a sense of their obligation; but what be my feeling when I reflect to
whom I owe that they be now capable of express their
gratitude.----oh, sir, the little heart which you have warm have now
be cold as ice without your assistance."
here Jones attempt to prevent the poor man from proceeding; but
indeed the overflowing of his own heart would of itself have stop
his word. and now Mrs Miller likewise begin to pour forth
thanksgiving, as well in her own name, as in that of her cousin, and
conclude with say, "she doubt not but such goodness would meet a
glorious reward."
Jones answer, "he have be sufficiently reward already. your
cousin's account, madam," say he, "hath give I a sensation more
pleasing than I have ever know. he must be a wretch who be unmove at
hear such a story; how transporting then must be the thought of
have happily act a part in this scene! if there be man who cannot
feel the delight of give happiness to other, I sincerely pity they,
as they be incapable of taste what be, in my opinion, a great
honour, a high interest, and a sweet pleasure than the ambitious,
the avaricious, or the voluptuous man can ever obtain."
the hour of appointment be now come, Jones be force to take a
hasty leave, but not before he have heartily shake his friend by the
hand, and desire to see he again as soon as possible; promise that
he would himself take the first opportunity of visit he at his own
house. he then stept into his chair, and proceed to Lady
Bellaston's, greatly exult in the happiness which he have procure
to this poor family; nor could he forbear reflect, without horror,
on the dreadful consequence which must have attend they, have he
listen rather to the voice of strict justice than to that of mercy,
when he be attack on the high road.
Mrs Miller sing forth the praise of Jones during the whole evening,
in which Mr Anderson, while he stay, so passionately accompany
she, that he be often on the very point of mention the
circumstance of the robbery. however, he luckily recollect himself,
and avoid an indiscretion which would have be so much the great,
as he know Mrs Miller to be extremely strict and nice in her
principle. he be likewise well apprized of the loquacity of this
lady; and yet such be his gratitude, that it have almost get the
well both of discretion and shame, and make he publish that which
would have defame his own character, rather than omit any
circumstance which might do the full honour to his benefactor.
Chapter xi.
in which the reader will be surprize.
Mr Jones be rather early than the time appoint, and early than
the lady; whose arrival be hinder, not only by the distance of the
place where she din, but by some other cross accident very
vexatious to one in her situation of mind. he be accordingly show
into the drawing-room, where he have not be many minute before the
door open, and in came----no other than Sophia herself, who have leave
the play before the end of the first act; for this, as we have already
say, be, a new play, at which two large party meet, the one to
damn, and the other to applaud, a violent uproar, and an engagement
between the two party, have so terrify our heroine, that she be
glad to put herself under the protection of a young gentleman who
safely convey she to her chair.
as Lady Bellaston have acquaint she that she should not be at home
till late, Sophia, expect to find no one in the room, come hastily
in, and go directly to a glass which almost front she, without
once look towards the upper end of the room, where the statue of
Jones now stand motionless.---In this glass it be, after
contemplate her own lovely face, that she first discover the say
statue; when, instantly turn about, she perceive the reality of
the vision: upon which she give a violent scream, and scarce preserve
herself from faint, till Jones be able to move to she, and support
she in his arm.
to paint the look or thought of either of these lover, be beyond my
power. as their sensation, from their mutual silence, may be judge
to have be too big for their own utterance, it cannot be suppose
that I should be able to express they: and the misfortune be, that few
of my reader have be enough in love to feel by their own heart
what past at this time in theirs.
after a short pause, Jones, with faultere accent, said--"i see,
madam, you be surprize."--"surprize!" answer she; "oh heaven!
indeed, I be surprize. I almost doubt whether you be the person you
seem."--"Indeed," cry he, "my Sophia, pardon I, madam, for this
once call you so, I be that very wretched Jones, whom fortune,
after so many disappointment, hath, at last, kindly conduct to you.
oh! my Sophia, do you know the thousand torment I have suffer in
this long, fruitless pursuit."--"pursuit of whom?" say Sophia, a
little recollect herself, and assume a reserve air.--"Can you be
so cruel to ask that question?" cry Jones; "need I say, of you?" "of
I!" answer Sophia: "Hath Mr Jones, then, any such important
business with me?"--"To some, madam," cry Jones, "this might seem an
important business" (give she the pocket-book). "I hope, madam, you
will find it of the same value as when it be lose." Sophia take the
pocket-book, and be go to speak, when he interrupt she
thus:--"let we not, I beseech you, lose one of these precious moment
which fortune hath so kindly send we. o, my Sophia! I have business of
a much superior kind. thus, on my knee, let I ask your pardon."--"My
pardon!" cry she; "sure, sir, after what be past, you cannot expect,
after what I have hear."--"I scarce know what I say," answer Jones.
"by heaven! I scarce wish you should pardon I. o my Sophia!
henceforth never cast away a thought on such a wretch as I be. if any
remembrance of I should ever intrude to give a moment's uneasiness to
that tender bosom, think of my unworthiness; and let the remembrance
of what pass at Upton blot I for ever from your mind."
Sophia stand tremble all this while. her face be white than snow,
and her heart be throb through her stay. but, at the mention of
Upton, a blush arise in her cheek, and her eye, which before she have
scarce lift up, be turn upon Jones with a glance of disdain. he
understand this silent reproach, and reply to it thus: "o my Sophia!
my only love! you cannot hate or despise I more for what happen
there than I do myself; but yet do I the justice to think that my
heart be never unfaithful to you. that have no share in the folly I
be guilty of; it be even then unalterably your. though I despair
of possess you, nay, almost of ever see you more, I doate still
on your charming idea, and could seriously love no other woman. but if
my heart have not be engage, she, into whose company I accidently
fall at that curse place, be not an object of serious love. believe
I, my angel, I never have see she from that day to this; and never
intend or desire to see she again." Sophia, in her heart, be very
glad to hear this; but force into her face an air of more coldness
than she have yet assume, "why," say she, "Mr Jones, do you take the
trouble to make a defence where you be not accuse? if I think it
worth while to accuse you, I have a charge of unpardonable nature
indeed."--"what be it, for heaven's sake?" answer Jones, tremble
and pale, expect to hear of his amour with Lady Bellaston. "oh,"
say she, "how be it possible! can everything noble and everything
base be lodge together in the same bosom?" Lady Bellaston, and the
ignominious circumstance of have be keep, rise again in his mind,
and stopt his mouth from any reply. "could I have expect," proceed
Sophia, "such treatment from you? Nay, from any gentleman, from any
man of honour? to have my name traduce in public; in inn, among the
mean vulgar! to have any little favour that my unguarded heart may
have too lightly betray I to grant, boast of there! nay, even to
hear that you have be force to fly from my love!"
nothing could equal Jones's surprize at these word of Sophia; but
yet, not be guilty, he be much less embarrassed how to defend
himself than if she have touch that tender string at which his
conscience have be alarm. by some examination he presently find,
that she suppose he guilty of so shocking an outrage against his
love, and her reputation, be entirely owe to Partridge's talk at
the inn before landlord and servant; for Sophia confess to he it
be from they that she receive her intelligence. he have no very great
difficulty to make she believe that he be entirely innocent of an
offence so foreign to his character; but she have a great deal to
hinder he from go instantly home, and put Partridge to death,
which he more than once swear he would do. this point be clear
up, they soon find themselves so well pleased with each other, that
Jones quite forget he have begin the conversation with conjure she to
give up all thought of he; and she be in a temper to have give ear
to a petition of a very different nature; for before they be aware
they have both go so far, that he let fall some word that sound
like a proposal of marriage. to which she reply, "that, do not her
duty to her father forbid she to follow her own inclination, ruin
with he would be more welcome to she than the most affluent fortune
with another man." at the mention of the word ruin, he start, let
drop her hand, which he have hold for some time, and strike his
breast with his own, cry out, "oh, Sophia! can I then ruin thee? no;
by heaven, no! I never will act so base a part. Dearest Sophia,
whatever it cost I, I will renounce you; I will give you up; I will
tear all such hope from my heart as be inconsistent with your real
good. my love I will ever retain, but it shall be in silence; it shall
be at a distance from you; it shall be in some foreign land; from
whence no voice, no sigh of my despair, shall ever reach and disturb
your ear. and when I be dead"--He would have go on, but be stopt
by a flood of tear which Sophia let fall in his bosom, upon which she
lean, without be able to speak one word. he kiss they off,
which, for some moment, she allow he to do without any resistance;
but then recollect herself, gently withdraw out of his arm; and,
to turn the discourse from a subject too tender, and which she find
she could not support, bethink herself to ask he a question she
never have time to put to he before, "how he come into that room?" he
begin to stammer, and would, in all probability, have raise her
suspicion by the answer he be go to give, when, at once, the door
open, and in come Lady Bellaston.
have advance a few step, and see Jones and Sophia together, she
suddenly stopt; when, after a pause of a few moment, recollect
herself with admirable presence of mind, she say--though with
sufficient indication of surprize both in voice and countenance--"i
thought, Miss Western, you have be at the play?"
Though Sophia have no opportunity of learning of Jones by what mean he
have discover she, yet, as she have not the least suspicion of the
real truth, or that Jones and Lady Bellaston be acquaint, so she
be very little confound; and the less, as the lady have, in all
their conversation on the subject, entirely take her side against
her father. with very little hesitation, therefore, she go through
the whole story of what have happen at the play-house, and the cause
of her hasty return.
the length of this narrative give Lady Bellaston an opportunity of
rally her spirit, and of consider in what manner to act. and as
the behaviour of Sophia give her hope that Jones have not betray
she, she put on an air of good humour, and say, "I should not have
break in so abruptly upon you, Miss Western, if I have know you have
company."
Lady Bellaston fix her eye on Sophia whilst she speak these word.
to which that poor young lady, have her face overspread with blush
and confusion, answer, in a stammering voice, "I be sure, madam, I
shall always think the honour of your ladyship's company----" "I hope,
at least," cry Lady Bellaston, "I interrupt no business."--"No,
madam," answer Sophia, "our business be at an end. your ladyship
may be pleased to remember I have often mention the loss of my
pocket-book, which this gentleman, have very luckily find, be so
kind to return it to I with the bill in it."
Jones, ever since the arrival of Lady Bellaston, have be ready to
sink with fear. he sit kick his heel, play with his finger,
and look more like a fool, if it be possible, than a young booby
squire, when he be first introduce into a polite assembly. he begin,
however, now to recover himself; and take a hint from the behaviour
of Lady Bellaston, who he see do not intend to claim any acquaintance
with he, he resolve as entirely to affect the stranger on his part.
he say, "ever since he have the pocket-book in his possession, he have
use great diligence in enquire out the lady whose name be writ in
it; but never till that day could be so fortunate to discover she."
Sophia have indeed mention the loss of her pocket-book to Lady
Bellaston; but as Jones, for some reason or other, have never once
hint to she that it be in his possession, she believe not one
syllable of what Sophia now say, and wonderfully admire the extreme
quickness of the young lady in invent such an excuse. the reason of
Sophia's leave the playhouse meet with no well credit; and though
she could not account for the meeting between these two lover, she
be firmly persuade it be not accidental.
with an affected smile, therefore, she say, "indeed, Miss Western,
you have have very good luck in recover your money. not only as it
fall into the hand of a gentleman of honour, but as he happen to
discover to whom it belong. I think you would not consent to have it
advertised.--it be great good fortune, sir, that you find out to
whom the note belong."
"oh, madam," cry Jones, "it be enclose in a pocket-book, in which
the young lady's name be write."
"that be very fortunate, indeed," cry the lady:--"And it be no
less so, that you hear Miss Western be at my house; for she be very
little known."
Jones have at length perfectly recover his spirit; and as he
conceive he have now an opportunity of satisfy Sophia as to the
question she have ask he just before Lady Bellaston come in, he
proceed thus: "why, madam," answer he, "it be by the lucky
chance imaginable I make this discovery. I be mention what I have
find, and the name of the owner, the other night to a lady at the
masquerade, who tell I she believe she know where I might see Miss
Western; and if I would come to her house the next morning she would
inform I, I go accord to her appointment, but she be not at
home; nor could I ever meet with she till this morning, when she
direct I to your ladyship's house. I come accordingly, and do
myself the honour to ask for your ladyship; and upon my saying that I
have very particular business, a servant show I into this room;
where I have not be long before the young lady return from the
play."
upon his mention the masquerade, he look very slily at Lady
Bellaston, without any fear of be remark by Sophia; for she be
visibly too much confound to make any observation. this hint a
little alarmed the lady, and she be silent; when Jones, who see the
agitation of Sophia's mind, resolve to take the only method of
relieve she, which be by retire; but, before he do this, he
say, "I believe, madam, it be customary to give some reward on these
occasions;--i must insist on a very high one for my honesty;--it be,
madam, no less than the honour of be permit to pay another visit
here."
"Sir," reply the lady, "I make no doubt that you be a gentleman,
and my door be never shut to people of fashion."
Jones then, after proper ceremonial, depart, highly to his own
satisfaction, and no less to that of Sophia; who be terribly alarmed
lest Lady Bellaston should discover what she know already but too
well.
upon the stair Jones meet his old acquaintance, Mrs Honour, who,
notwithstanding all she have say against he, be now so well breed to
behave with great civility. this meeting prove indeed a lucky
circumstance, as he communicate to she the house where he lodge,
with which Sophia be unacquainted.
Chapter xii.
in which the thirteenth book be conclude.
the elegant Lord Shaftesbury somewhere object to tell too much
truth: by which it may be fairly infer, that, in some case, to lie
be not only excusable but commendable.
and surely there be no person who may so properly challenge a right
to this commendable deviation from truth, as young woman in the affair
of love; for which they may plead precept, education, and above all,
the sanction, nay, I may say the necessity of custom, by which they
be restrain, not from submit to the honest impulse of nature
(for that would be a foolish prohibition), but from own they.
we be not, therefore, ashamed to say, that our heroine now pursue
the dictate of the above-mention right honourable philosopher. as
she be perfectly satisfied then, that Lady Bellaston be ignorant of
the person of Jones, so she determine to keep she in that ignorance,
though at the expense of a little fib.
Jones have not be long go, before Lady Bellaston cry, "upon my
word, a good pretty young fellow; I wonder who he be; for I donot
remember ever to have see his face before."
"nor I neither, madam," cry Sophia. "I must say he behave very
handsomely in relation to my note."
"yes; and he be a very handsome fellow," say the lady: "donot you
think so?"
"I do not take much notice of he," answer Sophia, "but I think
he seem rather awkward, and ungenteel than otherwise."
"you be extremely right," cry Lady Bellaston: "you may see, by his
manner, that he hath not keep good company. Nay, notwithstanding his
return your note, and refuse the reward, I almost question
whether he be a gentleman.----I have always observe there be a
something in person well bear, which other can never acquire.----i
think I will give order not to be at home to he."
"nay, sure, madam," answer Sophia, "one cannot suspect after what he
hath done;--beside, if your ladyship observe he, there be an
elegance in his discourse, a delicacy, a prettiness of expression
that, that----"
"I confess," say Lady Bellaston, "the fellow hath words----and
indeed, Sophia, you must forgive I, indeed you must."
"I forgive your ladyship!" say Sophia.
"yes, indeed you must," answer she, laugh; "for I have a horrible
suspicion when I first come into the room----i vow you must forgive
it; but I suspect it be Mr Jones himself."
"do your ladyship, indeed?" cry Sophia, blushing, and affect a
laugh.
"yes, I vow I do," answer she. "I cannot imagine what put it into my
head: for, give the fellow his due, he be genteely drest; which, I
think, dear Sophy, be not commonly the case with your friend."
"this raillery," cry Sophia, "be a little cruel, Lady Bellaston,
after my promise to your ladyship."
"not at all, child," say the lady;----"It would have be cruel
before; but after you have promise I never to marry without your
father's consent, in which you know be imply your give up Jones,
sure you can bear a little raillery on a passion which be pardonable
enough in a young girl in the country, and of which you tell I you
have so entirely get the well. what must I think, my dear Sophy, if
you cannot bear a little ridicule even on his dress? I shall begin to
fear you be very far go indeed; and almost question whether you
have deal ingenuously with I."
"indeed, madam," cry Sophia, "your ladyship mistake I, if you
imagine I have any concern on his account."
"on his account!" answer the lady: "you must have mistake I; I
go no far than his dress;----for I would not injure your taste
by any other comparison--I donot imagine, my dear Sophy, if your Mr
Jones have be such a fellow as this--"
"I think," say Sophia, "your ladyship have allow he to be
handsome"----
"Whom, pray?" cry the lady hastily.
"Mr Jones," answer sophia;--and immediately recollect herself,
"Mr Jones!--no, no; I ask your pardon;--i mean the gentleman who be
just now here."
"O Sophy! Sophy!" cry the lady; "this Mr Jones, I be afraid, still
run in your head."
"then, upon my honour, madam," say Sophia, "Mr Jones be as entirely
indifferent to I, as the gentleman who just now leave we."
"upon my honour," say Lady Bellaston, "I believe it. forgive I,
therefore, a little innocent raillery; but I promise you I will never
mention his name any more."
and now the two lady separate, infinitely more to the delight of
Sophia than of Lady Bellaston, who would willingly have torment she
rival a little long, have not business of more importance call she
away. as for Sophia, her mind be not perfectly easy under this first
practice of deceit; upon which, when she retire to her chamber, she
reflect with the high uneasiness and conscious shame. nor could
the peculiar hardship of her situation, and the necessity of the case,
at all reconcile her mind to her conduct; for the frame of her mind
be too delicate to bear the thought of have be guilty of a
falsehood, however qualified by circumstance. nor do this thought
once suffer she to close her eye during the whole succeeding night.
BOOK XIV.
contain two day.
Chapter i.
an essay to prove that an author will write the well for have some
knowledge of the subject on which he write.
as several gentleman in these time, by the wonderful force of genius
only, without the least assistance of learning, perhaps, without be
well able to read, have make a considerable figure in the republic of
letter; the modern critic, I be tell, have lately begin to assert,
that all kind of learning be entirely useless to a writer; and,
indeed, no other than a kind of fetter on the natural sprightliness
and activity of the imagination, which be thus weigh down, and
prevent from soar to those high flight which otherwise it would
be able to reach.
this doctrine, I be afraid, be at present carry much too far: for
why should write differ so much from all other art? the nimbleness
of a dancing-master be not at all prejudice by be teach to move;
nor doth any mechanic, I believe, exercise his tool the bad by
have learn to use they. for my own part, I cannot conceive that
Homer or Virgil would have writ with more fire, if instead of be
master of all the learning of their time, they have be as ignorant
as most of the author of the present age. nor do I believe that all
the imagination, fire, and judgment of Pitt, could have produce those
oration that have make the senate of England, in these our time, a
rival in eloquence to Greece and Rome, if he have not be so well read
in the writing of Demosthenes and Cicero, as to have transfer
their whole spirit into his speech, and, with their spirit, their
knowledge too.
I would not here be understand to insist on the same fund of learn
in any of my brother, as Cicero persuade we be necessary to the
composition of an orator. on the contrary, very little reading be, I
conceive, necessary to the poet, less to the critic, and the least of
all to the politician. for the first, perhaps, Byshe's Art of Poetry,
and a few of our modern poet, may suffice; for the second, a moderate
heap of play; and, for the last, an indifferent collection of
political journal.
to say the truth, I require no more than that a man should have some
little knowledge of the subject on which he treat, accord to the
old maxim of law, _Quam quisque nôrit artem in eâ se exerceat_. with
this alone a writer may sometimes do tolerably well; and, indeed,
without this, all the other learning in the world will stand he in
little stead.
for instance, let we suppose that Homer and Virgil, Aristotle and
Cicero, Thucydides and Livy, could have meet all together, and have
club their several talent to have compose a treatise on the art
of dancing: I believe it will be readily agree they could not have
equal the excellent treatise which Mr Essex hath give we on that
subject, entitle, the rudiment of Genteel Education. and, indeed,
should the excellent Mr Broughton be prevail on to set fist to
paper, and to complete the above-say rudiment, by deliver down
the true principle of athletic, I question whether the world will
have any cause to lament, that none of the great writer, either
antient or modern, have ever treat about that noble and useful art.
to avoid a multiplicity of example in so plain a case, and to come at
once to my point, I be apt to conceive, that one reason why many
english writer have totally fail in describe the manner of upper
life, may possibly be, that in reality they know nothing of it.
this be a knowledge unhappily not in the power of many author to
arrive at. book will give we a very imperfect idea of it; nor will
the stage a much well: the fine gentleman form upon read the
former will almost always turn out a pedant, and he who form himself
upon the latter, a coxcomb.
nor be the character draw from these model well support.
Vanbrugh and Congreve copy nature; but they who copy they draw as
unlike the present age as Hogarth would do if he be to paint a rout
or a drum in the dress of Titian and of Vandyke. in short, imitation
here will not do the business. the picture must be after nature
herself. a true knowledge of the world be gain only by conversation,
and the manner of every rank must be see in order to be know.
now it happen that this high order of mortal be not to be see,
like all the rest of the human specie, for nothing, in the street,
shop, and coffee-house; nor be they show, like the upper rank of
animal, for so much a-piece. in short, this be a sight to which no
person be admit without one or other of these qualification,
viz., either birth or fortune, or, what be equivalent to both, the
honourable profession of a gamester. and, very unluckily for the
world, person so qualified very seldom care to take upon themselves
the bad trade of writing; which be generally enter upon by the low
and poor sort, as it be a trade which many think require no kind of
stock to set up with.
hence those strange monster in lace and embroidery, in silk and
brocade, with vast wig and hoop; which, under the name of lord and
lady, strut the stage, to the great delight of attorney and their
clerk in the pit, and of the citizen and their apprentice in the
gallery; and which be no more to be find in real life than the
centaur, the chimera, or any other creature of mere fiction. but to
let my reader into a secret, this knowledge of upper life, though very
necessary for prevent mistake, be no very great resource to a
writer whose province be comedy, or that kind of novel which, like
this I be write, be of the comic class.
what Mr Pope say of woman be very applicable to most in this station,
who be, indeed, so entirely make up of form and affectation, that
they have no character at all, at least none which appear. I will
venture to say the high life be much the dull, and afford very
little humour or entertainment. the various calling in low sphere
produce the great variety of humorous character; whereas here, except
among the few who be engage in the pursuit of ambition, and the
few still who have a relish for pleasure, all be vanity and servile
imitation. dressing and card, eat and drink, bow and
courtesying, make up the business of their life.
some there be, however, of this rank upon whom passion exercise its
tyranny, and hurry they far beyond the bound which decorum
prescribe; of these the lady be as much distinguish by their
noble intrepidity, and a certain superior contempt of reputation, from
the frail one of mean degree, as a virtuous woman of quality be by
the elegance and delicacy of her sentiment from the honest wife of a
yeoman and shopkeeper. Lady Bellaston be of this intrepid character;
but let not my country reader conclude from she, that this be the
general conduct of woman of fashion, or that we mean to represent they
as such. they might as well suppose that every clergyman be
represent by Thwackum, or every soldier by ensign Northerton.
there be not, indeed, a great error than that which universally
prevail among the vulgar, who, borrow their opinion from some
ignorant satirist, have affix the character of lewdness to these
time. on the contrary, I be convinced there never be less of love
intrigue carry on among person of condition than now. our present
woman have be teach by their mother to fix their thought only on
ambition and vanity, and to despise the pleasure of love as unworthy
their regard; and be afterwards, by the care of such mother,
marry without have husband, they seem pretty well confirm in
the justness of those sentiment; whence they content themselves, for
the dull remainder of life, with the pursuit of more innocent, but I
be afraid more childish amusement, the bare mention of which would
ill suit with the dignity of this history. in my humble opinion, the
true characteristic of the present beau monde be rather folly than
vice, and the only epithet which it deserve be that of frivolous.
Chapter ii.
contain letter and other matter which attend amour.
Jones have not be long at home before he receive the follow
letter:--
"I be never more surprized than when I find you be go. when you
leave the room I little imagine you intend to have leave the house
without see I again. your behaviour be all of a piece, and
convince I how much I ought to despise a heart which can doat upon
an idiot; though I know not whether I should not admire her cunning
more than her simplicity: wonderful both! for though she understand
not a word of what pass between we, yet she have the skill, the
assurance, the----what shall I call it? to deny to my face that she
know you, or ever see you before.----was this a scheme lay between
you, and have you be base enough to betray me?----O how I despise
she, you, and all the world, but chiefly myself! for----I dare not
write what I should afterwards run mad to read; but remember, I can
det as violently as I have love."
Jones have but little time give he to reflect on this letter, before
a second be bring he from the same hand; and this, likewise, we
shall set down in the precise word.
"when you consider the hurry of spirit in which I must have writ,
you cannot be surprize at any expression in my former note.--Yet,
perhaps, on reflection, they be rather too warm. at least I would,
if possible, think all owe to the odious playhouse, and to the
impertinence of a fool, which detain I beyond my
appointment.----how easy be it to think well of those we
love!----perhap you desire I should think so. I have resolve to
see you to-night; so come to I immediately.
"_P.S._--I have order to be at home to none but yourself.
"_P.S._--Mr Jones will imagine I shall assist he in his defence;
for I believe he cannot desire to impose on I more than I desire to
impose on myself.
"_p.s._--come immediately."
to the man of intrigue I refer the determination, whether the angry or
the tender letter give the great uneasiness to Jones. certain it
be, he have no violent inclination to pay any more visit that evening,
unless to one single person. however, he think his honour engage,
and have not this be motive sufficient, he would not have venture to
blow the temper of Lady Bellaston into that flame of which he have
reason to think it susceptible, and of which he fear the consequence
might be a discovery to Sophia, which he dread. after some
discontent walk therefore about the room, he be prepare to
depart, when the lady kindly prevent he, not by another letter, but
by her own presence. she enter the room very disorder in her
dress, and very discompose in her look, and throw herself into a
chair, where, have recover her breath, she said--"you see, sir,
when woman have go one length too far, they will stop at none. if
any person would have swear this to I a week ago, I would not have
believe it of myself." "I hope, madam," say Jones, "my charming Lady
Bellaston will be as difficult to believe anything against one who be
so sensible of the many obligation she hath confer upon he."
"indeed!" say she, "sensible of obligation! do I expect to hear
such cold language from Mr Jones?" "pardon I, my dear angel," say
he, "if, after the letter I have receive, the terror of your anger,
though I know not how I have deserve it."--"and have I then," say
she, with a smile, "so angry a countenance?--have I really bring a
chiding face with me?"--"if there be honour in man," say he, "I have
do nothing to merit your anger.--you remember the appointment you
send I; I go in pursuance."--"I beseech you," cry she, "do not
run through the odious recital.--answer I but one question, and I
shall be easy. have you not betray my honour to her?"--Jones fall
upon his knee, and begin to utter the most violent protestation,
when Partridge come dance and caper into the room, like one drunk
with joy, cry out, "shebe find! shebe found!--here, sir, here,
shebe here--Mrs Honour be upon the stair." "stop she a moment," cry
jones--"here, madam, step behind the bed, I have no other room nor
closet, nor place on earth to hide you in; sure never be so damned an
accident."--"D--n'd indeed!" say the lady, as she go to her place
of concealment; and presently afterwards in come Mrs Honour.
"hey-day!" say she, "Mr Jones, whatbe the matter?--That impudent
rascal your servant would scarce let I come upstairs. I hope he hath
not the same reason to keep I from you as he have at Upton.--I suppose
you hardly expect to see I; but you have certainly bewitch my
lady. poor dear young lady! to be sure, I love she as tenderly as if
she be my own sister. Lord have mercy upon you, if you donot make she
a good husband! and to be sure, if you do not, nothing can be bad
enough for you." Jones beg she only to whisper, for that there be
a lady die in the next room. "a lady!" cry she; "ay, I suppose one
of your ladies.--o Mr Jones, there be too many of they in the world;
I believe we be get into the house of one, for my Lady Bellaston I
darst to say be no well than she should be."--"Hush! hush!" cry
Jones, "every word be overhear in the next room." "I donot care a
farthing," cry Honour, "I speak no scandal of any one; but to be
sure the servant make no scruple of say as how her ladyship meet
man at another place--where the house go under the name of a poor
gentlewoman; but her ladyship pay the rent, and manybe the good thing
besides, they say, she hath of she."--Here Jones, after express the
utmost uneasiness, offer to stop she mouth:--"hey-day! why sure, Mr
Jones, you will let I speak; I speak no scandal, for I only say
what I hear from other--and think I to myself, much good may it do
the gentlewoman with her rich, if she come by it in such a wicked
manner. to be sure it be well to be poor and honest." "the servant
be villain," cry Jones, "and abuse their lady unjustly."--"Ay, to
be sure, servant be always villain, and so my lady say, and willnot
hear a word of it."--"No, I be convince," say Jones, "my Sophia be
above listen to such base scandal." "Nay, I believe it be no
scandal, neither," cry Honour, "for why should she meet man at
another house?--it can never be for any good: for if she have a lawful
design of be court, as to be sure any lady may lawfully give she
company to man upon that account: why, where can be the sense?"--"i
protest," cry Jones, "I cannot hear all this of a lady of such
honour, and a relation of Sophia; besides, you will distract the poor
lady in the next room.--let I entreat you to walk with I down
stair."--"Nay, sir, if you willnot let I speak, I have done.--here,
sir, be a letter from my young lady--what would some man give to have
this? but, Mr Jones, I think you be not over and above generous, and
yet I have hear some servant say----but I be sure you will do I the
justice to own I never see the colour of your money." here Jones
hastily take the letter, and presently after slip five piece into
her hand. he then return a thousand thank to his dear Sophia in a
whisper, and beg she to leave he to read her letter: she presently
depart, not without express much grateful sense of his
generosity.
Lady Bellaston now come from behind the curtain. how shall I describe
her rage? her tongue be at first incapable of utterance; but stream
of fire dart from her eye, and well indeed they might, for her
heart be all in a flame. and now as soon as her voice find way,
instead of express any indignation against Honour or her own
servant, she begin to attack poor Jones. "you see," say she, "what I
have sacrifice to you; my reputation, my honour--go for ever! and
what return have I find? neglect, slight for a country girl, for
an idiot."--"what neglect, madam, or what slight," cry Jones, "have
I be guilty of?"--"Mr Jones," say she, "it be in vain to dissemble;
if you will make I easy, you must entirely give she up; and as a
proof of your intention, show I the letter."--"What letter, madam?"
say Jones. "Nay, surely," say she, "you cannot have the confidence
to deny your have receive a letter by the hand of that
trollop."--"And can your ladyship," cry he, "ask of I what I must
part with my honour before I grant? have I act in such a manner by
your ladyship? could I be guilty of betray this poor innocent girl
to you, what security could you have that I should not act the same
part by yourself? a moment's reflection will, I be sure, convince you
that a man with whom the secret of a lady be not safe must be the
most contemptible of wretch."--"Very well," say she--"i need not
insist on your become this contemptible wretch in your own opinion;
for the inside of the letter could inform I of nothing more than I
know already. I see the footing you be upon."--Here ensue a long
conversation, which the reader, who be not too curious, will thank I
for not insert at length. it shall suffice, therefore, to inform
he, that Lady Bellaston grow more and more pacified, and at length
believe, or affect to believe, his protestation, that his meeting
with Sophia that evening be merely accidental, and every other matter
which the reader already know, and which, as Jones set before she in
the strong light, it be plain that she have in reality no reason to
be angry with he.
she be not, however, in her heart perfectly satisfied with his
refusal to show she the letter; so deaf be we to the clear reason,
when it argue against our prevail passion. she be, indeed, well
convince that Sophia possess the first place in Jones's affection;
and yet, haughty and amorous as this lady be, she submit at last
to bear the second place; or, to express it more properly in a legal
phrase, be content with the possession of that of which another
woman have the reversion.
it be at length agree that Jones should for the future visit at the
house: for that Sophia, her maid, and all the servant, would place
these visit to the account of Sophia; and that she herself would be
consider as the person impose upon.
this scheme be contrive by the lady, and highly relish by Jones,
who be indeed glad to have a prospect of see his Sophia at any
rate; and the lady herself be not a little pleased with the
imposition on Sophia, which Jones, she think, could not possibly
discover to she for his own sake.
the next day be appoint for the first visit, and then, after proper
ceremonial, the Lady Bellaston return home.
Chapter iii.
contain various matter.
Jones be no soon alone than he eagerly break open his letter, and
read as follows:--
"Sir, it be impossible to express what I have suffer since you
leave this house; and as I have reason to think you intend come
here again, I have send Honour, though so late at night, as she
tell I she know your lodging, to prevent you. I charge you, by
all the regard you have for I, not to think of visit here; for
it will certainly be discover; nay, I almost doubt, from some
thing which have dropt from her ladyship, that she be not already
without some suspicion. something favourable perhaps may happen; we
must wait with patience; but I once more entreat you, if you have
any concern for my ease, do not think of return hither."
this letter administer the same kind of consolation to poor Jones,
which Job formerly receive from his friend. besides disappoint
all the hope which he promise to himself from see Sophia, he be
reduce to an unhappy dilemma, with regard to Lady Bellaston; for
there be some certain engagement, which, as he well know, do very
difficultly admit of any excuse for the failure; and to go, after the
strict prohibition from Sophia, he be not to be force by any human
power. at length, after much deliberation, which during that night
supply the place of sleep, he determine to feign himself sick: for
this suggest itself as the only mean of fail the appoint
visit, without incense Lady Bellaston, which he have more than one
reason of desire to avoid.
the first thing, however, which he do in the morning, be, to write
an answer to Sophia, which he inclose in one to Honour. he then
despatch another to Lady Bellaston, contain the above-mention
excuse; and to this he soon receive the follow answer:--
"I be vex that I cannot see you here this afternoon, but more
concerned for the occasion; take great care of yourself, and have
the good advice, and I hope there will be no danger.--i be so
torment all this morning with fool, that I have scarce a moment's
time to write to you. Adieu.
"_P.S._--I will endeavour to call on you this evening, at nine.--Be
sure to be alone."
Mr Jones now receive a visit from Mrs Miller, who, after some formal
introduction, begin the follow speech:--"i be very sorry, sir, to
wait upon you on such an occasion; but I hope you will consider the
ill consequence which it must be to the reputation of my poor girl,
if my house should once be talk of as a house of ill-fame. I hope
you willnot think I, therefore, guilty of impertinence, if I beg you
not to bring any more lady in at that time of night. the clock have
strike two before one of they go away."--"i do assure you, madam,"
say Jones, "the lady who be here last night, and who staid the
late (for the other only bring I a letter), be a woman of very
great fashion, and my near relation."--"i donot know what fashion she
be of," answer Mrs Miller; "but I be sure no woman of virtue, unless
a very near relation indeed, would visit a young gentleman at ten at
night, and stay four hour in his room with he alone; besides, sir,
the behaviour of her chairman show what she be; for they do nothing
but make jest all the evening in the entry, and ask Mr Partridge,
in the hearing of my own maid, if madam intend to stay with his
master all night; with a great deal of stuff not proper to be
repeat. I have really a great respect for you, Mr Jones, upon your
own account; nay, I have a very high obligation to you for your
generosity to my cousin. indeed, I do not know how very good you have
be till lately. little do I imagine to what dreadful course the
poor man's distress have drive he. little do I think, when you give
I the ten guineas, that you have give they to a highwayman! O
heaven! what goodness have you show! how have you preserve this
family!--the character which Mr Allworthy hath formerly give I of
you be, I find, strictly true.--And indeed, if I have no obligation to
you, my obligation to he be such, that, on his account, I should
shew you the utmost respect in my power.--Nay, believe I, dear Mr
Jones, if my daughter' and my own reputation be out of the case, I
should, for your own sake, be sorry that so pretty a young gentleman
should converse with these woman; but if you be resolve to do it, I
must beg you to take another lodging; for I do not myself like to have
such thing carry on under my roof; but more especially upon the
account of my girl, who have little, heaven know, besides their
character, to recommend they." Jones start and change colour at
the name of Allworthy. "indeed, Mrs Miller," answer he, a little
warmly, "I do not take this at all kind. I will never bring any
slander on your house; but I must insist on see what company I
please in my own room; and if that give you any offence, I shall, as
soon as I be able, look for another lodging."--"I be sorry we must
part then, sir," say she; "but I be convince Mr Allworthy himself
would never come within my door, if he have the least suspicion of my
keep an ill house."--"Very well, madam," say Jones.--"I hope,
sir," say she, "you be not angry; for I would not for the world
offend any of Mr Allworthy's family. I have not sleep a wink all night
about this matter."--"I be sorry I have disturb your rest, madam,"
say Jones, "but I beg you will send Partridge up to I immediately;"
which she promise to do, and then with a very low courtesy retire.
as soon as Partridge arrive, Jones fall upon he in the most
outrageous manner. "how often," say he, "be I to suffer for your
folly, or rather for my own in keep you? be that tongue of your
resolve upon my destruction?" "what have I do, sir?" answer
affright Partridge. "who be it give you authority to mention the
story of the robbery, or that the man you see here be the person?"
"I, sir?" cry Partridge. "now donot be guilty of a falsehood in
deny it," say Jones. "if I do mention such a matter," answer
Partridge, "I be sure I think no harm; for I should not have open
my lip, if it have not be to his own friend and relation, who, I
imagine, would have let it go no far." "but I have a much heavy
charge against you," cry Jones, "than this. how durst you, after all
the precaution I give you, mention the name of Mr Allworthy in this
house?" Partridge deny that he ever have, with many oath. "how
else," say Jones, "should Mrs Miller be acquaint that there be any
connexion between he and I? and it be but this moment she tell I
she respect I on his account." "o Lord, sir," say Partridge, "I
desire only to be hear out; and to be sure, never be anything so
unfortunate: hear I but out, and you will own how wrongfully you have
accuse I. when Mrs Honour come downstairs last night she meet I in
the entry, and ask I when my master have hear from Mr Allworthy;
and to be sure Mrs Miller hear the very word; and the moment Madam
Honour be go, she call I into the parlour to she. `Mr
Partridge,' say she, `what Mr Allworthy be it that the gentlewoman
mention? be it the great Mr Allworthy of Somersetshire?' `upon my
word, madam,' say I, `I know nothing of the matter.' `sure,' say
she, `your master be not the Mr Jones I have hear Mr Allworthy talk
of?' `upon my word, madam,' say I, `I know nothing of the matter.'
`then,' say she, turn to her daughter Nancy, say she, `as sure as
tenpence this be the very young gentleman, and he agree exactly with
the squire's description.' the Lord above know who it be tell she:
for I be the arrant villain that ever walk upon two leg if ever
it come out of my mouth. I promise you, sir, I can keep a secret when
I be desire. Nay, sir, so far be I from tell she anything about
Mr Allworthy, that I tell she the very direct contrary; for, though I
do not contradict it at that moment, yet, as second thought, they
say, be good, so when I come to consider that somebody must have
inform she, think I to myself, I will put an end to the story; and
so I go back again into the parlour some time afterwards, and say
I, upon my word, say I, whoever, say I, tell you that this gentleman
be Mr Jones; that is, say I, that this Mr Jones be that Mr Jones,
tell you a confounded lie: and I beg, say I, you will never mention
any such matter, say I; for my master, say I, will think I must have
tell you so; and I defy anybody in the house ever to say I mention
any such word. to be certain, sir, it be a wonderful thing, and I have
be think with myself ever since, how it be she come to know it;
not but I see an old woman here t'other day a begging at the door, who
look as like she we see in Warwickshire, that cause all that
mischief to we. to be sure it be never good to pass by an old woman
without give she something, especially if she look at you; for all
the world shall never persuade I but that they have a great power to
do mischief, and to be sure I shall never see an old woman again, but
I shall think to myself, _Infandum, regina, jubes renovare dolorem._"
the simplicity of Partridge set Jones a laughing, and put a final end
to his anger, which have indeed seldom any long duration in his mind;
and, instead of comment on his defence, he tell he he intend
presently to leave those lodging, and order he to go and endeavour
to get he other.
chapter iv.
which we hope will be very attentively peruse by young people of both
sex.
Partridge have no soon leave Mr Jones than Mr Nightingale, with whom
he have now contract a great intimacy, come to he, and, after a
short salutation, say, "so, Tom, I hear you have company very late
last night. upon my soul you be a happy fellow, who have not be in
town above a fortnight, and can keep chair wait at your door till
two in the morning." he then run on with much commonplace raillery of
the same kind, till Jones at last interrupt he, say, "I suppose
you have receive all this information from Mrs Miller, who hath be
up here a little while ago to give I warning. the good woman be
afraid, it seem, of the reputation of her daughter." "oh! she be
wonderfully nice," say Nightingale, "upon that account; if you
remember, she would not let Nancy go with we to the masquerade." "Nay,
upon my honour, I think shebe in the right of it," say Jones:
"however, I have take she at her word, and have send Partridge to
look for another lodging." "if you will," say Nightingale, "we may, I
believe, be again together; for, to tell you a secret, which I desire
you willnot mention in the family, I intend to quit the house to-day."
"what, hath Mrs Miller give you warn too, my friend?" cry Jones.
"no," answer the other; "but the room be not convenient enough.
besides, I be grow weary of this part of the town. I want to be
near the place of diversion; so I be go to pall-mall." "and do
you intend to make a secret of your go away?" say Jones. "I
promise you," answer Nightingale, "I donot intend to bilk my
lodging; but I have a private reason for not take a formal leave."
"not so private," answer Jones; "I promise you, I have see it ever
since the second day of my come to the house. here will be some wet
eye on your departure. poor Nancy, I pity she, faith! indeed, Jack,
you have play the fool with that girl. you have give she a longing,
which I be afraid nothing will ever cure she of." Nightingale
answer, "what the devil would you have I do? would you have I
marry she to cure she?" "no," answer Jones, "I would not have have
you make love to she, as you have often do in my presence. I have
be astonish at the blindness of her mother in never see it."
"Pugh, see it!" cry Nightingale. "what, the devil should she see?"
"why, see," say Jones, "that you have make her daughter distractedly
in love with you. the poor girl cannot conceal it a moment; her eye
be never off from you, and she always colour every time you come
into the room. indeed, I pity she heartily; for she seem to be one of
the well-natured and honest of human creature." "and so," answer
Nightingale, "accord to your doctrine, one must not amuse oneself
by any common gallantry with woman, for fear they should fall in
love with we." "indeed, Jack," say Jones, "you wilfully misunderstand
I; I do not fancy woman be so apt to fall in love; but you have go
far beyond common gallantry." "what, do you suppose," say
Nightingale, "that we have be a-bed together?" "no, upon my honour,"
answer Jones, very seriously, "I do not suppose so ill of you; nay,
I will go far, I do not imagine you have lay a regular
premeditate scheme for the destruction of the quiet of a poor little
creature, or have even foresee the consequence: for I be sure thou
art a very good-natured fellow; and such a one can never be guilty of
a cruelty of that kind; but at the same time you have please your own
vanity, without consider that this poor girl be make a sacrifice
to it; and while you have have no design but of amuse an idle hour,
you have actually give her reason to flatter herself that you have the
most serious design in her favour. Prithee, Jack, answer I honestly;
to what have tend all those elegant and luscious description of
happiness arise from violent and mutual fondness? all those warm
profession of tenderness, and generous disinterested love? do you
imagine she would not apply they? or, speak ingenuously, do not you
intend she should?" "upon my soul, Tom," cry Nightingale, "I do not
think this be in thee. thou wilt make an admirable parson. so I
suppose you would not go to bed to Nancy now, if she would let you?"
"no," cry Jones, "may I be d--n'd if I would." "Tom, Tom," answer
Nightingale, "last night; remember last night----
when every eye be closed, and the pale moon,
and silent star, shine conscious of the theft."
"Lookee, Mr Nightingale," say Jones, "I be no canting hypocrite, nor
do I pretend to the gift of chastity, more than my neighbour. I have
be guilty with woman, I own it; but be not conscious that I have
ever injure any.--nor would I, to procure pleasure to myself, be
knowingly the cause of misery to any human being."
"well, well," say Nightingale, "I believe you, and I be convinced you
acquit I of any such thing."
"I do, from my heart," answer Jones, "of have debauch the girl,
but not from have gain her affection."
"if I have," say Nightingale, "I be sorry for it; but time and
absence will soon wear off such impression. it be a receipt I must
take myself; for, to confess the truth to you--I never like any girl
half so much in my whole life; but I must let you into the whole
secret, Tom. my father hath provide a match for I with a woman I
never see; and she be now come to town, in order for I to make my
address to she."
at these word Jones burst into a loud fit of laughter; when
Nightingale cried--"nay, prithee, donot turn I into ridicule. the
devil take I if I be not half mad about this matter! my poor Nancy!
oh! Jones, Jones, I wish I have a fortune in my own possession."
"I heartily wish you have," cry Jones; "for, if this be the case, I
sincerely pity you both; but surely you donot intend to go away
without take your leave of she?"
"I would not," answer Nightingale, "undergo the pain of taking
leave, for ten thousand pound; besides, I be convince, instead of
answer any good purpose, it would only serve to inflame my poor
Nancy the more. I beg, therefore, you would not mention a word of it
to-day, and in the evening, or to-morrow morning, I intend to depart."
Jones promise he would not; and say, upon reflection, he think, as
he have determine and be oblige to leave she, he take the most
prudent method. he then tell Nightingale he should be very glad to
lodge in the same house with he; and it be accordingly agree
between they, that Nightingale should procure he either the ground
floor, or the two pair of stair; for the young gentleman himself be
to occupy that which be between they.
this Nightingale, of whom we shall be presently oblige to say a
little more, be in the ordinary transaction of life a man of strict
honour, and, what be more rare among young gentleman of the town, one
of strict honesty too; yet in affair of love he be somewhat loose in
his moral; not that he be even here as void of principle as
gentleman sometimes be, and oftener affect to be; but it be certain
he have be guilty of some indefensible treachery to woman, and have,
in a certain mystery, call make love, practise many deceit,
which, if he have use in trade, he would have be count the
great villain upon earth.
but as the world, I know not well for what reason, agree to see this
treachery in a well light, he be so far from be ashamed of his
iniquity of this kind, that he glory in they, and would often
boast of his skill in gain of woman, and his triumph over their
heart, for which he have before this time receive some rebuke from
Jones, who always expr great bitterness against any misbehaviour to
the fair part of the specie, who, if consider, he say, as they
ought to be, in the light of the dear friend, be to be
cultivate, honour, and caress with the utmost love and
tenderness; but, if regard as enemy, be a conquest of which a
man ought rather to be ashamed than to value himself upon it.
Chapter v.
a short account of the history of Mrs Miller.
Jones this day eat a pretty good dinner for a sick man, that be to
say, the large half of a shoulder of mutton. in the afternoon he
receive an invitation from Mrs Miller to drink tea; for that good
woman, have learn, either by mean of Partridge, or by some other
mean natural or supernatural, that he have a connexion with Mr
Allworthy, could not endure the thought of part with he in an
angry manner.
Jones accept the invitation; and no soon be the tea-kettle
remove, and the girl send out of the room, than the widow, without
much preface, begin as follow: "well, there be very surprizing
thing happen in this world; but certainly it be a wonderful business
that I should have a relation of Mr Allworthy in my house, and never
know anything of the matter. alas! sir, you little imagine what a
friend that good of gentleman hath be to I and mine. yes, sir, I be
not ashamed to own it; it be owe to his goodness that I do not long
since perish for want, and leave my poor little wretch, two
destitute, helpless, friendless orphan, to the care, or rather to the
cruelty, of the world.
"you must know, sir, though I be now reduce to get my living by
let lodging, I be bear and breed a gentlewoman. my father be an
officer of the army, and die in a considerable rank: but he live up
to his pay; and, as that expire with he, his family, at his death,
become beggar. we be three sister. one of we have the good luck to
die soon after of the small-pox; a lady be so kind as to take the
second out of charity, as she say, to wait upon she. the mother of
this lady have be a servant to my grand-mother; and, have inherit
a vast fortune from her father, which he have get by pawnbroke, be
married to a gentleman of great estate and fashion. she use my sister
so barbarously, often upbraid she with her birth and poverty,
call she in derision a gentlewoman, that I believe she at length
break the heart of the poor girl. in short, she likewise die within a
twelvemonth after my father. Fortune think proper to provide well
for I, and within a month from his decease I be married to a
clergyman, who have be my lover a long time before, and who have be
very ill use by my father on that account: for though my poor father
could not give any of we a shilling, yet he breed we up as delicately,
consider we, and would have have we consider ourselves, as highly as
if we have be the rich heiress. but my dear husband forget all
this usage, and the moment we be become fatherless he immediately
renew his address to I so warmly, that I, who always like, and
now more than ever esteem he, soon comply. five year do I live
in a state of perfect happiness with that good of man, till at
last--oh! cruel! cruel fortune, that ever separate we, that deprive
I of the kind of husband and my poor girl of the tender
parent.--O my poor girl! you never know the blessing which ye
lost.--I be ashamed, Mr Jones, of this womanish weakness; but I shall
never mention he without tear." "I ought rather, madam," say Jones,
"to be ashamed that I do not accompany you." "well, sir," continue
she, "I be now leave a second time in a much bad condition than
before; besides the terrible affliction I be to encounter, I have now
two child to provide for; and be, if possible, more pennyless than
ever; when that great, that good, that glorious man, Mr Allworthy, who
have some little acquaintance with my husband, accidentally hear of my
distress, and immediately writ this letter to I. here, sir, here it
be; I put it into my pocket to shew it you. this be the letter, sir; I
must and will read it to you.
"'Madam,
"'I heartily condole with you on your late grievous loss, which your
own good sense, and the excellent lesson you must have learn from
the worthy of man, will well enable you to bear than any advice
which I be capable of give. nor have I any doubt that you, whom I
have hear to be the tender of mother, will suffer any
immoderate indulgence of grief to prevent you from discharge your
duty to those poor infant, who now alone stand in need of your
tenderness.
"`however, as you must be suppose at present to be incapable of
much worldly consideration, you will pardon my have order a
person to wait on you, and to pay you twenty guineas, which I beg
you will accept till I have the pleasure of see you, and believe
I to be, madam, &c.'
"this letter, sir, I receive within a fortnight after the irreparable
loss I have mention; and within a fortnight afterwards, Mr
Allworthy--the blessed Mr Allworthy, come to pay I a visit, when he
place I in the house where you now see I, give I a large sum of
money to furnish it, and settle an annuity of £50 a-year upon I,
which I have constantly receive ever since. Judge, then, Mr Jones, in
what regard I must hold a benefactor, to whom I owe the preservation
of my life, and of those dear child, for whose sake alone my life
be valuable. do not, therefore, think I impertinent, Mr Jones (since
I must esteem one for whom I know Mr Allworthy hath so much value), if
I beg you not to converse with these wicked woman. you be a young
gentleman, and do not know half their artful wile. do not be angry
with I, sir, for what I say upon account of my house; you must be
sensible it would be the ruin of my poor dear girl. besides, sir, you
cannot but be acquaint that Mr Allworthy himself would never forgive
my conniving at such matter, and particularly with you."
"upon my word, madam," say Jones, "you need make no farth apology;
nor do I in the least take anything ill you have say; but give I
leave, as no one can have more value than myself for Mr Allworthy, to
deliver you from one mistake, which, perhaps, would not be altogether
for his honour; I do assure you, I be no relation of his."
"alas! sir," answer she, "I know you be not, I know very well who
you be; for Mr Allworthy hath tell I all; but I do assure you, have
you be twenty time his son, he could not have express more regard
for you than he hath often express in my presence. you need not be
ashamed, sir, of what you be; I promise you no good person will
esteem you the less on that account. no, Mr Jones, the word
`dishonourable birth' be nonsense, as my dear, dear husband use to
say, unless the word `dishonourable' be apply to the parent; for
the child can derive no real dishonour from an act of which they
be intirely innocent."
here Jones heave a deep sigh, and then say, "since I perceive,
madam, you really do know I, and Mr Allworthy hath think proper to
mention my name to you; and since you have be so explicit with I as
to your own affair, I will acquaint you with some more circumstance
concern myself." and these Mrs Miller have express great desire
and curiosity to hear, he begin and relate to she his whole history,
without once mention the name of Sophia.
there be a kind of sympathy in honest mind, by mean of which they
give an easy credit to each other. Mrs Miller believe all which Jones
tell she to be true, and expr much pity and concern for he. she
be begin to comment on the story, but Jones interrupt she; for,
as the hour of assignation now draw nigh, he begin to stipulate for a
second interview with the lady that evening, which he promise should
be the last at her house; swearing, at the same time, that she be one
of great distinction, and that nothing but what be intirely innocent
be to pass between they; and I do firmly believe he intend to keep
his word.
Mrs Miller be at length prevail on, and Jones depart to his
chamber, where he sit alone till twelve o'clock, but no Lady Bellaston
appear.
as we have say that this lady have a great affection for Jones, and as
it must have appear that she really have so, the reader may perhaps
wonder at the first failure of her appointment, as she apprehend he
to be confine by sickness, a season when friendship seem most to
require such visit. this behaviour, therefore, in the lady, may, by
some, be condemn as unnatural; but that be not our fault; for our
business be only to record truth.
Chapter vi.
contain a scene which we doubt not will affect all our reader.
Mr Jones close not his eye during all the former part of the night;
not owe to any uneasiness which he conceive at be disappoint
by Lady Bellaston; nor be Sophia herself, though most of his waking
hour be justly to be charge to her account, the present cause of
dispel his slumber. in fact, poor Jones be one of the
well-natured fellow alive, and have all that weakness which be call
compassion, and which distinguish this imperfect character from that
noble firmness of mind, which roll a man, as it be, within himself,
and like a polished bowl, enable he to run through the world without
be once stop by the calamity which happen to other. he could
not help, therefore, compassionate the situation of poor Nancy,
whose love for Mr Nightingale seem to he so apparent, that he be
astonish at the blindness of her mother, who have more than once, the
precede evening, remark to he the great change in the temper of
her daughter, "who from be," she say, "one of the lively,
merry girl in the world, be, on a sudden, become all gloom and
melancholy."
Sleep, however, at length get the well of all resistance; and now,
as if he have already be a deity, as the antient imagine, and an
offend one too, he seem to enjoy his dear-buy conquest.--to
speak simply, and without any metaphor, Mr Jones sleep till eleven the
next morning, and would, perhaps, have continue in the same quiet
situation much long, have not a violent uproar awaken he.
Partridge be now summon, who, be ask what be the matter,
answer, "that there be a dreadful hurricane below-stair; that
Miss Nancy be in fit; and that the other sister, and the mother,
be both cry and lament over she." Jones express much
concern at this news; which Partridge endeavour to relieve, by
say, with a smile, "he fancy the young lady be in no danger of
death; for that Susan" (which be the name of the maid) "have give
he to understand, it be nothing more than a common affair. in
short," say he, "Miss Nancy hath have a mind to be as wise as her
mother; thatbe all; she be a little hungry, it seem, and so sit
down to dinner before grace be say; and so there be a child come
for the Foundling Hospital."----"prithee, leave thy stupid jesting,"
cry Jones. "be the misery of these poor wretch a subject of
mirth? go immediately to Mrs Miller, and tell she I beg leave--stay,
you will make some blunder; I will go myself; for she desire I to
breakfast with she." he then rise and dress himself as fast as he
could; and while he be dress, Partridge, notwithstanding many
severe rebuke, could not avoid throw forth certain piece of
brutality, commonly call jest, on this occasion. Jones be no
soon dressed than he walk downstairs, and knock at the door,
be presently admit by the maid, into the outward parlour, which
be as empty of company as it be of any apparatus for eat. Mrs
Miller be in the inner room with her daughter, whence the maid
presently bring a message to Mr Jones, "that her mistress hop he
would excuse the disappointment, but an accident have happen, which
make it impossible for she to have the pleasure of his company at
breakfast that day; and beg his pardon for not send he up
notice soon." Jones desire, "she would give herself no trouble
about anything so trifle as his disappointment; that he be
heartily sorry for the occasion; and that if he could be of any
service to she, she might command he."
he have scarce speak these word, when Mrs Miller, who hear they all,
suddenly throw open the door, and come out to he, in a flood of
tear, say, "o Mr Jones! you be certainly one of the good young man
alive. I give you a thousand thank for your kind offer of your
service; but, alas! sir, it be out of your power to preserve my poor
girl.--O my child! my child! she be undo, she be ruin for ever!"
"I hope, madam," say Jones, "no villain"----"O Mr Jones!" say she,
"that villain who yesterday leave my lodging, hath betray my poor
girl; hath destroy her.--I know you be a man of honour. you have a
good--a noble heart, Mr Jones. the action to which I have be myself
a witness, could proceed from no other. I will tell you all: nay,
indeed, it be impossible, after what hath happen, to keep it a
secret. that Nightingale, that barbarous villain, hath undo my
daughter. she be--she be--oh! Mr Jones, my girl be with child by he;
and in that condition he hath desert she. here! here, sir, be his
cruel letter: read it, Mr Jones, and tell I if such another monster
life."
the letter be as follow:
"DEAR NANCY,
"as I find it impossible to mention to you what, I be afraid, will
be no less shocking to you, than it be to I, I have take this
method to inform you, that my father insist upon my immediately
pay my address to a young lady of fortune, whom he hath
provide for my--I need not write the detest word. your own good
understanding will make you sensible, how entirely I be oblige to
an obedience, by which I shall be for ever exclude from your dear
arm. the fondness of your mother may encourage you to trust she
with the unhappy consequence of our love, which may be easily keep a
secret from the world, and for which I will take care to provide, as
I will for you. I wish you may feel less on this account than I have
suffer; but summon all your fortitude to your assistance, and
forgive and forget the man, whom nothing but the prospect of certain
ruin could have force to write this letter. I bid you forget I, I
mean only as a lover; but the good of friend you shall ever find in
your faithful, though unhappy,
"J. N."
when Jones have read this letter, they both stand silent during a
minute, look at each other; at last he begin thus: "I cannot
express, madam, how much I be shock at what I have read; yet let I
beg you, in one particular, to take the writer's advice. consider the
reputation of your daughter."----"It be go, it be lose, Mr Jones,"
cry she, "as well as her innocence. she receive the letter in a
room full of company, and immediately swoon away upon open it,
the content be know to every one present. but the loss of her
reputation, bad as it be, be not the bad; I shall lose my child; she
hath attempt twice to destroy herself already; and though she hath
be hitherto prevent, vow she will not outlive it; nor could I
myself outlive any accident of that nature.--what then will become of
my little Betsy, a helpless infant orphan? and the poor little wretch
will, I believe, break her heart at the misery with which she see
her sister and myself distract, while she be ignorant of the cause.
o 'tis the most sensible, and good-natured little thing! the
barbarous, cruel----hath destroy we all. o my poor child! be this
the reward of all my care? be this the fruit of all my prospect?
have I so chearfully undergo all the labour and duty of a mother?
have I be so tender of their infancy, so careful of their education?
have I be toil so many year, deny myself even the
convenience of life, to provide some little sustenance for they, to
lose one or both in such a manner?" "indeed, madam," say Jones, with
tear in his eye, "I pity you from my soul."--"O! Mr Jones," answer
she, "even you, though I know the goodness of your heart, can have no
idea of what I feel. the good, the kind, the most dutiful of
child! o my poor Nancy, the darling of my soul! the delight of my
eye! the pride of my heart! too much, indeed, my pride; for to those
foolish, ambitious hope, arise from her beauty, I owe her ruin.
alas! I see with pleasure the liking which this young man have for she.
I think it an honourable affection; and flatter my foolish vanity
with the thought of see she married to one so much her superior.
and a thousand time in my presence, nay, often in your, he hath
endeavour to soothe and encourage these hope by the most generous
expression of disinterested love, which he hath always direct to my
poor girl, and which I, as well as she, believe to be real. could I
have believe that these be only snare lay to betray the innocence
of my child, and for the ruin of we all?"--At these word little Betsy
come run into the room, cry, "dear mamma, for heaven's sake
come to my sister; for she be in another fit, and my cousin cannot hold
she." Mrs Miller immediately obey the summon; but first order
Betsy to stay with Mr Jones, and beg he to entertain she a few
minute, say, in the most pathetic voice, "good heaven! let I
preserve one of my child at least."
Jones, in compliance with this request, do all he could to comfort
the little girl, though he be, in reality, himself very highly
affect with Mrs Miller's story. he tell she "her sister would be
soon very well again; that by take on in that manner she would not
only make her sister bad, but make her mother ill too." "indeed,
sir," say she, "I would not do anything to hurt they for the world. I
would burst my heart rather than they should see I cry.--but my poor
sister cannot see I cry.--I am afraid she will never be able to see I
cry any more. indeed, I cannot part with she; indeed, I can't.--and
then poor mamma too, what will become of her?--She say she will die
too, and leave I: but I be resolve I willnot be leave behind." "and be
you not afraid to die, my little Betsy?" say Jones. "yes," answer
she, "I be always afraid to die; because I must have leave my mamma,
and my sister; but I be not afraid of go anywhere with those I
love."
Jones be so pleased with this answer, that he eagerly kiss the
child; and soon after Mrs Miller return, say, "she thank heaven
Nancy be now come to herself. and now, Betsy," say she, "you may go
in, for your sister be well, and long to see you." she then turn
to Jones, and begin to renew her apology for have disappoint he
of his breakfast.
"I hope, madam," say Jones, "I shall have a more exquisite repast
than any you could have provide for I. this, I assure you, will be
the case, if I can do any service to this little family of love. but
whatever success may attend my endeavour, I be resolve to attempt
it. I be very much deceive in Mr Nightingale, if, notwithstanding
what hath happen, he hath not much goodness of heart at the bottom,
as well as a very violent affection for your daughter. if this be the
case, I think the picture which I shall lay before he will affect
he. Endeavour, madam, to comfort yourself, and Miss Nancy, as well as
you can. I will go instantly in quest of Mr Nightingale; and I hope to
bring you good news."
Mrs Miller fall upon her knee and invoke all the blessing of heaven
upon Mr Jones; to which she afterwards add the most passionate
expression of gratitude. he then depart to find Mr Nightingale, and
the good woman return to comfort her daughter, who be somewhat
cheare at what her mother tell she; and both join in resound the
praise of Mr Jones.
Chapter vii.
the interview between Mr Jones and Mr Nightingale.
the good or evil we confer on other very often, I believe, recoil on
ourselves. for as man of a benign disposition enjoy their own act of
beneficence equally with those to whom they be do, so there be
scarce any nature so entirely diabolical, as to be capable of do
injury, without pay themselves some pang for the ruin which they
bring on their fellow-creature.
Mr Nightingale, at least, be not such a person. on the contrary,
Jones find he in his new lodging, sit melancholy by the fire,
and silently lament the unhappy situation in which he have place
poor Nancy. he no soon see his friend appear than he arise hastily
to meet he; and after much congratulation say, "nothing could be
more opportune than this kind visit; for I be never more in the
spleen in my life."
"I be sorry," answer Jones, "that I bring news very unlikely to
relieve you: nay, what I be convinced must, of all other, shock you
the most. however, it be necessary you should know it. without further
preface, then, I come to you, Mr Nightingale, from a worthy family,
which you have involve in misery and ruin." Mr Nightingale change
colour at these word; but Jones, without regard it, proceed, in
the lively manner, to paint the tragical story with which the
reader be acquaint in the last chapter.
Nightingale never once interrupt the narration, though he discover
violent emotion at many part of it. but when it be conclude, after
fetch a deep sigh, he say, "what you tell I, my friend, affect
I in the tender manner. sure there never be so cursed an accident
as the poor girl's betray my letter. her reputation might otherwise
have be safe, and the affair might have remain a profound secret;
and then the girl might have go off never the bad; for many such
thing happen in this town: and if the husband should suspect a
little, when it be too late, it will be his wise conduct to conceal
his suspicion both from his wife and the world."
"indeed, my friend," answer Jones, "this could not have be the
case with your poor Nancy. you have so entirely gain her affection,
that it be the loss of you, and not of her reputation, which afflict
she, and will end in the destruction of she and her family." "Nay, for
that matter, I promise you," cry Nightingale, "she hath my
affection so absolutely, that my wife, whoever she be to be, will
have very little share in they." "and be it possible then," say
Jones, "you can think of desert she?" "why, what can I do?"
answer the other. "ask Miss Nancy," reply Jones warmly. "in the
condition to which you have reduce she, I sincerely think she ought
to determine what reparation you shall make she. her interest alone,
and not your, ought to be your sole consideration. but if you ask I
what you shall do, what can you do less," cry Jones, "than fulfil
the expectation of her family, and her own? Nay, I sincerely tell
you, they be mine too, ever since I first see you together. you will
pardon I if I presume on the friendship you have favour I with,
move as I be with compassion for those poor creature. but your own
heart will well suggest to you, whether you have never intend, by
your conduct, to persuade the mother, as well as the daughter, into an
opinion, that you design honourably: and if so, though there may
have be no direct promise of marriage in the case, I will leave to
your own good understanding, how far you be bind to proceed."
"Nay, I must not only confess what you have hint," say Nightingale;
"but I be afraid even that very promise you mention I have give."
"and can you, after own that," say Jones, "hesitate a moment?"
"consider, my friend," answer the other; "I know you be a man of
honour, and would advise no one to act contrary to its rule; if there
be no other objection, can I, after this publication of she
disgrace, think of such an alliance with honour?" "undoubtedly,"
reply Jones, "and the very good and true honour, which be
goodness, require it of you. as you mention a scruple of this kind,
you will give I leave to examine it. can you with honour be guilty of
have under false pretence deceive a young woman and her family,
and of have by these mean treacherously rob she of her
innocence? can you, with honour, be the knowing, the wilful occasion,
nay, the artful contriver of the ruin of a human being? can you, with
honour, destroy the fame, the peace, nay, probably, both the life and
soul too, of this creature? can honour bear the thought, that this
creature be a tender, helpless, defenceless, young woman? a young
woman, who love, who doat on you, who die for you; who hath place
the utmost confidence in your promise; and to that confidence hath
sacrifice everything which be dear to she? can honour support such
contemplation as these a moment?"
"common sense, indeed," say Nightingale, "warrant all you say; but
yet you well know the opinion of the world be so contrary to it, that,
be I to marry a whore, though my own, I should be ashamed of ever
show my face again."
"fie upon it, Mr Nightingale!" say Jones, "do not call she by so
ungenerous a name: when you promise to marry she she become your
wife; and she hath sin more against prudence than virtue. and what
be this world which you would be ashamed to face but the vile, the
foolish, and the profligate? forgive I if I say such a shame must
proceed from false modesty, which always attend false honour as its
shadow.--But I be well assured there be not a man of real sense and
goodness in the world who would not honour and applaud the action.
but, admit no other would, would not your own heart, my friend,
applaud it? and do not the warm, rapturous sensation, which we feel
from the consciousness of an honest, noble, generous, benevolent
action, convey more delight to the mind than the undeserved praise of
million? set the alternative fairly before your eye. on the one
side, see this poor, unhappy, tender, believe girl, in the arm of
her wretched mother, breathe she last. hear her break heart in
agony, sigh out your name; and lamenting, rather than accuse,
the cruelty which weigh she down to destruction. paint to your
imagination the circumstance of her fond despairing parent, drive to
madness, or, perhaps, to death, by the loss of her lovely daughter.
view the poor, helpless, orphan infant; and when your mind hath dwelt
a moment only on such idea, consider yourself as the cause of all the
ruin of this poor, little, worthy, defenceless family. on the other
side, consider yourself as relieve they from their temporary
suffering. think with what joy, with what transport that lovely
creature will fly to your arm. see her blood return to her pale
cheek, her fire to her languid eye, and rapture to her tortured
breast. consider the exultation of her mother, the happiness of all.
think of this little family make by one act of yours completely happy.
think of this alternative, and sure I be mistaken in my friend if it
require any long deliberation whether he will sink these wretch
down for ever, or, by one generous, noble resolution, raise they all
from the brink of misery and despair to the high pitch of human
happiness. add to this but one consideration more; the consideration
that it be your duty so to do--that the misery from which you will
relieve these poor people be the misery which you yourself have
wilfully bring upon they."
"o, my dear friend!" cry Nightingale, "I want not your eloquence
to rouse I. I pity poor Nancy from my soul, and would willingly give
anything in my power that no familiarity have ever pass between we.
Nay, believe I, I have many struggle with my passion before I could
prevail with myself to write that cruel letter, which hath cause all
the misery in that unhappy family. if I have no inclination to consult
but my own, I would marry she to-morrow morning: I would, by heaven!
but you will easily imagine how impossible it would be to prevail on
my father to consent to such a match; besides, he hath provide
another for I; and to-morrow, by his express command, I be to wait on
the lady."
"I have not the honour to know your father," say Jones; "but, suppose
he could be persuade, would you yourself consent to the only mean of
preserve these poor people?" "as eagerly as I would pursue my
happiness," answer Nightingale: "for I never shall find it in any
other woman.--O, my dear friend! could you imagine what I have feel
within these twelve hour for my poor girl, I be convinced she would
not engross all your pity. passion lead I only to she; and, if I have
any foolish scruple of honour, you have fully satisfy they: could
my father be induce to comply with my desire, nothing would be
want to compleat my own happiness or that of my Nancy."
"then I be resolve to undertake it," say Jones. "you must not be
angry with I, in whatever light it may be necessary to set this
affair, which, you may depend on it, could not otherwise be long hid
from he: for thing of this nature make a quick progress when once
they get abroad, as this unhappily hath already. besides, should any
fatal accident follow, as upon my soul I be afraid will, unless
immediately prevent, the public would ring of your name in a manner
which, if your father hath common humanity, must offend he. if you
will therefore tell I where I may find the old gentleman, I will not
lose a moment in the business; which, while I pursue, you cannot do a
more generous action than by pay a visit to the poor girl. you will
find I have not exaggerate in the account I have give of the
wretchedness of the family."
Nightingale immediately consent to the proposal; and now, have
acquaint Jones with his father's lodging, and the coffee-house where
he would most probably find he, he hesitate a moment, and then say,
"my dear Tom, you be go to undertake an impossibility. if you know
my father you would never think of obtain his consent.----Stay,
there be one way--suppose you tell he I be already marry, it might
be easy to reconcile he to the fact after it be do; and, upon my
honour, I be so affected with what you have say, and I love my Nancy
so passionately, I almost wish it be do, whatever might be the
consequence."
Jones greatly approve the hint, and promise to pursue it. they then
separate, Nightingale to visit his Nancy, and Jones in quest of the
old gentleman.
Chapter viii.
what pass between Jones and old Mr Nightingale; with the arrival of
a person not yet mention in this history.
notwithstanding the sentiment of the roman satirist, which deny the
divinity of fortune, and the opinion of Seneca to the same purpose;
Cicero, who be, I believe, a wise man than either of they, expressly
hold the contrary; and certain it be, there be some incident in
life so very strange and unaccountable, that it seem to require more
than human skill and foresight in produce they.
of this kind be what now happen to Jones, who find Mr Nightingale
the elder in so critical a minute, that Fortune, if she be really
worthy all the worship she receive at Rome, could not have contrive
such another. in short, the old gentleman, and the father of the young
lady whom he intend for his son, have be hard at it for many hour;
and the latter be just now go, and have leave the former delight
with the thought that he have succeed in a long contention, which
have be between the two father of the future bride and bridegroom;
in which both endeavour to overreach the other, and, as it not
rarely happen in such case, both have retreat fully satisfied of
have obtain the victory.
this gentleman, whom Mr Jones now visit, be what they call a man of
the world; that be to say, a man who direct his conduct in this world
as one who, be fully persuade there be no other, be resolve to
make the most of this. in his early year he have be breed to trade;
but, have acquire a very good fortune, he have lately decline his
business; or, to speak more properly, have change it from deal in
good, to deal only in money, of which he have always a plentiful
fund at command, and of which he know very well how to make a very
plentiful advantage, sometimes of the necessity of private man, and
sometimes of those of the public. he have indeed converse so entirely
with money, that it may be almost doubted whether he imagine there
be any other thing really exist in the world; this at least may be
certainly aver, that he firmly believe nothing else to have any
real value.
the reader will, I fancy, allow that Fortune could not have cull out
a more improper person for Mr Jones to attack with any probability of
success; nor could the whimsical lady have direct this attack at a
more unseasonable time.
as money then be always uppermost in this gentleman's thought, so
the moment he see a stranger within his door it immediately occur
to his imagination, that such stranger be either come to bring he
money, or to fetch it from he. and accord as one or other of these
thought prevail, he conceive a favourable or unfavourable idea of
the person who approach he.
Unluckily for Jones, the latter of these be the ascendant at present;
for as a young gentleman have visit he the day before, with a bill
from his son for a play debt, he apprehend, at the first sight of
Jones, that he be come on such another errand. Jones therefore have no
soon tell he that he be come on his son's account than the old
gentleman, be confirm in his suspicion, burst forth into an
exclamation, "that he would lose his labour." "be it then possible,
sir," answer Jones, "that you can guess my business?" "if I do guess
it," reply the other, "I repeat again to you, you will lose your
labour. what, I suppose you be one of those spark who lead my son
into all those scene of riot and debauchery, which will be his
destruction? but I shall pay no more of his bill, I promise you. I
expect he will quit all such company for the future. if I have imagine
otherwise, I should not have provide a wife for he; for I would be
instrumental in the ruin of nobody." "how, sir," say Jones, "and be
this lady of your providing?" "pray, sir," answer the old gentleman,
"how come it to be any concern of yours?"--"Nay, dear sir," reply
Jones, "be not offend that I interest myself in what regard your
son's happiness, for whom I have so great an honour and value. it be
upon that very account I come to wait upon you. I cannot express the
satisfaction you have give I by what you say; for I do assure you
your son be a person for whom I have the high honour.--Nay, sir, it
be not easy to express the esteem I have for you; who could be so
generous, so good, so kind, so indulgent to provide such a match for
your son; a woman, who, I dare swear, will make he one of the
happy man upon earth."
there be scarce anything which so happily introduce man to our good
liking, as have conceive some alarm at their first appearance; when
once those apprehension begin to vanish we soon forget the fear
which they occasion, and look on ourselves as indebted for our
present ease to those very person who at first raise our fear.
thus it happen to Nightingale, who no soon find that Jones have no
demand on he, as he suspect, than he begin to be pleased with his
presence. "pray, good sir," say he, "be pleased to sit down. I do not
remember to have ever have the pleasure of see you before; but if
you be a friend of my son, and have anything to say concern this
young lady, I shall be glad to hear you. as to she make he happy,
it will be his own fault if she doth not. I have discharge my duty,
in take care of the main article. she will bring he a fortune
capable of make any reasonable, prudent, sober man, happy."
"undoubtedly," cry Jones, "for she be in herself a fortune; so
beautiful, so genteel, so sweet-temper, and so well-educate; she be
indeed a most accomplished young lady; sing admirably well, and hath
a most delicate hand at the harpsichord." "I do not know any of these
matter," answer the old gentleman, "for I never see the lady: but I
do not like she the bad for what you tell I; and I be the well
pleased with her father for not lay any stress on these
qualification in our bargain. I shall always think it a proof of his
understanding. a silly fellow would have bring in these article as
an addition to her fortune; but, to give he his due, he never
mention any such matter; though to be sure they be no
disparagement to a woman." "I do assure you, sir," cry Jones, "she
hath they all in the most eminent degree: for my part, I own I be
afraid you might have be a little backward, a little less inclined
to the match; for your son tell I you have never see the lady;
therefore I come, sir, in that case, to entreat you, to conjure you,
as you value the happiness of your son, not to be averse to his match
with a woman who hath not only all the good quality I have
mention, but many more."--"If that be your business, sir," say the
old gentleman, "we be both oblige to you; and you may be perfectly
easy; for I give you my word I be very well satisfied with her
fortune." "Sir," answer Jones, "I honour you every moment more and
more. to be so easily satisfied, so very moderate on that account, be
a proof of the soundness of your understanding, as well as the
nobleness of your mind."----"not so very moderate, young gentleman,
not so very moderate," answer the father.--"still more and more
noble," reply Jones; "and give I leave to add, sensible: for sure
it be little less than madness to consider money as the sole
foundation of happiness. such a woman as this with her little, her
nothing of a fortune"--"i find," cry the old gentleman, "you have a
pretty just opinion of money, my friend, or else you be well
acquaint with the person of the lady than with her circumstance.
why, pray, what fortune do you imagine this lady to have?" "what
fortune?" cry Jones, "why, too contemptible a one to be name for
your son."--"Well, well, well," say the other, "perhaps he might have
do well."--"That I deny," say Jones, "for she be one of the good
of woman."--"Ay, ay, but in point of fortune I mean," answer the
other. "and yet, as to that now, how much do you imagine your friend
be to have?"--"how much?" cry Jones, "how much? why, at the utmost,
perhaps £200." "do you mean to banter I, young gentleman?" say the
father, a little angry. "no, upon my soul," answer Jones, "I be in
earnest: nay, I believe I have go to the utmost farthing. if I do
the lady an injury, I ask her pardon." "indeed you do," cry the
father; "I be certain she hath fifty time that sum, and she shall
produce fifty to that before I consent that she shall marry my son."
"Nay," say Jones, "it be too late to talk of consent now; if she have
not fifty farthing your son be marry."--"My son marry!" answer
the old gentleman, with surprize. "Nay," say Jones, "I think you
be unacquainted with it." "my son marry to Miss Harris!" answer
he again. "to Miss Harris!" say Jones; "no, sir; to Miss Nancy
Miller, the daughter of Mrs Miller, at whose house he lodge; a young
lady, who, though her mother be reduce to let lodgings--"--"Are you
bantering, or be you in earnest?" cry the father, with a most
solemn voice. "indeed, sir," answer Jones, "I scorn the character of
a banterer. I come to you in most serious earnest, imagine, as I
find true, that your son have never dare acquaint you with a match so
much inferior to he in point of fortune, though the reputation of the
lady will suffer it no long to remain a secret."
while the father stand like one strike suddenly dumb at this news, a
gentleman come into the room, and salute he by the name of brother.
but though these two be in consanguinity so nearly related, they
be in their disposition almost the opposite to each other. the
brother who now arrive have likewise be breed to trade, in which he
no soon see himself worth £6000 than he purchase a small estate
with the great part of it, and retire into the country; where he
marry the daughter of an unbeneficed clergyman; a young lady, who,
though she have neither beauty nor fortune, have recommend herself to
his choice entirely by her good humour, of which she possess a very
large share.
with this woman he have, during twenty-five year, live a life more
resemble the model which certain poet ascribe to the golden age,
than any of those pattern which be furnish by the present time.
by she he have four child, but none of they arrive at maturity,
except only one daughter, whom, in vulgar language, he and his wife
have spoil; that is, have educate with the utmost tenderness and
fondness, which she return to such a degree, that she have actually
refuse a very extraordinary match with a gentleman a little turn of
forty, because she could not bring herself to part with her parent.
the young lady whom Mr Nightingale have intend for his son be a near
neighbour of his brother, and an acquaintance of his niece; and in
reality it be upon the account of his project match that he be now
come to town; not, indeed, to forward, but to dissuade his brother
from a purpose which he conceive would inevitably ruin his nephew;
for he foresaw no other event from a union with Miss Harris,
notwithstanding the largeness of her fortune, as neither her person
nor mind seem to he to promise any kind of matrimonial felicity:
for she be very tall, very thin, very ugly, very affected, very
silly, and very ill-natured.
his brother, therefore, no soon mention the marriage of his nephew
with Miss Miller, than he expr the utmost satisfaction; and when
the father have very bitterly revile his son, and pronounce sentence
of beggary upon he, the uncle begin in the following manner:
"if you be a little cool, brother, I would ask you whether you love
your son for his sake or for your own. you would answer, I suppose,
and so I suppose you think, for his sake; and doubtless it be his
happiness which you intend in the marriage you propose for he.
"now, brother, to prescribe rule of happiness to other hath always
appear to I very absurd, and to insist on do this, very
tyrannical. it be a vulgar error, I know; but it be, nevertheless, an
error. and if this be absurd in other thing, it be mostly so in the
affair of marriage, the happiness of which depend entirely on the
affection which subsist between the party.
"I have therefore always think it unreasonable in parent to desire
to chuse for their child on this occasion; since to force affection
be an impossible attempt; nay, so much doth love abhor force, that I
know not whether, through an unfortunate but uncurable perverseness in
our nature, it may not be even impatient of persuasion.
"it be, however, true that, though a parent will not, I think, wisely
prescribe, he ought to be consult on this occasion; and, in
strictness, perhaps, should at least have a negative voice. my nephew,
therefore, I own, in marrying, without ask your advice, hath be
guilty of a fault. but, honestly speak, brother, have you not a
little promote this fault? have not your frequent declaration on
this subject give he a moral certainty of your refusal, where there
be any deficiency in point of fortune? Nay, doth not your present
anger arise solely from that deficiency? and if he hath fail in his
duty here, do you not as much exceed that authority when you
absolutely bargain with he for a woman, without his knowledge, whom
you yourself never see, and whom, if you have see and know as well as
I, it must have be madness in you to have ever think of bring
she into your family?
"still I own my nephew in a fault; but surely it be not an
unpardonable fault. he hath act indeed without your consent, in a
matter in which he ought to have ask it, but it be in a matter in
which his interest be principally concerned; you yourself must and
will acknowledge that you consult his interest only, and if he
unfortunately differed from you, and hath be mistaken in his notion
of happiness, will you, brother, if you love your son, carry he still
wide from the point? will you increase the ill consequence of his
simple choice? will you endeavour to make an event certain misery to
he, which may accidentally prove so? in a word, brother, because he
hath put it out of your power to make his circumstance as affluent as
you would, will you distress they as much as you can?"
by the force of the true catholic faith St Anthony win upon the
fish. Orpheus and Amphion go a little far, and by the charm
of music enchant thing merely inanimate. wonderful, both! but
neither history nor fable have ever yet venture to record an instance
of any one, who, by force of argument and reason, hath triumph over
habitual avarice.
Mr Nightingale, the father, instead of attempt to answer his
brother, content himself with only observe, that they have always
differ in their sentiment concern the education of their
child. "I wish," say he, "brother, you would have confine your
care to your own daughter, and never have trouble yourself with my
son, who hath, I believe, as little profit by your precept, as by
your example." for young Nightingale be his uncle's godson, and have
live more with he than with his father. so that the uncle have often
declare he love his nephew almost equally with his own child.
Jones fall into rapture with this good gentleman; and when, after
much persuasion, they find the father grow still more and more
irritated, instead of appeased, Jones conduct the uncle to his
nephew at the house of Mrs Miller.
Chapter ix.
contain strange matter.
at his return to his lodging, Jones find the situation of affair
greatly alter from what they have be in at his departure. the
mother, the two daughter, and young Mr Nightingale, be now sit down
to supper together, when the uncle be, at his own desire, introduce
without any ceremony into the company, to all of whom he be well
know; for he have several time visit his nephew at that house.
the old gentleman immediately walk up to Miss Nancy, salute and
wish her joy, as he do afterwards the mother and the other sister;
and lastly, he pay the proper compliment to his nephew, with the
same good humour and courtesy, as if his nephew have marry his equal
or superior in fortune, with all the previous requisite first
perform.
Miss Nancy and her suppose husband both turn pale, and look
rather foolish than otherwise upon the occasion; but Mrs Miller take
the first opportunity of withdraw; and, have send for Jones into
the dining-room, she throw herself at his foot, and in a most
passionate flood of tear, call he her good angel, the preserver of
her poor little family, with many other respectful and endear
appellation, and make he every acknowledgment which the high
benefit can extract from the most grateful heart.
after the first gust of her passion be a little over, which she
declare, if she have not vent, would have burst she, she proceed
to inform Mr Jones that all matter be settle between Mr
Nightingale and her daughter, and that they be to be marry the
next morning; at which Mr Jones have express much pleasure, the
poor woman fall again into a fit of joy and thanksgiving, which he at
length with difficulty silence, and prevail on she to return with
he back to the company, whom they find in the same good humour in
which they have leave they.
this little society now past two or three very agreeable hour
together, in which the uncle, who be a very great lover of his
bottle, have so well ply his nephew, that this latter, though not
drunk, begin to be somewhat fluster; and now Mr Nightingale, take
the old gentleman with he upstairs into the apartment he have lately
occupy, unbosomed himself as follows:--
"as you have be always the good and kind of uncle to I, and as
you have show such unparalleled goodness in forgive this match,
which to be sure may be think a little improvident, I should never
forgive myself if I attempt to deceive you in anything." he then
confess the truth, and open the whole affair.
"how, Jack?" say the old gentleman, "and be you really then not
married to this young woman?" "no, upon my honour," answer
Nightingale, "I have tell you the simple truth." "my dear boy," cry
the uncle, kiss he, "I be heartily glad to hear it. I never be
well pleased in my life. if you have be marry I should have
assist you as much as be in my power to have make the good of a bad
matter; but there be a great difference between consider a thing
which be already do and irrecoverable, and that which be yet to do.
let your reason have fair play, Jack, and you will see this match in
so foolish and preposterous a light, that there will be no need of any
dissuasive argument." "how, sir?" reply young Nightingale, "be
there this difference between have already do an act, and be in
honour engage to do it?" "Pugh!" say the uncle, "honour be a
creature of the world's making, and the world hath the power of a
creator over it, and may govern and direct it as they please. now you
well know how trivial these breach of contract be think; even the
gross make but the wonder and conversation of a day. be there a man
who afterwards will be more backward in give you his sister, or
daughter? or be there any sister or daughter who would be more
backward to receive you? Honour be not concerned in these
engagement." "pardon I, dear sir," cry Nightingale, "I can never
think so; and not only honour, but conscience and humanity, be
concerned. I be well satisfied, that, be I now to disappoint the
young creature, her death would be the consequence, and I should look
upon myself as her murderer; nay, as her murderer by the cruell of
all method, by break her heart." "break her heart, indeed! no, no,
Jack," cry the uncle, "the heart of woman be not so soon break;
they be tough, boy, they be tough." "but, sir," answer
Nightingale, "my own affection be engage, and I never could be
happy with any other woman. how often have I hear you say, that
child should be always suffer to chuse for themselves, and that
you would let my cousin Harriet do so?" "why, ay," reply the old
gentleman, "so I would have they; but then I would have they chuse
wisely.--Indeed, Jack, you must and shall leave the girl."----"Indeed,
uncle," cry the other, "I must and will have she." "you will, young
gentleman;" say the uncle; "I do not expect such a word from you. I
should not wonder if you have use such language to your father, who
hath always treat you like a dog, and keep you at the distance which
a tyrant preserve over his subject; but I, who have live with you
upon an equal footing, might surely expect well usage: but I know
how to account for it all: it be all owe to your preposterous
education, in which I have have too little share. there be my daughter,
now, whom I have bring up as my friend, never doth anything without
my advice, nor ever refuse to take it when I give it she." "you have
never yet give her advice in an affair of this kind," say
Nightingale; "for I be greatly mistaken in my cousin, if she would be
very ready to obey even your most positive command in abandon she
inclination." "donot abuse my girl," answer the old gentleman with
some emotion; "donot abuse my Harriet. I have bring she up to have
no inclination contrary to my own. by suffer she to do whatever
she please, I have enure she to a habit of be pleased to do
whatever I like." "Pardon, I, sir," say Nightingale, "I have not the
least design to reflect on my cousin, for whom I have the great
esteem; and indeed I be convinced you will never put she to so severe
a tryal, or lie such hard command on she as you would do on me.--But,
dear sir, let we return to the company; for they will begin to be
uneasy at our long absence. I must beg one favour of my dear uncle,
which be that he would not say anything to shock the poor girl or her
mother." "oh! you need not fear I," answer he, "I understand myself
too well to affront woman; so I will readily grant you that favour;
and in return I must expect another of you." "there be but few of
your command, sir," say Nightingale, "which I shall not very
chearfully obey." "Nay, sir, I ask nothing," say the uncle, "but the
honour of your company home to my lodging, that I may reason the case
a little more fully with you; for I would, if possible, have the
satisfaction of preserve my family, notwithstanding the headstrong
folly of my brother, who, in his own opinion, be the wise man in the
world."
Nightingale, who well know his uncle to be as headstrong as his
father, submit to attend he home, and then they both return back
into the room, where the old gentleman promise to carry himself with
the same decorum which he have before maintain.
Chapter x.
a short chapter, which conclude the book.
the long absence of the uncle and nephew have occasion some disquiet
in the mind of all whom they have leave behind they; and the more, as,
during the precede dialogue, the uncle have more than once elevate
his voice, so as to be hear downstair; which, though they could not
distinguish what he say, have cause some evil foreboding in Nancy and
her mother, and, indeed, even in Jones himself.
when the good company, therefore, again assemble, there be a visible
alteration in all their face; and the good-humour which, at their
last meeting, universally shine forth in every countenance, be now
change into a much less agreeable aspect. it be a change, indeed,
common enough to the weather in this climate, from sunshine to cloud,
from June to December.
this alteration be not, however, greatly remark by any present; for
as they be all now endeavour to conceal their own thought, and
to act a part, they become all too busily engage in the scene to be
spectator of it. thus neither the uncle nor nephew see any symptom
of suspicion in the mother or daughter; nor do the mother or daughter
remark the overact complacence of the old man, nor the counterfeit
satisfaction which grin in the feature of the young one.
something like this, I believe, frequently happen, where the whole
attention of two friend be engage in the part which each be to
act, in order to impose on the other, neither see nor suspect the
art practise against himself; and thus the thrust of both (to borrow
no improper metaphor on the occasion) alike take place.
from the same reason it be no unusual thing for both party to be
overreach in a bargain, though the one must be always the great
loser; as be he who sell a blind horse, and receive a bad note in
payment.
our company in about half an hour break up, and the uncle carry off
his nephew; but not before the latter have assure Miss Nancy, in a
whisper, that he would attend she early in the morning, and fulfil all
his engagement.
Jones, who be the least concerned in this scene, see the most. he do
indeed suspect the very fact; for, besides observe the great
alteration in the behaviour of the uncle, the distance he assume, and
his overstrained civility to Miss Nancy; the carry off a bridegroom
from his bride at that time of night be so extraordinary a proceeding
that it could be account for only by imagine that young
Nightingale have reveal the whole truth, which the apparent openness
of his temper, and his be fluster with liquor, make too probable.
while he be reason with himself, whether he should acquaint these
poor people with his suspicion, the maid of the house inform he
that a gentlewoman desire to speak with him.----He go immediately
out, and, take the candle from the maid, usher his visitant
upstairs, who, in the person of Mrs Honour, acquaint he with such
dreadful news concern his Sophia, that he immediately lose all
consideration for every other person; and his whole stock of
compassion be entirely swallow up in reflection on his own misery,
and on that of his unfortunate angel.
what this dreadful matter be, the reader will be inform, after we
have first relate the many precede step which produce it, and
those will be the subject of the follow book.
BOOK XV.
in which the history advances about two day.
Chapter i.
too short to need a preface.
there be a set of religious, or rather moral writer, who teach that
virtue be the certain road to happiness, and vice to misery, in this
world. a very wholesome and comfortable doctrine, and to which we have
but one objection, namely, that it be not true.
indeed, if by virtue these writer mean the exercise of those cardinal
virtue, which like good housewife stay at home, and mind only the
business of their own family, I shall very readily concede the point;
for so surely do all these contribute and lead to happiness, that I
could almost wish, in violation of all the antient and modern sage,
to call they rather by the name of wisdom, than by that of virtue;
for, with regard to this life, no system, I conceive, be ever wise
than that of the antient Epicureans, who hold this wisdom to
constitute the chief good; nor foolisher than that of their opposite,
those modern epicure, who place all felicity in the abundant
gratification of every sensual appetite.
but if by virtue be mean (as I almost think it ought) a certain
relative quality, which be always busy itself without-door, and
seem as much interested in pursue the good of other as its own; I
cannot so easily agree that this be the sure way to human happiness;
because I be afraid we must then include poverty and contempt, with
all the mischief which backbiting, envy, and ingratitude, can bring
on mankind, in our idea of happiness; nay, sometimes perhaps we shall
be oblige to wait upon the say happiness to a jail; since many by
the above virtue have bring themselves thither.
I have not now leisure to enter upon so large a field of speculation,
as here seem open upon I; my design be to wipe off a doctrine
that lie in my way; since, while Mr Jones be act the most virtuous
part imaginable in labour to preserve his fellow-creature from
destruction, the devil, or some other evil spirit, one perhaps
cloathe in human flesh, be hard at work to make he completely
miserable in the ruin of his Sophia.
this therefore would seem an exception to the above rule, if indeed it
be a rule; but as we have in our voyage through life see so many
other exception to it, we chuse to dispute the doctrine on which it
be found, which we donot apprehend to be Christian, which we be
convince be not true, and which be indeed destructive of one of the
noble argument that reason alone can furnish for the belief of
immortality.
but as the reader's curiosity (if he hath any) must be now awake, and
hungry, we shall provide to feed it as fast as we can.
Chapter ii.
in which be open a very black design against Sophia.
I remember a wise old gentleman who use to say, "when child be
do nothing, they be do mischief." I will not enlarge this
quaint say to the most beautiful part of the creation in general;
but so far I may be allow, that when the effect of female jealousy
do not appear openly in their proper colour of rage and fury, we may
suspect that mischievous passion to be at work privately, and
attempt to undermine, what it doth not attack above-ground.
this be exemplified in the conduct of Lady Bellaston, who, under all
the smile which she wear in her countenance, conceal much
indignation against Sophia; and as she plainly see that this young
lady stand between she and the full indulgence of her desire, she
resolve to get rid of she by some mean or other; nor be it long
before a very favourable opportunity of accomplish this present
itself to she.
the reader may be pleased to remember, that when Sophia be throw
into that consternation at the playhouse, by the wit and humour of a
set of young gentleman who call themselves the town, we inform he,
that she have put herself under the protection of a young nobleman, who
have very safely conduct she to her chair.
this nobleman, who frequently visit Lady Bellaston, have more than
once see Sophia there, since her arrival in town, and have conceive a
very great liking to she; which like, as beauty never look more
amiable than in distress, Sophia have in this fright so encreased, that
he might now, without any great impropriety, be say to be actually in
love with she.
it may easily be believe, that he would not suffer so handsome an
occasion of improve his acquaintance with the beloved object as now
offer itself to elapse, when even good breeding alone might have
prompt he to pay she a visit.
the next morning therefore, after this accident, he wait on Sophia,
with the usual compliment, and hop that she have receive no harm
from her last night's adventure.
as love, like fire, when once thoroughly kindle, be soon blow into a
flame, Sophia in a very short time compleate her conquest. time now
fly away unperceived, and the noble lord have be two hour in
company with the lady, before it enter into his head that he have
make too long a visit. though this circumstance alone would have
alarm Sophia, who be somewhat more a mistress of computation at
present; she have indeed much more pregnant evidence from the eye of
her lover of what past within his bosom; nay, though he do not make
any open declaration of his passion, yet many of his expression be
rather too warm, and too tender, to have be impute to complacence,
even in the age when such complacence be in fashion; the very reverse
of which be well known to be the reign mode at present.
Lady Bellaston have be apprize of his lordship's visit at his first
arrival; and the length of it very well satisfied she, that thing
go as she wish, and as indeed she have suspect the second time
she see this young couple together. this business, she rightly I think
conclude, that she should by no mean forward by mix in the
company while they be together; she therefore order her servant,
that when my lord be go, they should tell he she desire to speak
with he; and employ the intermediate time in meditate how good to
accomplish a scheme, which she make no doubt but his lordship would
very readily embrace the execution of.
Lord Fellamar (for that be the title of this young nobleman) be no
soon introduce to her ladyship, than she attack he in the
following strain: "bless I, my lord, be you here yet? I think my
servant have make a mistake, and let you go away; and I want to see
you about an affair of some importance."----"Indeed, Lady Bellaston,"
say he, "I donot wonder you be astonish at the length of my
visit; for I have staid above two hour, and I do not think I have
staid above half-a-one."----"what be I to conclude from thence, my
lord?" say she. "the company must be very agreeable which can make
time slide away so very deceitfully."----"Upon my honour," say he,
"the most agreeable I ever see. pray tell I, Lady Bellaston, who be
this blaze star which you have produce among we all of a
sudden?"----"what blaze star, my lord?" say she, affect a
surprize. "I mean," say he, "the lady I see here the other day, whom
I have last night in my arm at the playhouse, and to whom I have be
make that unreasonable visit."----"O, my cousin western!" say she;
"why, that blaze star, my lord, be the daughter of a country booby
squire, and hath be in town about a fortnight, for the first
time."----"Upon my soul," say he, "I should swear she have be breed
up in a court; for besides her beauty, I never see anything so
genteel, so sensible, so polite."----"O brave!" cry the lady, "my
cousin hath you, I find."----"Upon my honour," answer he, "I wish
she have; for I be in love with she to distraction."----"Nay, my
lord," say she, "it be not wish yourself very ill neither, for
she be a very great fortune: I assure you she be an only child, and
her father's estate be a good £3000 a-year." "then I can assure you,
madam," answer the lord, "I think she the good match in England."
"indeed, my lord," reply she, "if you like she, I heartily wish you
have she." "if you think so kindly of I, madam," say he, "as she be
a relation of your, will you do I the honour to propose it to her
father?" "and be you really then in earnest?" cry the lady, with
an affected gravity. "I hope, madam," answer he, "you have a well
opinion of I, than to imagine I would jest with your ladyship in an
affair of this kind." "indeed, then," say the lady, "I will most
readily propose your lordship to her father; and I can, I believe,
assure you of his joyful acceptance of the proposal; but there be a
bar, which I be almost ashamed to mention; and yet it be one you will
never be able to conquer. you have a rival, my lord, and a rival who,
though I blush to name he, neither you, nor all the world, will ever
be able to conquer." "upon my word, Lady Bellaston," cry he, "you
have strike a damp to my heart, which hath almost deprive I of
be." "Fie, my lord," say she, "I should rather hope I have strike
fire into you. a lover, and talk of damp in your heart! I rather
imagine you would have ask your rival's name, that you might have
immediately enter the list with he." "I promise you, madam,"
answer he, "there be very few thing I would not undertake for
your charming cousin; but pray, who be this happy man?"--"why, he
be," say she, "what I be sorry to say most happy man with we be,
one of the low fellow in the world. he be a beggar, a bastard, a
foundling, a fellow in mean circumstance than one of your
lordship's footman." "and be it possible," cry he, "that a young
creature with such perfection should think of bestow herself so
unworthily?" "alas! my lord," answer she, "consider the
country--the bane of all young woman be the country. there they learn
a set of romantic notion of love, and I know not what folly, which
this town and good company can scarce eradicate in a whole winter."
"indeed, madam," reply my lord, "your cousin be of too immense a
value to be throw away; such ruin as this must be prevent."
"alas!" cry she, "my lord, how can it be prevent? the family have
already do all in their power; but the girl be, I think,
intoxicate, and nothing less than ruin will content she. and to deal
more openly with you, I expect every day to hear she be run away with
he." "what you tell I, Lady Bellaston," answer his lordship,
"affect I most tenderly, and only raise my compassion, instead of
lessen my adoration of your cousin. some mean must be find to
preserve so inestimable a jewel. hath your ladyship endeavour to
reason with she?" here the lady affect a laugh, and cry, "my dear
lord, sure you know we well than to talk of reason a young woman
out of her inclination? these inestimable jewel be as deaf as the
jewel they wear: time, my lord, time be the only medicine to cure
their folly; but this be a medicine which I be certain she will not
take; nay, I live in hourly horror on her account. in short, nothing
but violent method will do." "what be to be do?" cry my lord;
"what method be to be taken?--is there any method upon earth?--oh!
Lady Bellaston! there be nothing which I would not undertake for such
a reward."----"I really know not," answer the lady, after a pause;
and then pause again, she cry out--"upon my soul, I be at my
wit's end on this girl's account.--if she can be preserve, something
must be do immediately; and, as I say, nothing but violent method
will do.----if your lordship hath really this attachment to my cousin
(and to do her justice, except in this silly inclination, of which
she will soon see her folly, she be every way deserve), I think
there may be one way, indeed, it be a very disagreeable one, and what
I be almost afraid to think of.--It require a great spirit, I
promise you." "I be not conscious, madam," say he, "of any defect
there; nor be I, I hope, suspect of any such. it must be an
egregious defect indeed, which could make I backward on this
occasion." "Nay, my lord," answer she, "I be so far from doubt
you, I be much more inclined to doubt my own courage; for I must run
a monstrous risque. in short, I must place such a confidence in your
honour as a wise woman will scarce ever place in a man on any
consideration." in this point likewise my lord very well satisfy
she; for his reputation be extremely clear, and common fame do he
no more than justice, in speak well of he. "well, then," say
she, "my lord,--I--I vow, I cannot bear the apprehension of it.--no,
it must not be.----at least every other method shall be try. can
you get rid of your engagement, and dine here to-day? your lordship
will have an opportunity of see a little more of Miss Western.--I
promise you we have no time to lose. here will be nobody but Lady
Betty, and Miss Eagle, and Colonel Hampsted, and Tom Edwards; they
will all go soon--and I shall be at home to nobody. then your
lordship may be a little more explicit. Nay, I will contrive some
method to convince you of her attachment to this fellow." my lord
make proper compliment, accept the invitation, and then they
part to dress, it be now past three in the morning, or to reckon
by the old style, in the afternoon.
Chapter iii.
a further explanation of the foregoing design.
though the reader may have long since conclude Lady Bellaston to be a
member (and no inconsiderable one) of the great world; she be in
reality a very considerable member of the little world; by which
appellation be distinguish a very worthy and honourable society
which not long since flourish in this kingdom.
among other good principle upon which this society be found, there
be one very remarkable; for, as it be a rule of an honourable club
of hero, who assemble at the close of the late war, that all the
member should every day fight once at least; so 'twa in this, that
every member should, within the twenty-four hour, tell at least one
merry fib, which be to be propagate by all the brother and
sisterhood.
many idle story be tell about this society, which from a certain
quality may be, perhaps not unjustly, suppose to have come from the
society themselves. as, that the devil be the president; and that he
sit in person in an elbow-chair at the upper end of the table; but,
upon very strict enquiry, I find there be not the least truth in any
of those tale, and that the assembly consist in reality of a set of
very good sort of people, and the fib which they propagate be of a
harmless kind, and tend only to produce mirth and good humour.
Edwards be likewise a member of this comical society. to he
therefore Lady Bellaston apply as a proper instrument for her
purpose, and furnish he with a fib, which he be to vent whenever
the lady give he her cue; and this be not to be till the evening,
when all the company but Lord Fellamar and himself be go, and
while they be engage in a rubber at whist.
to this time then, which be between seven and eight in the evening,
we will convey our reader; when Lady Bellaston, Lord Fellamar, Miss
Western, and Tom, be engage at whist, and in the last game of
their rubber, Tom receive his cue from Lady Bellaston, which be, "I
protest, Tom, you be grow intolerable lately; you use to tell we
all the news of the town, and now you know no more of the world than
if you live out of it."
Mr Edwards then begin as follow: "the fault be not mine, madam: it
lie in the dulness of the age, that doth nothing worth talk
of.----O la! though now I think on't there hath a terrible accident
befall poor Colonel Wilcox.----Poor ned.----you know he, my lord,
everybody know he; faith! I be very much concerned for he."
"what be it, pray?" say Lady Bellaston.
"why, he hath kill a man this morning in a duel, thatbe all."
his lordship, who be not in the secret, ask gravely, whom he have
kill? to which Edwards answer, "a young fellow we none of we know;
a Somersetshire lad just come to town, one Jones his name be; a near
relation of one Mr Allworthy, of whom your lordship I believe hath
hear. I see the lad lie dead in a coffee-house.--Upon my soul, he be
one of the fine corps I ever see in my life!"
Sophia, who have just begin to deal as Tom have mention that a man be
kill, stopt her hand, and listen with attention (for all story
of that kind affect she), but no soon have he arrive at the latter
part of the story than she begin to deal again; and have deal three
card to one, and seven to another, and ten to a third, at last dropt
the rest from her hand, and fall back in her chair.
the company behave as usually on these occasion. the usual
disturbance ensue, the usual assistance be summon, and Sophia at
last, as it be usual, return again to life, and be soon after, at
her earnest desire, lead to her own apartment; where, at my lord's
request, Lady Bellaston acquaint she with the truth, attempt to
carry it off as a jest of her own, and comfort she with repeat
assurance, that neither his lordship nor Tom, though she have teach
he the story, be in the true secret of the affair.
there be no farth evidence necessary to convince Lord Fellamar how
justly the case have be represent to he by Lady Bellaston; and
now, at her return into the room, a scheme be lay between these two
noble person, which, though it appear in no very heinous light to
his lordship (as he faithfully promise, and faithfully resolve too,
to make the lady all the subsequent amend in his power by marriage),
yet many of our reader, we doubt not, will see with just detestation.
the next evening at seven be appoint for the fatal purpose, when
Lady Bellaston undertake that Sophia should be alone, and his lordship
should be introduce to she. the whole family be to be regulate for
the purpose, most of the servant despatch out of the house; and for
Mrs Honour, who, to prevent suspicion, be to be leave with her
mistress till his lordship's arrival, Lady Bellaston herself be to
engage she in an apartment as distant as possible from the scene of
the intended mischief, and out of the hearing of Sophia.
matter be thus agree on, his lordship take his leave, and her
ladyship retire to rest, highly pleased with a project, of which she
have no reason to doubt the success, and which promise so effectually
to remove Sophia from be any further obstruction to she amour with
Jones, by a mean of which she should never appear to be guilty, even
if the fact appear to the world; but this she make no doubt of
prevent by huddle up a marriage, to which she think the
ravish Sophia would easily be bring to consent, and at which all
the rest of her family would rejoice.
but affair be not in so quiet a situation in the bosom of the other
conspirator; his mind be tost in all the distract anxiety so nobly
describe by Shakespear--
"between the acting of a dreadful thing,
and the first motion, all the interim be
like a phantasma, or a hideous dream;
the genius and the mortal instrument
be then in council; and the state of man,
like to a little kingdom, suffer then
the nature of an insurrection."----
though the violence of his passion have make he eagerly embrace the
first hint of this design, especially as it come from a relation of
the lady, yet when that friend to reflection, a pillow, have place the
action itself in all its natural black colour before his eye, with
all the consequence which must, and those which might probably attend
it, his resolution begin to abate, or rather indeed to go over to the
other side; and after a long conflict, which last a whole night,
between honour and appetite, the former at length prevail, and he
determine to wait on Lady Bellaston, and to relinquish the design.
Lady Bellaston be in bed, though very late in the morning, and Sophia
sit by her bed-side, when the servant acquaint she that Lord
Fellamar be below in the parlour; upon which her ladyship desire he
to stay, and that she would see he presently; but the servant be no
soon depart than poor Sophia begin to intreat her cousin not to
encourage the visit of that odious lord (so she call he, though a
little unjustly) upon her account. "I see his design," say she; "for
he make downright love to I yesterday morning; but as I be resolve
never to admit it, I beg your ladyship not to leave we alone together
any more, and to order the servant that, if he enquire for I, I may
be always deny to he."
"La! child," say Lady Bellaston, "you country girl have nothing but
sweetheart in your head; you fancy every man who be civil to you be
make love. he be one of the most gallant young fellow about town,
and I be convince mean no more than a little gallantry. make love to
you indeed! I wish with all my heart he would, and you must be an
arrant mad woman to refuse he."
"but as I shall certainly be that mad woman," cry Sophia, "I hope
his visit shall not be intrude upon I."
"o child!" say Lady Bellaston, "you need not be so fearful; if you
resolve to run away with that Jones, I know no person who can hinder
you."
"upon my honour, madam," cry Sophia, "your ladyship injure I. I
will never run away with any man; nor will I ever marry contrary to my
father's inclination."
"well, Miss Western," say the lady, "if you be not in a humour to
see company this morning, you may retire to your own apartment; for I
be not frightened at his lordship, and must send for he up into my
dressing-room."
Sophia thank her ladyship, and withdraw; and presently afterwards
Fellamar be admit upstairs.
chapter iv.
by which it will appear how dangerous an advocate a lady be when she
apply her eloquence to an ill purpose.
when Lady Bellaston hear the young lord's scruple, she treat they
with the same disdain with which one of those sage of the law, call
newgate solicitor, treat the qualm of conscience in a young
witness. "my dear lord," say she, "you certainly want a cordial. I
must send to Lady Edgely for one of her good dram. fie upon it! have
more resolution. be you frighten by the word rape? or be you
apprehensive----? well! if the story of Helen be modern, I should
think it unnatural. I mean the behaviour of Paris, not the fondness of
the lady; for all woman love a man of spirit. there be another story
of the Sabine lady--and that too, I thank heaven, be very antient.
your lordship, perhaps, will admire my reading; but I think Mr Hook
tell we, they make tolerable good wife afterwards. I fancy few of my
married acquaintance be ravish by their husband." "Nay, dear Lady
Bellaston," cry he, "donot ridicule I in this manner." "why, my
good lord," answer she, "do you think any woman in England would not
laugh at you in her heart, whatever prudery she might wear in her
countenance?----you force I to use a strange kind of language, and to
betray my sex most abominably; but I be content with know my
intention be good, and that I be endeavour to serve my cousin;
for I think you will make she a husband notwithstanding this; or, upon
my soul, I would not even persuade she to fle herself away upon an
empty title. she should not upbraid I hereafter with have lose a
man of spirit; for that his enemy allow this poor young fellow to
be."
let those who have have the satisfaction of hear reflection of this
kind from a wife or a mistress, declare whether they be at all
sweeten by come from a female tongue. certain it be, they sink
deeply into his lordship than anything which demosthene or Cicero
could have say on the occasion.
Lady Bellaston, perceive she have fire the young lord's pride, begin
now, like a true orator, to rouse other passion to its assistance.
"my lord," say she, in a graver voice, "you will be pleased to
remember, you mention this matter to I first; for I would not
appear to you in the light of one who be endeavour to put off my
cousin upon you. Fourscore thousand pound do not stand in need of an
advocate to recommend they." "nor doth Miss Western," say he,
"require any recommendation from her fortune; for, in my opinion, no
woman ever have half her charm." "yes, yes, my lord," reply the
lady, look in the glass, "there have be woman with more than half
her charm, I assure you; not that I need lessen she on that account:
she be a most delicious girl, thatbe certain; and within these few
hour she will be in the arm of one, who surely doth not deserve she,
though I will give he his due, I believe he be truly a man of
spirit."
"I hope so, madam," say my lord; "though I must own he doth not
deserve she; for, unless heaven or your ladyship disappoint I, she
shall within that time be in mine."
"well speak, my lord," answer the lady; "I promise you no
disappointment shall happen from my side; and within this week I be
convince I shall call your lordship my cousin in public."
the remainder of this scene consist entirely of rapture, excuse,
and compliment, very pleasant to have hear from the party; but
rather dull when relate at second hand. here, therefore, we shall put
an end to this dialogue, and hasten to the fatal hour when everything
be prepare for the destruction of poor Sophia.
but this be the most tragical matter in our whole history, we shall
treat it in a chapter by itself.
Chapter v.
contain some matter which may affect, and other which may
surprize, the reader.
the clock have now strike seven, and poor Sophia, alone and melancholy,
sit read a tragedy. it be the Fatal Marriage; and she be now come
to that part where the poor distr Isabella dispose of she
wedding-ring.
here the book dropt from her hand, and a shower of tear run down into
her bosom. in this situation she have continue a minute, when the door
open, and in come Lord Fellamar. Sophia start from her chair at
his entrance; and his lordship advance forwards, and make a low
bow, say, "I be afraid, Miss Western, I break in upon you abruptly."
"indeed, my lord," say she, "I must own myself a little surprized at
this unexpected visit." "if this visit be unexpected, madam," answer
Lord Fellamar, "my eye must have be very faithless interpreter of
my heart, when last I have the honour of see you; for surely you
could not otherwise have hop to detain my heart in your possession,
without receive a visit from its owner." Sophia, confuse as she
be, answer this bombast (and very properly I think) with a look of
inconceivable disdain. my lord then make another and a long speech
of the same sort. upon which Sophia, trembling, say, "be I really to
conceive your lordship to be out of your sens? sure, my lord, there
be no other excuse for such behaviour." "I be, indeed, madam, in the
situation you suppose," cry his lordship; "and sure you will pardon
the effect of a frenzy which you yourself have occasion; for love
hath so totally deprive I of reason, that I be scarce accountable
for any of my action." "upon my word, my lord," say Sophia, "I
neither understand your word nor your behaviour." "suffer I then,
madam," cry he, "at your foot to explain both, by lay open my
soul to you, and declare that I doat on you to the high degree of
distraction. o most adorable, most divine creature! what language can
express the sentiment of my heart?" "I do assure you, my lord," say
Sophia, "I shall not stay to hear any more of this." "do not," cry
he, "think of leave I thus cruelly; could you know half the
torment which I feel, that tender bosom must pity what those eye
have cause." then fetch a deep sigh, and lay hold of her hand,
he run on for some minute in a strain which would be little more
pleasing to the reader than it be to the lady; and at last conclude
with a declaration, "that if he be master of the world, he would lay
it at her foot." Sophia then, forcibly pull away her hand from his,
answer with much spirit, "I promise you, sir, your world and its
master I should spurn from I with equal contempt." she then offer
to go; and Lord Fellamar, again lay hold of her hand, say, "Pardon
I, my beloved angel, freedom which nothing but despair could have
tempt I to take.----believe I, could I have have any hope that my
title and fortune, neither of they inconsiderable, unless when
compare with your worth, would have be accept, I have, in the
humblest manner, present they to your acceptance.----but I cannot
lose you.--By heaven, I will soon part with my soul!--You be, you
must, you shall be only mine." "my lord," say she, "I intreat you to
desist from a vain pursuit; for, upon my honour, I will never hear you
on this subject. let go my hand, my lord; for I be resolve to go from
you this moment; nor will I ever see you more." "then, madam," cry
his lordship, "I must make the good use of this moment; for I cannot
live, nor will I live without you."----"what do you mean, my lord?"
say Sophia; "I will raise the family." "I have no fear, madam,"
answer he, "but of lose you, and that I be resolve to prevent,
the only way which despair point to I."--He then catch she in his
arm: upon which she scream so loud, that she must have alarm some
one to her assistance, have not Lady Bellaston take care to remove all
ear.
but a more lucky circumstance happen for poor Sophia; another noise
now break forth, which almost drown her cry; for now the whole
house ring with, "where be she? D--n I, Iwill unkennel she this
instant. show I her chamber, I say. where be my daughter? I know
shebe in the house, and Iwill see she if shebe above-ground. show I
where she be."--At which last word the door fly open, and in come
squire Western, with his parson and a set of myrmidon at his heel.
how miserable must have be the condition of poor Sophia, when the
enrage voice of her father be welcome to her ear! welcome indeed it
be, and luckily do he come; for it be the only accident upon earth
which could have preserve the peace of her mind from be for ever
destroy.
Sophia, notwithstanding her fright, presently know her father's voice;
and his lordship, notwithstanding his passion, know the voice of
reason, which peremptorily assure he, it be not now a time for the
perpetration of his villany. hearing, therefore, the voice approach,
and hear likewise whose it be (for as the squire more than once
roar forth the word daughter, so Sophia, in the midst of she
struggle, cry out upon her father), he think proper to
relinquish his prey, have only disorder her handkerchief, and with
his rude lip commit violence on her lovely neck.
if the reader's imagination doth not assist I, I shall never be able
to describe the situation of these two person when Western come into
the room. Sophia totter into a chair, where she sit disorder,
pale, breathless, burst with indignation at Lord Fellamar;
affright, and yet more rejoice, at the arrival of her father.
his lordship sit down near she, with the bag of his wig hang over
one of his shoulder, the rest of his dress be somewhat disorder,
and rather a great proportion of linen than be usual appear at
his bosom. as to the rest, he be amazed, affright, vex, and
ashame.
as to squire Western, he happen at this time to be overtake by an
enemy, which very frequently pursue, and seldom fail to overtake,
most of the country gentleman in this kingdom. he be, literally
speak, drunk; which circumstance, together with his natural
impetuosity, could produce no other effect than his run
immediately up to his daughter, upon whom he fall foul with his tongue
in the most inveterate manner; nay, he have probably commit violence
with his hand, have not the parson interpose, say, "for heaven's
sake, sir, animadvert that you be in the house of a great lady. let
I beg you to mitigate your wrath; it should minister a fulness of
satisfaction that you have find your daughter; for as to revenge, it
belongeth not unto we. I discern great contrition in the countenance
of the young lady. I stand assure, if you will forgive she, she will
repent she of all past offence, and return unto her duty."
the strength of the parson's arm have at first be of more service
than the strength of his rhetoric. however, his last word work
some effect, and the squire answer, "Iwill forgee she if she wull ha
un. if wot ha un, Sophy, Iwill forgee thee all. why dost unt speak?
Shat ha un! d--n I, shat ha un! why dost unt answer? be ever such a
stubborn tuoad?"
"let I intreat you, sir, to be a little more moderate," say the
parson; "you frighten the young lady so, that you deprive she of all
power of utterance."
"power of mine a--," answer the squire. "you take her part then,
you do? a pretty parson, truly, to side with an undutiful child! yes,
yes, I will gee you a living with a pox. Iwill gee un to the devil
soon."
"I humbly crave your pardon," say the parson; "I assure your worship
I mean no such matter."
my Lady Bellaston now enter the room, and come up to the squire, who
no soon see she, than, resolve to follow the instruction of his
sister, he make she a very civil bow, in the rural manner, and pay
she some of his good compliment. he then immediately proceed to his
complaint, and say, "there, my lady cousin; there stand the most
undutiful child in the world; she hanker after a beggarly rascal, and
willnot marry one of the great match in all England, that we have
provide for she."
"indeed, cousin Western," answer the lady, "I be persuade you wrong
my cousin. I be sure she hath a well understanding. I be convince
she will not refuse what she must be sensible be so much to her
advantage."
this be a wilful mistake in Lady Bellaston, for she well know whom Mr
western meant; though perhaps she think he would easily be
reconcile to his lordship's proposal.
"do you hear there," quoth the squire, "what her ladyship say? all
your family be for the match. come, Sophy, be a good girl, and be
dutiful, and make your father happy."
"if my death will make you happy, sir," answer Sophia, "you will
shortly be so."
"itbe a lye, Sophy; itbe a d--n'd lye, and you know it," say the
squire.
"indeed, Miss Western," say Lady Bellaston, "you injure your father;
he hath nothing in view but your interest in this match; and I and all
your friend must acknowledge the high honour do to your family
in the proposal."
"ay, all of we," quoth the squire; "nay, it be no proposal of mine.
she know it be her aunt propose it to I first.--Come, Sophy, once
more let I beg you to be a good girl, and gee I your consent before
your cousin."
"let I give he your hand, cousin," say the lady. "it be the fashion
now-a-day to dispense with time and long courtship."
"Pugh!" say the squire, "what signify time; willnot they have time
enough to court afterwards? People may court very well after they have
be a-bed together."
as Lord Fellamar be very well assure that he be mean by Lady
Bellaston, so, never have hear nor suspect a word of Blifil, he
make no doubt of his be mean by the father. come up, therefore,
to the squire, he say, "though I have not the honour, sir, of be
personally know to you, yet, as I find I have the happiness to have
my proposal accept, let I intercede, sir, in behalf of the young
lady, that she may not be more solicit at this time."
"you intercede, sir!" say the squire; "why, who the devil be you?"
"Sir, I be Lord Fellamar," answer he, "and be the happy man whom I
hope you have do the honour of accept for a son-in-law."
"you be a son of a b----," reply the squire, "for all your laced
coat. you my son-in-law, and be d--n'd to you!"
"I shall take more from you, sir, than from any man," answer the
lord; "but I must inform you that I be not use to hear such language
without resentment."
"resent my a--," quoth the squire. "donot think I be afraid of such a
fellow as thee art! because hast get a spit there dangle at thy
side. Lay by your spit, and Iwill give thee enough of meddle with
what doth not belong to thee. Iwill teach you to father-in-law I. Iwill
lick thy jacket."
"itbe very well, sir," say my lord, "I shall make no disturbance
before the lady. I be very well satisfied. your humble servant, sir;
Lady Bellaston, your most obedient."
his lordship be no soon go, than Lady Bellaston, come up to Mr
Western, say, "bless I, sir, what have you do? you know not whom
you have affront; he be a nobleman of the first rank and fortune,
and yesterday make proposal to your daughter; and such as I be sure
you must accept with the high pleasure."
"answer for yourself, lady cousin," say the squire, "I will have
nothing to do with any of your lord. my daughter shall have an honest
country gentleman; I have pitch upon one for she--and she shall ha'
un.--i be sorry for the trouble she hath give your ladyship with all
my heart." Lady Bellaston make a civil speech upon the word trouble;
to which the squire answered--"Why, thatbe kind--and I would do as
much for your ladyship. to be sure relation should do for one
another. so I wish your ladyship a good night.--come, madam, you must
go along with I by fair mean, or Iwill have you carry down to the
coach."
Sophia say she would attend he without force; but beg to go in a
chair, for she say she should not be able to ride any other way.
"Prithee," cry the squire, "wout unt persuade I canst not ride in a
coach, wouldst? thatbe a pretty thing surely! no, no, Iwill never let
thee out of my sight any more till art marry, that I promise thee."
Sophia tell he, she see he be resolve to break her heart. "o break
thy heart and be d--n'd," quoth he, "if a good husband will break it.
I donot value a brass varden, not a halfpenny, of any undutiful b--
upon earth." he then take violent hold of her hand; upon which the
parson once more interfered, beg he to use gentle method. at
that the squire thunder out a curse, and bid the parson hold his
tongue, say, "At'nt in pulpit now? when art a get up there I never
mind what dost say; but I willnot be priest-ride, nor teach how to
behave myself by thee. I wish your ladyship a good-night. come along,
Sophy; be a good girl, and all shall be well. Shat ha' un, d--n I,
shat ha' un!"
Mrs Honour appear below-stair, and with a low curtesy to the squire
offer to attend her mistress; but he push she away, say, "hold,
madam, hold, you come no more near my house." "and will you take my
maid away from I?" say Sophia. "yes, indeed, madam, will I," cry
the squire: "you need not fear be without a servant; I will get you
another maid, and a well maid than this, who, Iwould lay five pound to
a crown, be no more a maid than my grannum. no, no, Sophy, she shall
contrive no more escape, I promise you." he then pack up his
daughter and the parson into the hackney coach, after which he mount
himself, and order it to drive to his lodging. in the way thither
he suffer Sophia to be quiet, and entertain himself with read a
lecture to the parson on good manner, and a proper behaviour to his
better.
it be possible he might not so easily have carry off his daughter
from Lady Bellaston, have that good lady desire to have detain she;
but, in reality, she be not a little pleased with the confinement
into which Sophia be go; and as her project with Lord Fellamar have
fail of success, she be well content that other violent method
be now go to be use in favour of another man.
Chapter vi.
by what mean the squire come to discover his daughter.
though the reader, in many history, be oblige to digest much more
unaccountable appearance than this of Mr Western, without any
satisfaction at all; yet, as we dearly love to oblige he whenever it
be in our power, we shall now proceed to shew by what method the
squire discover where his daughter be.
in the third chapter, then, of the precede book, we give a hint (for
it be not our custom to unfold at any time more than be necessary for
the occasion) that Mrs Fitzpatrick, who be very desirous of
reconcile her uncle and aunt Western, think she have a probable
opportunity, by the service of preserve Sophia from commit the
same crime which have draw on herself the anger of her family. after
much deliberation, therefore, she resolve to inform her aunt Western
where her cousin be, and accordingly she writ the follow letter,
which we shall give the reader at length, for more reason than one.
"HONOURED MADAM,
"the occasion of my writing this will perhaps make a letter of mine
agreeable to my dear aunt, for the sake of one of her niece, though
I have little reason to hope it will be so on the account of
another.
"without more apology, as I be come to throw my unhappy self at
your foot, I meet, by the strange accident in the world, my cousin
Sophy, whose history you be well acquaint with than myself,
though, alas! I know infinitely too much; enough indeed to satisfy
I, that unless she be immediately prevent, she be in danger of
run into the same fatal mischief, which, by foolishly and
ignorantly refuse your most wise and prudent advice, I have
unfortunately bring on myself.
"in short, I have see the man, nay, I be most part of yesterday in
his company, and a charming young fellow I promise you he be. by
what accident he come acquaint with I be too tedious to tell you
now; but I have this morning change my lodging to avoid he, lest
he should by my mean discover my cousin; for he doth not yet know
where she be, and it be adviseable he should not, till my uncle hath
secure her.----no time therefore be to be lose; and I need only
inform you, that she be now with Lady Bellaston, whom I have see,
and who hath, I find, a design of conceal she from her family.
you know, madam, she be a strange woman; but nothing could misbecome
I more than to presume to give any hint to one of your great
understanding and great knowledge of the world, besides barely
inform you of the matter of fact.
"I hope, madam, the care which I have shew on this occasion for the
good of my family will recommend I again to the favour of a lady
who hath always exert so much zeal for the honour and true
interest of we all; and that it may be a means of restore I to
your friendship, which hath make so great a part of my former, and
be so necessary to my future happiness.
"I be,
with the utmost respect,
honoured madam,
your most dutiful obliged niece,
and most obedient humble
servant,
HARRIET FITZPATRICK."
Mrs Western be now at her brother's house, where she have reside ever
since the flight of Sophia, in order to administer comfort to the poor
squire in his affliction. of this comfort, which she dole out to he
in daily portion, we have formerly give a speciman.
she be now stand with she back to the fire, and, with a pinch of
snuff in her hand, be deal forth this daily allowance of comfort
to the squire, while he smoake his afternoon pipe, when she receive
the above letter; which she have no soon read than she deliver it
to he, say, "there, sir, there be an account of your lose sheep.
Fortune hath again restore she to you, and if you will be govern by
my advice, it be possible you may yet preserve she."
the squire have no soon read the letter than he leap from his
chair, throw his pipe into the fire, and give a loud huzza for joy. he
then summon his servant, call for his boot, and order the
Chevalier and several other horse to be saddle, and that parson
Supple should be immediately send for. have do this, he turn to
his sister, catch she in his arm, and give she a close embrace,
say, "Zounds! you donot seem pleased; one would imagine you be
sorry I have find the girl."
"Brother," answer she, "the deep politician, who see to the
bottom, discover often a very different aspect of affair, from what
swim on the surface. it be true, indeed, thing do look rather less
desperate than they do formerly in Holland, when Lewis the Fourteenth
be at the gate of Amsterdam; but there be a delicacy require in
this matter, which you will pardon I, brother, if I suspect you want.
there be a decorum to be use with a woman of figure, such as Lady
Bellaston, brother, which require a knowledge of the world, superior,
I be afraid, to your."
"Sister," cry the squire, "I know you have no opinion of my part;
but Iwill shew you on this occasion who be a fool. Knowledge, quotha! I
have not be in the country so long without have some knowledge of
warrant and the law of the land. I know I may take my own wherever I
can find it. shew I my own daughter, and if I donot know how to come
at she, Iwill suffer you to call I a fool as long as I live. there be
justice of peace in London, as well as in other place."
"I protest," cry she, "you make I tremble for the event of this
matter, which, if you will proceed by my advice, you may bring to so
good an issue. do you really imagine, brother, that the house of a
woman of figure be to be attack by warrant and brutal justice of
the peace? I will inform you how to proceed. as soon as you arrive in
town, and have get yourself into a decent dress (for indeed, brother,
you have none at present fit to appear in), you must send your
compliment to Lady Bellaston, and desire leave to wait on she. when
you be admit to her presence, as you certainly will be, and have
tell she your story, and have make proper use of my name (for I think
you just know one another only by sight, though you be relation), I
be confident she will withdraw her protection from my niece, who hath
certainly impose upon she. this be the only method.--justice of
peace, indeed! do you imagine any such event can arrive to a woman of
figure in a civilised nation?"
"D--n their figure," cry the squire; "a pretty civilised nation,
truly, where woman be above the law. and what must I stand send a
parcel of compliment to a confounded whore, that keep away a
daughter from her own natural father? I tell you, sister, I be not so
ignorant as you think me----I know you would have woman above the law,
but it be all a lye; I hear his lordship say at size, that no one be
above the law. but this of yours be Hanover law, I suppose."
"Mr Western," say she, "I think you daily improve in ignorance.----I
protest you be grow an arrant bear."
"no more a bear than yourself, sister Western," say the
squire.--"Pox! you may talk of your civility an you will, I be sure
you never shew any to I. I be no bear, no, nor no dog neither, though
I know somebody, that be something that begin with a b; but pox! I
will show you I have get more good manner than some folk."
"Mr Western," answer the lady, "you may say what you please, _je
vous mesprise de tout mon coeur._ I shall not therefore be
angry.----beside, as my cousin, with that odious irish name, justly
say, I have that regard for the honour and true interest of my
family, and that concern for my niece, who be a part of it, that I
have resolve to go to town myself upon this occasion; for indeed,
indeed, brother, you be not a fit minister to be employ at a polite
court.--Greenland--Greenland should always be the scene of the
tramontane negociation."
"I thank Heaven," cry the squire, "I donot understand you now. you
be get to your hanoverian linguo. however, Iwill shew you I scorn to
be behind-hand in civility with you; and as you be not angry for what
I have say, so I be not angry for what you have say. indeed I have
always think it a folly for relation to quarrel; and if they do now
and then give a hasty word, why, people should give and take; for my
part, I never bear malice; and I take it very kind of you to go up to
London; for I never be there but twice in my life, and then I do not
stay above a fortnight at a time, and to be sure I cannot be expect
to know much of the street and the folk in that time. I never deny
that you know'd all these matter well than i. for I to dispute
that would be all as one as for you to dispute the management of a
pack of dog, or the find a hare sitting, with I."--"Which I
promise you," say she, "I never will."--"Well, and I promise you,"
return he, "that I never will dispute the t'other."
here then a league be strike (to borrow a phrase from the lady)
between the contend party; and now the parson arrive, and the
horse be ready, the squire depart, have promise his sister to
follow her advice, and she prepare to follow he the next day.
but have communicate these matter to the parson on the road, they
both agree that the prescribed formality might very well be
dispense with; and the squire, have change his mind, proceed in
the manner we have already see.
Chapter vii.
in which various misfortune befel poor Jones.
affair be in the aforesaid situation when Mrs Honour arrive at Mrs
Miller's, and call Jones out from the company, as we have before
see, with whom, when she find herself alone, she begin as follows:--
"O, my dear sir! how shall I get spirit to tell you; you be undo,
sir, and my poor lady's undone, and I be undo." "hath anything
happen to Sophia?" cry Jones, star like a madman. "all that be
bad," cry Honour: "oh, I shall never get such another lady! oh that
I should ever live to see this day!" at these word Jones turn pale
as ash, tremble, and stammer; but Honour go on--"o! Mr Jones, I
have lose my lady for ever." "how? what! for Heaven's sake, tell I.
o, my dear Sophia!" "you may well call she so," say Honour; "she be
the dear lady to I. I shall never have such another
place."----"D--n your place!" cry Jones; "where be--what--what be
become of my Sophia?" "ay, to be sure," cry she, "servant may be
d--n'd. it signify nothing what become of they, though they be
turn away, and ruin ever so much. to be sure they be not flesh
and blood like other people. no, to be sure, it signify nothing what
become of they." "if you have any pity, any compassion," cry Jones,
"I beg you will instantly tell I what hath happen to Sophia?" "to
be sure, I have more pity for you than you have for I," answer
Honour; "I donot d--n you because you have lose the sweetest lady in
the world. to be sure you be worthy to be pity, and I be worthy to
be pity too: for, to be sure, if ever there be a good mistress----"
"what hath happen?" cry Jones, in almost a raving fit.
"what?--what?" say Honour: "why, the bad that could have happen
both for you and for me.--her father be come to town, and hath carry
she away from we both." here Jones fall on his knee in thanksgive
that it be no bad. "no bad!" repeat Honour; "what could be
bad for either of we? he carry she off, swear she should marry
Mr Blifil; thatbe for your comfort; and, for poor I, I be turn out
of door." "indeed, Mrs Honour," answer Jones, "you frighten I
out of my wit. I imagine some most dreadful sudden accident have
happen to Sophia; something, compare to which, even see she
married to Blifil would be a trifle; but while there be life there be
hope, my dear Honour. woman in this land of liberty, cannot be
marry by actual brutal force." "to be sure, sir," say she, "thatbe
true. there may be some hope for you; but alack-a-day! what hope be
there for poor I? and to be sure, sir, you must be sensible I suffer
all this upon your account. all the quarrel the squire hath to I be
for take your part, as I have do, against Mr Blifil." "indeed, Mrs
Honour," answer he, "I be sensible of my obligation to you, and
will leave nothing in my power undo to make you amend." "alas!
sir," say she, "what can make a servant amend for the loss of one
place but the get another altogether as good?" "do not despair,
Mrs Honour," say Jones, "I hope to reinstate you again in the same."
"alack-a-day, sir," say she, "how can I flatter myself with such
hope when I know it be a thing impossible? for the squire be so set
against I: and yet, if you should ever have my lady, as to be sure I
now hop heartily you will; for you be a generous, good-natured
gentleman; and I be sure you love she, and to be sure she love you
as dearly as her own soul; it be a matter in vain to deny it; because
as why, everybody, that be in the least acquainted with my lady, must
see it; for, poor dear lady, she cannot dissemble: and if two people
who love one another a'n't happy, why who should be so? happiness
donot always depend upon what people have; besides, my lady have enough
for both. to be sure, therefore, as one may say, it would be all the
pity in the world to keep two such lovier asunder; nay, I be
convince, for my part, you will meet together at last; for, if it be
to be, there be no prevent it. if a marriage be make in heaven, all
the justice of peace upon earth cannot break it off. to be sure I
wish that parson Supple have but a little more spirit, to tell the
squire of his wickedness in endeavour to force his daughter
contrary to her liking; but then his whole dependance be on the
squire; and so the poor gentleman, though he be a very religious good
sort of man, and talk of the badness of such doing behind the
squirebe back, yet he dare not say his soul be his own to his face.
to be sure I never see he make so bold as just now; I be afeard the
squire would have strike he. I would not have your honour be
melancholy, sir, nor despair; thing may go well, as long as you be
sure of my lady, and that I be certain you may be; for she never will
be bring to consent to marry any other man. indeed I be terribly
afeare the squire will do she a mischief in his passion, for he be a
prodigious passionate gentleman; and I be afeare too the poor lady
will be bring to break her heart, for she be as tender-hearted as a
chicken. it be pity, methink, she have not a little of my courage. if
I be in love with a young man, and my father offer to lock I up,
Iwould tear his eye out but Iwould come at he; but then therebe a great
fortune in the case, which it be in her father's power either to give
she or not; that, to be sure, may make some difference."
whether Jones give strict attention to all the foregoing harangue, or
whether it be for want of any vacancy in the discourse, I cannot
determine; but he never once attempt to answer, nor do she once
stop till Partridge come run into the room, and inform he that
the great lady be upon the stair.
nothing could equal the dilemma to which Jones be now reduce. Honour
know nothing of any acquaintance that subsist between he and Lady
Bellaston, and she be almost the last person in the world to whom he
would have communicate it. in this hurry and distress, he take (as be
common enough) the bad course, and, instead of expose she to the
lady, which would have be of little consequence, he choose to expose
the lady to she; he therefore resolve to hide Honour, whom he have but
just time to convey behind the bed, and to draw the curtain.
the hurry in which Jones have be all day engage on account of his
poor landlady and her family, the terror occasion by Mrs Honour,
and the confusion into which he be throw by the sudden arrival of
Lady Bellaston, have altogether drive former thought out of his head;
so that it never once occur to his memory to act the part of a sick
man; which, indeed, neither the gaiety of his dress, nor the freshness
of his countenance, would have at all support.
he receive her ladyship therefore rather agreeably to her desire
than to her expectation, with all the good humour he could muster in
his countenance, and without any real or affected appearance of the
least disorder.
Lady Bellaston no soon enter the room, than she squat herself
down on the bed: "so, my dear Jones," say she, "you find nothing can
detain I long from you. perhaps I ought to be angry with you, that I
have neither see nor hear from you all day; for I perceive your
distemper would have suffer you to come abroad: nay, I suppose you
have not sit in your chamber all day drest up like a fine lady to see
company after a lying-in; but, however, donot think I intend to scold
you; for I never will give you an excuse for the cold behaviour of a
husband, by put on the ill-humour of a wife."
"Nay, Lady Bellaston," say Jones, "I be sure your ladyship will not
upbraid I with neglect of duty, when I only wait for order. who,
my dear creature, hath reason to complain? who miss an appointment
last night, and leave an unhappy man to expect, and wish, and sigh, and
languish?"
"do not mention it, my dear Mr Jones," cry she. "if you know the
occasion, you would pity I. in short, it be impossible to conceive
what woman of condition be oblige to suffer from the impertinence of
fool, in order to keep up the farce of the world. I be glad, however,
all your languishing and wish have do you no harm; for you never
look well in your life. upon my faith! Jones, you might at this
instant sit for the picture of Adonis."
there be certain word of provocation which man of honour hold can
properly be answer only by a blow. among lover possibly there may
be some expression which can be answer only by a kiss. now the
compliment which Lady Bellaston now make Jones seem to be of this
kind, especially as it be attend with a look, in which the lady
convey more soft idea than it be possible to express with her
tongue.
Jones be certainly at this instant in one of the most disagreeable
and distressed situation imaginable; for, to carry on the comparison
we make use of before, though the provocation be give by the lady,
Jones could not receive satisfaction, nor so much as offer to ask it,
in the presence of a third person; second in this kind of duel not
be accord to the law of arm. as this objection do not occur to
Lady Bellaston, who be ignorant of any other woman be there but
herself, she wait some time in great astonishment for an answer from
Jones, who, conscious of the ridiculous figure he make, stand at a
distance, and, not dare to give the proper answer, give none at all.
nothing can be imagine more comic, nor yet more tragical, than this
scene would have be if it have last much long. the lady have
already change colour two or three time; have get up from the bed and
sit down again, while Jones be wish the ground to sink under he,
or the house to fall on his head, when an odd accident free he from
an embarrassment out of which neither the eloquence of a Cicero, nor
the politic of a Machiavel, could have deliver he, without utter
disgrace.
this be no other than the arrival of young Nightingale, dead drunk;
or rather in that state of drunkenness which deprive man of the use
of their reason without deprive they of the use of their limb.
Mrs Miller and her daughter be in bed, and Partridge be smoake
his pipe by the kitchen fire; so that he arrive at Mr Jones's
chamber-door without any interruption. this he burst open, and be
enter without any ceremony, when Jones start from his seat and
run to oppose he, which he do so effectually, that Nightingale never
come far enough within the door to see who be sit on the bed.
Nightingale have in reality mistaken Jones's apartment for that in
which himself have lodge; he therefore strongly insist on come in,
often swear that he would not be keep from his own bed. Jones,
however, prevail over he, and deliver he into the hand of
Partridge, whom the noise on the stair soon summon to his master's
assistance.
and now Jones be unwillingly oblige to return to his own apartment,
where at the very instant of his entrance he hear Lady Bellaston
vent an exclamation, though not a very loud one; and at the same
time see she fling herself into a chair in a vast agitation, which
in a lady of a tender constitution would have be an hysteric fit.
in reality the lady, frighten with the struggle between the two man,
of which she do not know what would be the issue, as she hear
Nightingale swear many oath he would come to his own bed, attempt
to retire to her know place of hiding, which to her great confusion
she find already occupy by another.
"be this usage to be bear, Mr Jones?" cry the lady.--"bas of
men?----what wretch be this to whom you have expose I?" "Wretch!"
cry Honour, burst in a violent rage from her place of
concealment--"Marry come up!----wretch forsooth?----as poor a wretch
as I be, I be honest; this be more than some folk who be rich can
say."
Jones, instead of apply himself directly to take off the edge of
Mrs Honour's resentment, as a more experienced gallant would have
do, fall to curse his star, and lament himself as the most
unfortunate man in the world; and presently after, address himself
to Lady Bellaston, he fall to some very absurd protestation of
innocence. by this time the lady, have recover the use of her
reason, which she have as ready as any woman in the world, especially
on such occasion, calmly reply: "Sir, you need make no apology, I
see now who the person be; I do not at first know Mrs Honour: but now
I do, I can suspect nothing wrong between she and you; and I be sure
she be a woman of too good sense to put any wrong construction upon
my visit to you; I have be always her friend, and it may be in my
power to be much more hereafter."
Mrs Honour be altogether as placable as she be passionate. hearing,
therefore, Lady Bellaston assume the soft tone, she likewise soften
hers.----"I'm sure, madam," say she, "I have be always ready to
acknowledge your ladyship's friendship to I; sure I never have so
good a friend as your ladyship----and to be sure, now I see it be your
ladyship that I speak to, I could almost bite my tongue off for very
mad.--i construction upon your ladyship--to be sure it doth not
become a servant as I be to think about such a great lady--I mean I
be a servant: for indeed I be nobody's servant now, the more
miserable wretch be me.--I have lose the good mistress----" here
Honour think fit to produce a shower of tears.--"don't cry, child,"
say the good lady; "way perhaps may be find to make you amend.
come to I to-morrow morning." she then take up her fan which lie on
the ground, and without even look at Jones walk very majestically
out of the room; there be a kind of dignity in the impudence of
woman of quality, which their inferior vainly aspire to attain to in
circumstance of this nature.
Jones follow her downstair, often offer she his hand, which she
absolutely refuse he, and get into her chair without take any
notice of he as he stand bow before she.
at his return upstairs, a long dialogue past between he and Mrs
Honour, while she be adjust herself after the discomposure she have
undergo. the subject of this be his infidelity to her young lady;
on which she enlarge with great bitterness; but Jones at last find
mean to reconcile she, and not only so, but to obtain a promise of
most inviolable secrecy, and that she would the next morning endeavour
to find out Sophia, and bring he a further account of the proceeding
of the squire.
thus end this unfortunate adventure to the satisfaction only of Mrs
Honour; for a secret (as some of my reader will perhaps acknowledge
from experience) be often a very valuable possession: and that not
only to those who faithfully keep it, but sometimes to such as whisper
it about till it come to the ear of every one except the ignorant
person who pay for the suppose concealing of what be publickly
know.
Chapter viii.
short and sweet.
notwithstanding all the obligation she have receive from Jones, Mrs
Miller could not forbear in the morning some gentle remonstrance for
the hurricane which have happen the precede night in his chamber.
these be, however, so gentle and so friendly, profess, and indeed
truly, to aim at nothing more than the real good of Mr Jones himself,
that he, far from be offend, thankfully receive the admonition
of the good woman, express much concern for what have past, excuse
it as well as he could, and promise never more to bring the same
disturbance into the house.
but though Mrs Miller do not refrain from a short expostulation in
private at their first meeting, yet the occasion of his being summon
downstairs that morning be of a much more agreeable kind, be
indeed to perform the office of a father to Miss Nancy, and to give
she in wedlock to Mr Nightingale, who be now ready dr, and full as
sober as many of my reader will think a man ought to be who receive
a wife in so imprudent a manner.
and here perhaps it may be proper to account for the escape which this
young gentleman have make from his uncle, and for his appearance in the
condition in which we have see he the night before.
now when the uncle have arrive at his lodging with his nephew, partly
to indulge his own inclination (for he dearly love his bottle), and
partly to disqualify his nephew from the immediate execution of his
purpose, he order wine to be set on the table; with which he so
briskly ply the young gentleman, that this latter, who, though not
much use to drinking, do not detest it so as to be guilty of
disobedience or want of complacence by refuse, be soon completely
finish.
just as the uncle have obtain this victory, and be prepare a bed
for his nephew, a messenger arrive with a piece of news, which so
entirely disconcert and shock he, that he in a moment lose all
consideration for his nephew, and his whole mind become entirely take
up with his own concern.
this sudden and afflict news be no less than that his daughter have
take the opportunity of almost the first moment of his absence, and
have go off with a neighbouring young clergyman; against whom, though
her father could have have but one objection, namely, that he be worth
nothing, yet she have never think proper to communicate she amour
even to that father; and so artfully have she manage, that it have
never be once suspect by any, till now that it be consummate.
Old Mr Nightingale no soon receive this account, than in the utmost
confusion he order a post-chaise to be instantly get ready, and,
have recommend his nephew to the care of a servant, he directly
leave the house, scarce know what he do, nor whither he go.
the uncle thus depart, when the servant come to attend the nephew to
bed, have wake he for that purpose, and have at last make he sensible
that his uncle be go, he, instead of accept the kind office
tender he, insist on a chair be call; with this the servant,
who have receive no strict order to the contrary, readily comply;
and, thus be conduct back to the house of Mrs Miller, he have
stagger up to Mr Jones's chamber, as hath be before recount.
this bar of the uncle be now remove (though young Nightingale know
not as yet in what manner), and all party be quickly ready, the
mother, Mr Jones, Mr Nightingale, and his love, stept into a
hackney-coach, which convey they to doctor' Commons; where Miss
Nancy be, in vulgar language, soon make an honest woman, and the poor
mother become, in the pure sense of the word, one of the happy of
all human being.
and now Mr Jones, have see his good office to that poor woman and
her family bring to a happy conclusion, begin to apply himself to
his own concern; but here, lest many of my reader should censure his
folly for thus trouble himself with the affair of other, and lest
some few should think he act more disinterestedly than indeed he
do, we think proper to assure our reader, that he be so far from
be unconcerned in this matter, that he have indeed a very
considerable interest in bring it to that final consummation.
to explain this seem paradox at once, he be one who could truly
say with he in Terence, _homo sum: humani nihil a me alienum puto_.
he be never an indifferent spectator of the misery or happiness of
any one; and he feel either the one or the other in great proportion
as he himself contribute to either. he could not, therefore, be the
instrument of raise a whole family from the low state of
wretchedness to the high pitch of joy without convey great
felicity to himself; more perhaps than worldly man often purchase to
themselves by undergo the most severe labour, and often by wad
through the deep iniquity.
those reader who be of the same complexion with he will perhaps
think this short chapter contain abundance of matter; while other
may probably wish, short as it be, that it have be totally spar as
impertinent to the main design, which I suppose they conclude be to
bring Mr Jones to the gallow, or, if possible, to a more deplorable
catastrophe.
chapter ix.
contain love-letter of several sort.
Mr Jones, at his return home, find the following letter lie on his
table, which he luckily open in the order they be send.
LETTER I.
"surely I be under some strange infatuation; I cannot keep my
resolution a moment, however strongly make or justly found. last
night I resolve never to see you more; this morning I be willing to
hear if you can, as you say, clear up this affair. and yet I know
that to be impossible. I have say everything to myself which you
can invent.----perhap not. perhaps your invention be strong. come
to I, therefore, the moment you receive this. if you can forge an
excuse I almost promise you to believe it. betrayed too----i will
think no more.----come to I directly.----This be the third letter I
have writ, the two former be burnt----I be almost inclined to burn
this too----i wish I may preserve my senses.----come to I
presently."
LETTER II.
"if you ever expect to be forgive, or even suffer within my
door, come to I this instant."
LETTER III.
"I now find you be not at home when my note come to your lodging.
the moment you receive this let I see you;--I shall not stir out;
nor shall anybody be let in but yourself. sure nothing can detain
you long."
Jones have just read over these three billet when Mr Nightingale come
into the room. "well, Tom," say he, "any news from Lady Bellaston,
after last night's adventure?" (for it be now no secret to any one in
that house who the lady be). "the Lady Bellaston?" answer Jones
very gravely.----"Nay, dear Tom," cry Nightingale, "donot be so
reserve to your friend. though I be too drunk to see her last
night, I see she at the masquerade. do you think I be ignorant who the
queen of the fairy be?" "and do you really then know the lady at
the masquerade?" say Jones. "yes, upon my soul, do I," say
Nightingale, "and have give you twenty hint of it since, though you
seem always so tender on that point, that I would not speak plainly.
I fancy, my friend, by your extreme nicety in this matter, you be not
so well acquainted with the character of the lady as with her person.
donot be angry, Tom, but upon my honour, you be not the first young
fellow she hath debauch. her reputation be in no danger, believe
I."
Though Jones have no reason to imagine the lady to have be of the
vestal kind when his amour begin; yet, as he be thoroughly ignorant
of the town, and have very little acquaintance in it, he have no
knowledge of that character which be vulgarly call a demirep; that
be to say, a woman who intrigue with every man she like, under the
name and appearance of virtue; and who, though some over-nice lady
will not be see with she, be visit (as they term it) by the whole
town, in short, whom everybody know to be what nobody call she.
when he find, therefore, that Nightingale be perfectly acquaint
with his intrigue, and begin to suspect that so scrupulous a delicacy
as he have hitherto observe be not quite necessary on the occasion,
he give a latitude to his friend's tongue, and desire he to speak
plainly what he know, or have ever hear of the lady.
Nightingale, who, in many other instance, be rather too effeminate
in his disposition, have a pretty strong inclination to tittle-tattle.
he have no soon, therefore, receive a full liberty of speak from
Jones, than he enter upon a long narrative concern the lady;
which, as it contain many particular highly to her dishonour, we
have too great a tenderness for all woman of condition to repeat. we
would cautiously avoid give an opportunity to the future
commentator on our work, of make any malicious application and of
force we to be, against our will, the author of scandal, which never
enter into our head.
Jones, have very attentively hear all that Nightingale have to say,
fetch a deep sigh; which the other, observe, cry, "Heyday! why,
thou art not in love, I hope! have I imagine my story would have
affect you, I promise you should never have hear they." "o my dear
friend!" cry Jones, "I be so entangle with this woman, that I know
not how to extricate myself. in love, indeed! no, my friend, but I be
under obligation to she, and very great one. since you know so much,
I will be very explicit with you. it be owing, perhaps, solely to she,
that I have not, before this, want a bit of bread. how can I
possibly desert such a woman? and yet I must desert she, or be guilty
of the black treachery to one who deserve infinitely well of I
than she can; a woman, my Nightingale, for whom I have a passion which
few can have an idea of. I be half distracted with doubt how to act."
"and be this other, pray, an honourable mistress?" cry Nightingale.
"honourable!" answer Jones; "no breath ever yet durst sully her
reputation. the sweetest air be not pure, the limpid stream not
clear, than her honour. she be all over, both in mind and body,
consummate perfection. she be the most beautiful creature in the
universe: and yet she be mistress of such noble elevated quality,
that, though she be never from my thought, I scarce ever think of her
beauty but when I see it."--"And can you, my good friend," cry
Nightingale, "with such an engagement as this upon your hand,
hesitate a moment about quit such a--" "hold," say Jones, "no
more abuse of she: I det the thought of ingratitude." "Pooh!"
answer the other, "you be not the first upon whom she hath
confer obligation of this kind. she be remarkably liberal where
she like; though, let I tell you, her favour be so prudently
bestow, that they should rather raise a man's vanity than his
gratitude." in short, Nightingale proceed so far on this head, and
tell his friend so many story of the lady, which he swear to the
truth of, that he entirely remove all esteem for she from the breast
of Jones; and his gratitude be lessen in proportion. indeed, he
begin to look on all the favour he have receive rather as wage than
benefit, which depreciate not only she, but himself too in his own
conceit, and put he quite out of humour with both. from this disgust,
his mind, by a natural transition, turn towards Sophia; her virtue,
her purity, her love to he, her suffering on his account, fill all
his thought, and make his commerce with Lady Bellaston appear still
more odious. the result of all be, that, though his turn himself
out of her service, in which light he now see his affair with she,
would be the loss of his bread; yet he determine to quit she, if he
could but find a handsome pretence: which be communicate to his
friend, Nightingale consider a little, and then say, "I have it, my
boy! I have find out a sure method; propose marriage to she, and I
would venture hang upon the success." "marriage?" cry Jones. "ay,
propose marriage," answer Nightingale, "and she will declare off in
a moment. I know a young fellow whom she keep formerly, who make the
offer to she in earnest, and be presently turn off for his pain."
Jones declare he could not venture the experiment. "perhaps," say
he, "she may be less shocked at this proposal from one man than from
another. and if she should take I at my word, where be I then?
catch, in my own trap, and undo for ever." "no;" answer
Nightingale, "not if I can give you an expedient by which you may at
any time get out of the trap."----"What expedient can that be?"
reply Jones. "this," answer Nightingale. "the young fellow I
mention, who be one of the most intimate acquaintance I have in the
world, be so angry with she for some ill office she hath since do
he, that I be sure he would, without any difficulty, give you a sight
of her letter; upon which you may decently break with she; and
declare off before the knot be tye, if she should really be willing
to tie it, which I be convinced she will not."
after some hesitation, Jones, upon the strength of this assurance,
consent; but, as he swear he want the confidence to propose the
matter to her face, he write the following letter, which Nightingale
dictated:--
"MADAM,
"I be extremely concerned, that, by an unfortunate engagement
abroad, I should have miss receive the honour of your ladyship's
command the moment they come; and the delay which I must now suffer
of vindicate myself to your ladyship greatly add to this
misfortune. o, Lady Bellaston! what a terror have I be in for fear
your reputation should be expose by these perverse accident! there
be one only way to secure it. I need not name what that be. only
permit I to say, that as your honour be as dear to I as my own, so
my sole ambition be to have the glory of lay my liberty at your
foot; and believe I when I assure you, I can never be make
completely happy without you generously bestow on I a legal right
of call you mine for ever.--I am,
madam,
with most profound respect,
your ladyship's most oblige,
obedient, humble servant,
THOMAS JONES."
to this she presently return the follow answer:
"SIR,
"when I read over your serious epistle, I could, from its coldness
and formality, have swear that you already have the legal right you
mention; nay, that we have for many year compose that monstrous
animal a husband and wife. do you really then imagine I a fool? or
do you fancy yourself capable of so entirely persuade I out of my
sens, that I should deliver my whole fortune into your power, in
order to enable you to support your pleasure at my expense? be
these the proof of love which I expect? be this the return for--?
but I scorn to upbraid you, and be in great admiration of your
profound respect.
"P.S. I be prevent from revising:----perhap I have say more than
I meant.----come to I at eight this evening."
Jones, by the advice of his privy-council, reply:
"MADAM,
"it be impossible to express how much I be shock at the suspicion
you entertain of I. can Lady Bellaston have confer favour on a
man whom she could believe capable of so base a design? or can she
treat the most solemn tie of love with contempt? can you imagine,
madam, that if the violence of my passion, in an unguarded moment,
overcome the tenderness which I have for your honour, I would think
of indulge myself in the continuance of an intercourse which could
not possibly escape long the notice of the world; and which, when
discover, must prove so fatal to your reputation? if such be your
opinion of I, I must pray for a sudden opportunity of return
those pecuniary obligation, which I have be so unfortunate to
receive at your hand; and for those of a more tender kind, I shall
ever remain, &c." and so conclude in the very word with which he
have conclude the former letter.
the lady answer as follow:
"I see you be a villain! and I despise you from my soul. if you
come here I shall not be at home."
Though Jones be well satisfied with his deliverance from a thraldom
which those who have ever experience it will, I apprehend, allow to
be none of the light, he be not, however, perfectly easy in his
mind. there be in this scheme too much of fallacy to satisfy one who
utterly detest every specie of falshood or dishonesty: nor would
he, indeed, have submit to put it in practice, have he not be
involve in a distressful situation, where he be oblige to be guilty
of some dishonour, either to the one lady or the other; and surely the
reader will allow, that every good principle, as well as love, plead
strongly in favour of Sophia.
Nightingale highly exult in the success of his stratagem, upon which
he receive many thank and much applause from his friend. he
answer, "Dear Tom, we have confer very different obligation on
each other. to I you owe the regain your liberty; to you I owe the
loss of mine. but if you be as happy in the one instance as I be in
the other, I promise you we be the two happy fellow in England."
the two gentleman be now summon down to dinner, where Mrs Miller,
who perform herself the office of cook, have exert her good talent
to celebrate the wedding of her daughter. this joyful circumstance she
ascribe principally to the friendly behaviour of Jones, her whole
soul be fire with gratitude towards he, and all her look, word,
and action, be so busied in express it, that her daughter, and
even her new son-in-law, be very little object of her
consideration.
Dinner be just end when Mrs Miller receive a letter; but as we
have have letter enow in this chapter, we shall communicate its
content in our next.
Chapter x.
consist partly of fact, and partly of observation upon they.
the letter then which arrive at the end of the precede chapter be
from Mr Allworthy, and the purport of it be, his intention to come
immediately to town, with his nephew Blifil, and a desire to be
accommodate with his usual lodging, which be the first floor for
himself, and the second for his nephew.
the chearfulness which have before display itself in the countenance
of the poor woman be a little clouded on this occasion. this news do
indeed a good deal disconcert she. to requite so disintereste a match
with her daughter, by presently turn her new son-in-law out of
door, appear to her very unjustifiable on the one hand; and on the
other, she could scarce bear the thought of make any excuse to Mr
Allworthy, after all the obligation receive from he, for deprive
he of lodging which be indeed strictly his due; for that
gentleman, in confer all his numberless benefit on other, act
by a rule diametrically opposite to what be practise by most generous
people. he contrive, on all occasion, to hide his beneficence, not
only from the world, but even from the object of it. he constantly
use the word Lend and Pay, instead of Give; and by every other
method he could invent, always lessen with his tongue the favour he
confer, while he be heap they with both his hand. when he
settle the annuity of £50 a year therefore on Mrs Miller, he tell
she, "it be in consideration of always have her first-floor when he
be in town (which he scarce ever intend to be), but that she might
let it at any other time, for that he would always send she a month's
warning." he be now, however, hurry to town so suddenly, that he
have no opportunity of give such notice; and this hurry probably
prevent he, when he write for his lodging, add, if they be
then empty; for he would most certainly have be well satisfied to
have relinquish they, on a less sufficient excuse than what Mrs
Miller could now have make.
but there be a sort of person, who, as Prior excellently well
remark, direct their conduct by something
beyond the fix'd and settle rule
of vice and virtue in the school,
beyond the letter of the law.
to these it be so far from be sufficient that their defence would
acquit they at the Old Bailey, that they be not even content,
though conscience, the severest of all judge, should discharge they.
nothing short of the fair and honourable will satisfy the delicacy of
their mind; and if any of their action fall short of this mark, they
mope and pine, be as uneasy and restless as a murderer, who be afraid
of a ghost, or of the hangman.
Mrs Miller be one of these. she could not conceal her uneasiness at
this letter; with the content of which she have no soon acquaint
the company, and give some hint of her distress, than Jones, her
good angel, presently relieve her anxiety. "as for myself, madam,"
say he, "my lodging be at your service at a moment's warning; and Mr
Nightingale, I be sure, as he cannot yet prepare a house fit to
receive his lady, will consent to return to his new lodging, whither
Mrs Nightingale will certainly consent to go." with which proposal
both husband and wife instantly agree.
the reader will easily believe, that the cheek of Mrs Miller begin
again to glow with additional gratitude to Jones; but, perhaps, it may
be more difficult to persuade he, that Mr Jones have in his last
speech call her daughter Mrs Nightingale (it be the first time
that agreeable sound have ever reach her ear), give the fond mother
more satisfaction, and warm her heart more towards Jones, than his
have dissipate her present anxiety.
the next day be then appoint for the removal of the new-married
couple, and of Mr Jones, who be likewise to be provide for in the
same house with his friend. and now the serenity of the company be
again restore, and they past the day in the utmost chearfulness, all
except Jones, who, though he outwardly accompany the rest in their
mirth, feel many a bitter pang on the account of his Sophia, which
be not a little heighten by the news of Mr Blifil's come to town
(for he clearly see the intention of his journey); and what greatly
aggravate his concern be, that Mrs Honour, who have promise to
inquire after Sophia, and to make her report to he early the next
evening, have disappoint he.
in the situation that he and his mistress be in at this time, there
be scarce any ground for he to hope that he should hear any good
news; yet he be as impatient to see Mrs Honour as if he have expect
she would bring he a letter with an assignation in it from Sophia,
and bear the disappointment as ill. whether this impatience arise from
that natural weakness of the human mind, which make it desirous to
know the bad, and render uncertainty the most intolerable of pain;
or whether he still flatter himself with some secret hope, we will
not determine. but that it might be the last, whoever have love cannot
but know. for of all the power exercise by this passion over our
mind, one of the most wonderful be that of support hope in the
midst of despair. difficulty, improbability, nay, impossibility,
be quite overlook by it; so that to any man extremely in love, may
be apply what Addison say of Caesar,
"the Alps, and Pyrenaeans, sink before he!"
yet it be equally true, that the same passion will sometimes make
mountain of molehill, and produce despair in the midst of hope; but
these cold fit last not long in good constitution. which temper
Jones be now in, we leave the reader to guess, have no exact
information about it; but this be certain, that he have spend two hour
in expectation, when, be unable any long to conceal his
uneasiness, he retire to his room; where his anxiety have almost make
he frantick, when the following letter be bring he from Mrs
Honour, with which we shall present the reader _verbatim et
literatim._
"SIR,
"I shud sartenly haf kale on you a cordin too mi prommiss haddunt
itt bin that hur lashipp prevent mee; for to bee sur, Sir, you nose
very well that evere persun must luk furst at ome, and sartenly such
anuther offar mite not have ever hapne, so as I shud ave bin justly
to blam, have I not excepted of it when her lashipp be so veri kind
as to offar to mak mee hur one uman without mi ever askin any such
thing, to be sur shee be win of thee good ladi in thee wurld, and
pepil who sase to the kontrari must bee veri wiket pepil in thare
hart. to bee sur if ever I ave sad any thing of that kine it as bin
thru ignoren, and I be hartili sorri for it. I nose your onur to be
a genteelman of more onur and onesty, if I ever say ani such thing,
to repete it to hurt a pore servant that as alwais add thee grat
respect in thee wurld for ure onur. to be sur win shud kepe won
tung within won tooth, for no boddi nose what may hapen; and to bee
sur if ani boddi ad tolde mee yesterday, that I shud haf bin in so
gud a plase to day, I shud not haf beleeve it; for to be sur I
never be a dremd of any such thing, nor shud I ever have soft after
ani other bodi's plase; but as her lashipp wass so kine of her one a
cord too give it mee without askin, to be sur Mrs Etoff herself, nor
no other boddi can blam mee for exceptin such a thing when it fal
in mi waye. I beg ure Onur not to menshion ani thing of what I haf
sad, for I wish ure Onur all thee gud luk in the wurld; and I donot
cuestion butt thatt u will haf Madam Sofia in the end; butt ass to
miself ure onur nose I kant bee of ani farder sarvis to u in that
matar, nou bein under thee cumand off anuther parson, and nott mi
one mistress, I begg ure Onur to say nothing of what past, and
belive I to be, sir, ure Onur's umble servant to cumand till deth,
"HONOUR BLACKMORE."
Various be the conjecture which Jones entertain on this step of
Lady Bellaston; who, in reality, have little farth design than to
secure within her own house the repository of a secret, which she
choose should make no farth progress than it have make already; but
mostly, she desire to keep it from the ear of Sophia; for though
that young lady be almost the only one who would never have repeat
it again, her ladyship could not persuade herself of this; since, as
she now hat poor Sophia with most implacable hatred, she conceive a
reciprocal hatred to herself to be lodge in the tender breast of our
heroine, where no such passion have ever yet find an entrance.
while Jones be terrify himself with the apprehension of a thousand
dreadful machination, and deep political design, which he imagine
to be at the bottom of the promotion of Honour, Fortune, who hitherto
seem to have be an utter enemy to his match with Sophia, try a
new method to put a final end to it, by throw a temptation in his
way, which in his present desperate situation it seem unlikely he
should be able to resist.
Chapter xi.
contain curious, but not unprecedented matter.
there be a lady, one Mrs Hunt, who have often see Jones at the house
where he lodge, be intimately acquaint with the woman there, and
indeed a very great friend to Mrs Miller. her age be about thirty,
for she own six-and-twenty; her face and person very good, only
incline a little too much to be fat. she have be marry young by
her relation to an old Turkey merchant, who, have get a great
fortune, have leave off trade. with he she live without reproach, but
not without pain, in a state of great self-denial, for about twelve
year; and her virtue be reward by his dying and leave she very
rich. the first year of her widowhood be just at an end, and she have
past it in a good deal of retirement, see only a few particular
friend, and divide her time between her devotion and novel, of
which she be always extremely fond. very good health, a very warm
constitution, and a good deal of religion, make it absolutely
necessary for she to marry again; and she resolve to please herself
in her second husband, as she have do her friend in the first. from
she the follow billet be bring to jones:--
"SIR,
"from the first day I see you, I doubt my eye have tell you too
plainly that you be not indifferent to I; but neither my tongue
nor my hand should have ever avow it, have not the lady of the
family where you be lodge give I such a character of you, and
tell I such proof of your virtue and goodness, as convince I you
be not only the most agreeable, but the most worthy of man. I have
also the satisfaction to hear from they, that neither my person,
understanding, or character, be disagreeable to you. I have a
fortune sufficient to make we both happy, but which cannot make I
so without you. in thus dispose of myself, I know I shall incur
the censure of the world; but if I do not love you more than I fear
the world, I should not be worthy of you. one only difficulty stop
I: I be inform you be engage in a commerce of gallantry with a
woman of fashion. if you think it worth while to sacrifice that to
the possession of I, I be your; if not, forget my weakness, and
let this remain an eternal secret between you and
"ARABELLA HUNT."
at the reading of this, Jones be put into a violent flutter. his
fortune be then at a very low ebb, the source be stopt from which
hitherto he have be supply. of all he have receive from Lady
Bellaston, not above five guineas remain; and that very morning he
have be dun by a tradesman for twice that sum. his honourable
mistress be in the hand of her father, and he have scarce any hope
ever to get she out of they again. to be subsist at her expense,
from that little fortune she have independent of her father, go much
against the delicacy both of his pride and his love. this lady's
fortune would have be exceed convenient to he, and he could have
no objection to she in any respect. on the contrary, he like she as
well as he do any woman except Sophia. but to abandon Sophia, and
marry another, that be impossible; he could not think of it upon any
account, yet why should he not, since it be plain she could not be
his? would it not be kind to she, than to continue she long
engage in a hopeless passion for he? ought he not to do so in
friendship to she? this notion prevail some moment, and he have
almost determined to be false to she from a high point of honour: but
that refinement be not able to stand very long against the voice of
nature, which cry in his heart that such friendship be treason to
love. at last he call for pen, ink, and paper, and writ as follow
to Mrs Hunt:--
"MADAM,
"it would be but a poor return to the favour you have do I to
sacrifice any gallantry to the possession of you, and I would
certainly do it, though I be not disengage, as at present I be,
from any affair of that kind. but I should not be the honest man you
think I, if I do not tell you that my affection be engage to
another, who be a woman of virtue, and one that I never can leave,
though it be probable I shall never possess she. God forbid that, in
return of your kindness to I, I should do you such an injury as to
give you my hand when I cannot give my heart. no; I have much rather
starve than be guilty of that. even though my mistress be marry
to another, I would not marry you unless my heart have entirely
efface all impression of she. be assure that your secret be not
more safe in your own breast, than in that of your most oblige, and
grateful humble servant,
"T. JONES."
when our heroe have finish and send this letter, he go to his
scrutore, take out Miss Western's muff, kiss it several time, and
then strut some turn about his room, with more satisfaction of
mind than ever any Irishman feel in carry off a fortune of fifty
thousand pound.
Chapter xii.
a discovery make by Partridge.
while Jones be exult in the consciousness of his integrity,
Partridge come caper into the room, as be his custom when he
bring, or fancy he bring, any good tiding. he have be
despatch that morning by his master, with order to endeavour, by
the servant of Lady Bellaston, or by any other mean, to discover
whither Sophia have be convey; and he now return, and with a
joyful countenance tell our heroe that he have find the lose bird. "I
have see, sir," say he, "Black George, the gamekeeper, who be one of
the servant whom the squire hath bring with he to town. I know he
presently, though I have not see he these several year; but you
know, sir, he be a very remarkable man, or, to use a purer phrase, he
hath a most remarkable beard, the large and black I ever see. it
be some time, however, before Black George could recollect I."
"well, but what be your good news?" cry Jones; "what do you know of
my Sophia?" "you shall know presently, sir," answer Partridge, "I be
come to it as fast as I can. you be so impatient, sir, you would
come at the infinitive mood before you can get to the imperative. as I
be say, sir, it be some time before he recollect my
face."--"Confound your face!" cry Jones, "what of my Sophia?" "Nay,
sir," answer Partridge, "I know nothing more of Madam Sophia than
what I be go to tell you; and I should have tell you all before
this if you have not interrupt I; but if you look so angry at I you
will frighten all of it out of my head, or, to use a purer phrase, out
of my memory. I never see you look so angry since the day we leave
Upton, which I shall remember if I be to live a thousand
year."--"Well, pray go on your own way," say Jones: "you be
resolve to make I mad I find." "not for the world," answer
Partridge, "I have suffer enough for that already; which, as I say,
I shall bear in my remembrance the long day I have to live." "well,
but Black George?" cry Jones. "well, sir, as I be say, it be a
long time before he could recollect I; for, indeed, I be very much
alter since I see he. _Non sum quali eram._ I have have trouble in
the world, and nothing alter a man so much as grief. I have hear it
will change the colour of a man's hair in a night. however, at last,
know I he do, thatbe sure enough; for we be both of an age, and
be at the same charity school. George be a great dunce, but no
matter for that; all man do not thrive in the world accord to their
learning. I be sure I have reason to say so; but it will be all one a
thousand year hence. well, sir, where be I?--O--well, we no soon
know each other, than, after many hearty shake by the hand, we agree
to go to an alehouse and take a pot, and by good luck the beer be
some of the good I have meet with since I have be in town. now, sir,
I be come to the point; for no soon do I name you, and tell he
that you and I come to town together, and have live together ever
since, than he call for another pot, and swear he would drink to
your health; and indeed he drink your health so heartily that I be
overjoyed to see there be so much gratitude leave in the world; and
after we have empty that pot I say I would buy my pot too, and so we
drink another to your health; and then I make haste home to tell you
the news."
"what news?" cry Jones, "you have not mention a word of my
Sophia!" "bless I! I have like to have forget that. indeed, we
mention a great deal about young Madam Western, and George tell I
all; that Mr Blifil be come to town in order to be married to she.
he have well make haste then, say I, or somebody will have she before
he come; and, indeed, say I, Mr Seagrim, it be a thousand pity
somebody should not have she; for he certainly love she above all the
woman in the world. I would have both you and she know, that it be not
for her fortune he follow she; for I can assure you, as to matter of
that, there be another lady, one of much great quality and fortune
than she can pretend to, who be so fond of somebody that she come
after he day and night."
here Jones fall into a passion with Partridge, for have, as he say,
betray he; but the poor fellow answer, he have mention no name:
"besides, sir," say he, "I can assure you George be sincerely your
friend, and wish Mr Blifil at the devil more than once; nay, he say
he would do anything in his power upon earth to serve you; and so I be
convince he will. betray you, indeed! why, I question whether you
have a well friend than George upon earth, except myself, or one
that would go far to serve you."
"well," say Jones, a little pacify, "you say this fellow, who, I
believe, indeed, be enough incline to be my friend, live in the same
house with Sophia?"
"in the same house!" answer Partridge; "why, sir, he be one of the
servant of the family, and very well drest I promise you he be; if it
be not for his black beard you would hardly know he."
"one service then at least he may do I," say Jones: "sure he can
certainly convey a letter to my Sophia."
"you have hit the nail _ad unguem_" cry Partridge; "how come I not
to think of it? I will engage he shall do it upon the very first
mention."
"well, then," say Jones, "do you leave I at present, and I will
write a letter, which you shall deliver to he to-morrow morning; for
I suppose you know where to find he."
"o yes, sir," answer Partridge, "I shall certainly find he again;
there be no fear of that. the liquor be too good for he to stay away
long. I make no doubt but he will be there every day he stay in
town."
"so you donot know the street then where my Sophia be lodge?" cry
Jones.
"indeed, sir, I do," say Partridge.
"what be the name of the street?" cry Jones.
"the name, sir? why, here, sir, just by," answer Partridge, "not
above a street or two off. I donot, indeed, know the very name; for,
as he never tell I, if I have ask, you know, it might have put some
suspicion into his head. no, no, sir, let I alone for that. I be too
cunning for that, I promise you."
"thou art most wonderfully cunning, indeed," reply Jones; "however,
I will write to my charmer, since I believe you will be cunning enough
to find he to-morrow at the alehouse."
and now, have dismiss the sagacious Partridge, Mr Jones sit
himself down to write, in which employment we shall leave he for a
time. and here we put an end to the fifteenth book.
BOOK XVI.
contain the SPACE of five day.
Chapter i.
of prologue.
I have hear of a dramatic writer who use to say, he would rather
write a play than a prologue; in like manner, I think, I can with less
pain write one of the book of this history than the prefatory
chapter to each of they.
to say the truth, I believe many a hearty curse hath be devoted on
the head of that author who first institute the method of prefix
to his play that portion of matter which be call the prologue; and
which at first be part of the piece itself, but of latter year hath
have usually so little connexion with the drama before which it stand,
that the prologue to one play might as well serve for any other. those
indeed of more modern date, seem all to be write on the same three
topic, viz., an abuse of the taste of the town, a condemnation of all
contemporary author, and an eulogium on the performance just about to
be represent. the sentiment in all these be very little varied,
nor be it possible they should; and indeed I have often wonder at
the great invention of author, who have be capable of find such
various phrase to express the same thing.
in like manner I apprehend, some future historian (if any one shall do
I the honour of imitate my manner) will, after much scratch his
pate, bestow some good wish on my memory, for have first
establish these several initial chapter; most of which, like modern
prologue, may as properly be prefix to any other book in this
history as to that which they introduce, or indeed to any other
history as to this.
but however author may suffer by either of these invention, the
reader will find sufficient emolument in the one as the spectator hath
long find in the other.
first, it be well know that the prologue serve the critic for an
opportunity to try his faculty of hiss, and to tune his cat-call to
the good advantage; by which mean, I have know those musical
instrument so well prepare, that they have be able to play in full
concert at the first rise of the curtain.
the same advantage may be draw from these chapter, in which the
critic will be always sure of meet with something that may serve as
a whetstone to his noble spirit; so that he may fall with a more
hungry appetite for censure on the history itself. and here his
sagacity must make it needless to observe how artfully these chapter
be calculate for that excellent purpose; for in these we have always
take care to intersperse somewhat of the sour or acid kind, in order
to sharpen and stimulate the say spirit of criticism.
again, the indolent reader, as well as spectator, find great
advantage from both these; for, as they be not oblige either to see
the one or read the other, and both the play and the book be thus
protract, by the former they have a quarter of an hour long
allow they to sit at dinner, and by the latter they have the
advantage of begin to read at the fourth or fifth page instead of
the first, a matter by no mean of trivial consequence to person who
read book with no other view than to say they have read they, a more
general motive to reading than be commonly imagine; and from which
not only law book, and good book, but the page of Homer and Virgil,
of Swift and Cervantes, have be often turn over.
many other be the emolument which arise from both these, but they
be for the most part so obvious, that we shall not at present stay to
enumerate they; especially since it occur to we that the principal
merit of both the prologue and the preface be that they be short.
Chapter ii.
a whimsical adventure which befel the squire, with the distressed
situation of Sophia.
we must now convey the reader to Mr Western's lodging, which be in
Piccadilly, where he be place by the recommendation of the landlord
at the Hercules Pillars at Hyde Park Corner; for at the inn, which be
the first he see on his arrival in town, he place his horse, and in
those lodging, which be the first he hear of, he deposit
himself.
here, when Sophia alight from the hackney-coach, which bring she
from the house of Lady Bellaston, she desire to retire to the
apartment provide for she; to which her father very readily agree,
and whither he attend she himself. a short dialogue, neither very
material nor pleasant to relate minutely, then pass between they, in
which he press she vehemently to give her consent to the marriage
with Blifil, who, as he acquaint she, be to be in town in a few
day; but, instead of comply, she give a more peremptory and
resolute refusal than she have ever do before. this so incense she
father, that after many bitter vow, that he would force she to have
he whether she would or no, he depart from she with many hard word
and curse, lock the door, and put the key into his pocket.
while Sophia be leave with no other company than what attend the
close state prisoner, namely, fire and candle, the squire sit down
to regale himself over a bottle of wine, with his parson and the
landlord of the Hercules Pillars, who, as the squire say, would make
an excellent third man, and could inform they of the news of the town,
and how affair go; for to be sure, say he, he know a great deal,
since the horse of many of the quality stand at his house.
in this agreeable society Mr Western past that evening and great part
of the succeed day, during which period nothing happen of
sufficient consequence to find a place in this history. all this time
Sophia past by herself; for her father swear she should never come out
of her chamber alive, unless she first consent to marry Blifil; nor
do he ever suffer the door to be unlocked, unless to convey her food,
on which occasion he always attend himself.
the second morning after his arrival, while he and the parson be at
breakfast together on a toast and tankard, he be inform that a
gentleman be below to wait on he.
"a gentleman!" quoth the squire, "who the devil can he be? do, doctor,
go down and see who 'tis. Mr Blifil can hardly be come to town
yet.--Go down, do, and know what his business be."
the doctor return with an account that it be a very well-dr man,
and by the ribbon in his hat he take he for an officer of the army;
that he say he have some particular business, which he could deliver
to none but Mr Western himself.
"an officer!" cry the squire; "what can any such fellow have to do
with I? if he want an order for baggage-waggon, I be no justice of
peace here, nor can I grant a warrant.--let un come up then, if he
must speak to I."
a very genteel man now enter the room; who, have make his
compliment to the squire, and desire the favour of be alone with
he, deliver himself as follows:--
"Sir, I come to wait upon you by the command of my Lord Fellamar; but
with a very different message from what I suppose you expect, after
what past the other night."
"my lord who?" cry the squire; "I never hear the name o'un."
"his lordship," say the gentleman, "be willing to impute everything
to the effect of liquor, and the most trifling acknowledgment of that
kind will set everything right; for as he hath the most violent
attachment to your daughter, you, sir, be the last person upon earth
from whom he would resent an affront; and happy be it for you both
that he hath give such public demonstration of his courage as to be
able to put up an affair of this kind without danger of any imputation
on his honour. all he desire, therefore, be, that you will before I
make some acknowledgment; the slight in the world will be
sufficient; and he intend this afternoon to pay his respect to you,
in order to obtain your leave of visit the young lady on the
footing of a lover."
"I donot understand much of what you say, sir," say the squire; "but
I suppose, by what you talk about my daughter, that this be the lord
which my cousin, Lady Bellaston, mention to I, and say something
about his court my daughter. if so be that how that be the
case--you may give my service to his lordship, and tell un the girl be
dispose of already."
"perhaps, sir," say the gentleman, "you be not sufficiently apprize
of the greatness of this offer. I believe such a person, title, and
fortune would be nowhere refuse."
"Lookee, sir," answer the squire; "to be very plain, my daughter be
bespoke already; but if she be not, I would not marry she to a lord
upon any account; I hate all lord; they be a parcel of courtier and
Hanoverians, and I will have nothing to do with they."
"well, sir," say the gentleman, "if that be your resolution, the
message I be to deliver to you be that my lord desire the favour of
your company this morning in Hyde Park."
"you may tell my lord," answer the squire, "that I be busy and
cannot come. I have enough to look after at home, and cannot stir
abroad on any account."
"I be sure, sir," quoth the other, "you be too much a gentleman to
send such a message; you will not, I be convince, have it say of
you, that, after have affront a noble peer, you refuse he
satisfaction. his lordship would have be willing, from his great
regard to the young lady, to have make up matter in another way; but
unless he be to look on you as a father, his honour will not suffer
his put up such an indignity as you must be sensible you offer
he."
"I offer he!" cry the squire; "it be a d--n'd lie! I never
offer he anything."
upon these word the gentleman return a very short verbal rebuke,
and this he accompany at the same time with some manual
remonstrance, which no soon reach the ear of Mr Western, than
that worthy squire begin to caper very briskly about the room,
bellowing at the same time with all his might, as if desirous to
summon a great number of spectator to behold his agility.
the parson, who have leave great part of the tankard unfinishe, be not
retire far; he immediately attend therefore on the squire's
vociferation, crying, "bless I! sir, whatbe the matter?"--"matter!"
quoth the squire, "herebe a highwayman, I believe, who want to rob
and murder I--for he hath fall upon I with that stick there in his
hand, when I wish I may be d--n'd if I gid un the least provocation."
"how, sir," say the captain, "do you not tell I I lye?"
"no, as I hope to be save," answer the squire, "--I believe I might
say, 'twas a lie that I have offer any affront to my lord--but I
never say the word, `you lie.'--I understand myself well, and you
might have understand yourself well than to fall upon a naked man.
if I have a stick in my hand, you would not have dare strike I. Iwould
have knock thy lantern jaw about thy ear. come down into yard this
minute, and Iwill take a bout with thee at single stick for a break
head, that I will; or I will go into naked room and box thee for a
belly-full. at unt half a man, at unt, Ibe sure."
the captain, with some indignation, reply, "I see, sir, you be
below my notice, and I shall inform his lordship you be below his. I
be sorry I have dirty my finger with you." at which word he
withdraw, the parson interpose to prevent the squire from stop
he, in which he easily prevail, as the other, though he make some
effort for the purpose, do not seem very violently bent on success.
however, when the captain be depart, the squire send many curse
and some menace after he; but as these do not set out from his lip
till the officer be at the bottom of the stair, and grow loud and
louder as he be more and more remote, they do not reach his ear, or
at least do not retard his departure.
Poor Sophia, however, who, in her prison, hear all her father's
outcry from first to last, begin now first to thunder with her foot,
and afterwards to scream as loudly as the old gentleman himself have
do before, though in a much sweet voice. these scream soon
silence the squire, and turn all his consideration towards his
daughter, whom he love so tenderly, that the least apprehension of
any harm happen to she, throw he presently into agony; for,
except in that single instance in which the whole future happiness of
her life be concern, she be sovereign mistress of his
inclination.
have end his rage against the captain, with swear he would take
the law of he, the squire now mount upstairs to Sophia, whom, as
soon as he have unlock and open the door, he find all pale and
breathless. the moment, however, that she see her father, she
collect all her spirit, and, catch he hold by the hand, she
cry passionately, "o my dear sir, I be almost frightened to death! I
hope to heaven no harm hath happen to you." "no, no," cry the
squire, "no great harm. the rascal hath not hurt I much, but rat I
if I donot ha the la o' un." "pray, dear sir," say she, "tell I
whatbe the matter; who be it that hath insult you?" "I donot know
the name o' un," answer western; "some officer fellow, I suppose,
that we be to pay for beat we; but Iwill make he pay this bout, if
the rascal hath get anything, which I suppose he hath not. for thof he
be drest out so vine, I question whether he have get a voot of land in
the world." "but, dear sir," cry she, "what be the occasion of your
quarrel?" "what should it be, Sophy," answer the squire, "but about
you, Sophy? all my misfortune be about you; you will be the death of
your poor father at last. herebe a varlet of a lord, the Lord know
who, forsooth! who hath a taan a liking to you, and because I would
not gi un my consent, he send I a kallenge. come, do be a good girl,
Sophy, and put an end to all your father's trouble; come, do consent
to ha un; he will be in town within this day or two; do but promise I
to marry un as soon as he come, and you will make I the happy man
in the world, and I will make you the happy woman; you shall have
the fine cloath in London, and the fine jewel, and a coach and
six at your command. I promise Allworthy already to give up half my
estate--od rabbet it! I should hardly stick at give up the whole."
"will my papa be so kind," say she, "as to hear I speak?"--"why wout
ask, Sophy?" cry he, "when dost know I have rather hear thy voice
than the musick of the good pack of dog in england.--hear thee, my
dear little girl! I hope I shall hear thee as long as I live; for if I
be ever to lose that pleasure, I would not gee a brass varden to live
a moment long. indeed, Sophy, you do not know how I love you, indeed
you donot, or you never could have run away and leave your poor father,
who hath no other joy, no other comfort upon earth, but his little
Sophy." at these word the tear stand in his eye; and Sophia (with
the tear stream from her) answer, "indeed, my dear papa, I know
you have love I tenderly, and heaven be my witness how sincerely I
have return your affection; nor could anything but an apprehension
of be force into the arm of this man have drive I to run from a
father whom I love so passionately, that I would, with pleasure,
sacrifice my life to his happiness; nay, I have endeavour to reason
myself into do more, and have almost work up a resolution to
endure the most miserable of all life, to comply with your
inclination. it be that resolution alone to which I could not force
my mind; nor can I ever." here the squire begin to look wild, and the
foam appear at his lip, which Sophia, observing, beg to be hear
out, and then proceed: "if my father's life, his health, or any real
happiness of his be at stake, here stand your resolved daughter; may
heaven blast I if there be a misery I would not suffer to preserve
you!--no, that most detest, most loathsome of all lot would I
embrace. I would give my hand to Blifil for your sake."--"I tell thee,
it will preserve I," answer the father; "it will give I health,
happiness, life, everything.--upon my soul I shall die if dost refuse
I; I shall break my heart, I shall, upon my soul."--"Is it possible,"
say she, "you can have such a desire to make I miserable?"--"i tell
thee noa," answer he loudly, "d--n I if there be a thing upon earth
I would not do to see thee happy."--"And will not my dear papa allow
I to have the least knowledge of what will make I so? if it be true
that happiness consist in opinion, what must be my condition, when I
shall think myself the most miserable of all the wretch upon earth?"
"well think yourself so," say he, "than know it by be marry to
a poor bastardly vagabond." "if it will content you, sir," say
Sophia, "I will give you the most solemn promise never to marry he,
nor any other, while my papa live, without his consent. let I
dedicate my whole life to your service; let I be again your poor
Sophy, and my whole business and pleasure be, as it hath be, to
please and divert you." "Lookee, Sophy," answer the squire, "I be
not to be chouse in this manner. your aunt Western would then have
reason to think I the fool she doth. no, no, Sophy, Iwould have you to
know I have a get more wisdom, and know more of the world, than to
take the word of a woman in a matter where a man be concern." "how,
sir, have I deserve this want of confidence?" say she; "have I ever
break a single promise to you? or have I ever be find guilty of a
falsehood from my cradle?" "Lookee, Sophy," cry he; "thatbe neither
here nor there. I be determine upon this match, and have he you
shall, d--n I if shat unt. D--n I if shat unt, though dost hang
thyself the next morning." at repeat which word he clinch his
fist, knit his brow, bit his lip, and thunder so loud, that the
poor afflict, terrified Sophia sunk tremble into her chair, and,
have not a flood of tear come immediately to her relief, perhaps bad
have follow.
western beheld the deplorable condition of his daughter with no more
contrition or remorse than the turnkey of Newgate feel at view the
agony of a tender wife, when take she last farewel of she
condemn husband; or rather he look down on she with the same
emotion which arise in an honest fair tradesman, who see his debtor
drag to prison for £10, which, though a just debt, the wretch be
wickedly unable to pay. or, to hit the case still more nearly, he feel
the same compunction with a bawd, when some poor innocent, whom she
hath ensnare into her hand, fall into fit at the first proposal of
what be call see company. indeed this resemblance would be exact,
be it not that the bawd hath an interest in what she doth, and the
father, though perhaps he may blindly think otherwise, can, in
reality, have none in urge his daughter to almost an equal
prostitution.
in this condition he leave his poor Sophia, and, depart with a very
vulgar observation on the effect of tear, he lock the room, and
return to the parson, who say everything he durst in behalf of the
young lady, which, though perhaps it be not quite so much as his duty
require, yet be it sufficient to throw the squire into a violent
rage, and into many indecent reflection on the whole body of the
clergy, which we have too great an honour for that sacred function to
commit to paper.
Chapter iii.
what happen to Sophia during her confinement.
the landlady of the house where the squire lodge have begin very early
to entertain a strange opinion of her guest. however, as she be
inform that the squire be a man of vast fortune, and as she have
take care to exact a very extraordinary price for her room, she do
not think proper to give any offence; for, though she be not without
some concern for the confinement of poor Sophia, of whose great
sweetness of temper and affability the maid of the house have make so
favourable a report, which be confirm by all the squire's servant,
yet she have much more concern for her own interest than to provoke
one, whom, as she say, she perceive to be a very hastish kind of a
gentleman.
Though Sophia eat but little, yet she be regularly serve with her
meal; indeed, I believe, if she have like any one rarity, that the
squire, however angry, would have spar neither pain nor cost to
have procure it for she; since, however strange it may appear to some
of my reader, he really doate on his daughter, and to give she any
kind of pleasure be the high satisfaction of his life.
the dinner-hour being arrive, Black George carry she up a pullet,
the squire himself (for he have swear not to part with the key)
attend the door. as George deposit the dish, some compliment
pass between he and Sophia (for he have not see she since she leave
the country, and she treat every servant with more respect than some
person shew to those who be in a very slight degree their
inferior). Sophia would have have he take the pullet back, say,
she could not eat; but George beg she to try, and particularly
recommend to she the egg, of which he say it be full.
all this time the squire be wait at the door; but George be a
great favourite with his master, as his employment be in concern of
the high nature, namely, about the game, and be accustom to take
many liberty. he have officiously carry up the dinner, be, as he
say, very desirous to see his young lady; he make therefore no
scruple of keep his master stand above ten minute, while
civility be pass between he and Sophia, for which he receive
only a good-humour rebuke at the door when he return.
the egg of pullet, partridge, pheasant, &c., be, as George well
know, the most favourite dainty of Sophia. it be therefore no
wonder that he, who be a very good-natured fellow, should take care
to supply she with this kind of delicacy, at a time when all the
servant in the house be afraid she would be starve; for she have
scarce swallow a single morsel in the last forty hour.
though vexation hath not the same effect on all person as it usually
hath on a widow, whose appetite it often render sharp than it can
be render by the air on Bansted down, or Salisbury Plain; yet the
sublime grief, notwithstanding what some people may say to the
contrary, will eat at last. and Sophia, herself, after some little
consideration, begin to dissect the fowl, which she find to be as
full of egg as George have report it.
but, if she be pleased with these, it contain something which would
have delight the Royal Society much more; for if a fowl with three
leg be so invaluable a curiosity, when perhaps time hath produce a
thousand such, at what price shall we esteem a bird which so totally
contradict all the law of animal oeconomy, as to contain a letter in
its belly? Ovid tell we of a flower into which Hyacinthus be
metamorphose, that bear letter on its leaf, which Virgil
recommend as a miracle to the Royal Society of his day; but no age
nor nation hath ever record a bird with a letter in its maw.
but though a miracle of this kind might have engage all the
_Académies des Sciences_ in Europe, and perhaps in a fruitless
enquiry; yet the reader, by barely recollect the last dialogue
which pass between Messieurs Jones and Partridge, will be very
easily satisfied from whence this letter come, and how it find its
passage into the fowl.
Sophia, notwithstanding her long fast, and notwithstanding her
favourite dish be there before she, no soon see the letter than she
immediately snatch it up, tear it open, and read as follows:--
"MADAM,
"be I not sensible to whom I have the honour of writing, I should
endeavour, however difficult, to paint the horror of my mind at the
account bring I by Mrs Honour; but as tenderness alone can have
any true idea of the pang which tenderness be capable of feeling,
so can this most amiable quality, which my Sophia possess in the
most eminent degree, sufficiently inform she what her Jones must
have suffer on this melancholy occasion. be there a circumstance
in the world which can heighten my agony, when I hear of any
misfortune which hath befall you? surely there be one only, and
with that I be accurse. it be, my Sophia, the dreadful
consideration that I be myself the wretched cause. perhaps I here do
myself too much honour, but none will envy I an honour which cost
I so extremely dear. pardon I this presumption, and pardon I a
great still, if I ask you, whether my advice, my assistance, my
presence, my absence, my death, or my torture can bring you any
relief? can the most perfect admiration, the most watchful
observance, the most ardent love, the most melting tenderness, the
most resign submission to your will, make you amend for what you
be to sacrifice to my happiness? if they can, fly, my lovely angel,
to those arm which be ever open to receive and protect you; and to
which, whether you bring yourself alone, or the rich of the world
with you, be, in my opinion, an alternative not worth regard. if,
on the contrary, wisdom shall predominate, and, on the most mature
reflection, inform you, that the sacrifice be too great; and if
there be no way leave to reconcile your father, and restore the peace
of your dear mind, but by abandon I, I conjure you drive I for
ever from your thought, exert your resolution, and let no
compassion for my suffering bear the least weight in that tender
bosom. believe I, madam, I so sincerely love you well than
myself, that my great and principal end be your happiness. my first
wish (why would not fortune indulge I in it?) be, and pardon I if
I say, still be, to see you every moment the happy of woman; my
second wish be, to hear you be so; but no misery on earth can equal
mine, while I think you owe an uneasy moment to he who be,
Madam,
in every sense, and to every purpose,
your devoted,
THOMAS JONES."
what Sophia say, or do, or think, upon this letter, how often she
read it, or whether more than once, shall all be leave to our reader's
imagination. the answer to it he may perhaps see hereafter, but not at
present: for this reason, among other, that she do not now write
any, and that for several good cause, one of which be this, she have
no paper, pen, nor ink.
in the evening, while Sophia be meditate on the letter she have
receive, or on something else, a violent noise from below disturb
her meditation. this noise be no other than a round bout at
altercation between two person. one of the combatant, by his voice,
she immediately distinguish to be her father; but she do not so
soon discover the shrill pipe to belong to the organ of her aunt
Western, who be just arrive in town, where have, by mean of one
of her servant, who stopt at the Hercules Pillars, learn where she
brother lodge, she drive directly to his lodging.
we shall therefore take our leave at present of Sophia, and, with our
usual good-breeding, attend her ladyship.
chapter iv.
in which Sophia be deliver from her confinement.
the squire and the parson (for the landlord be now otherwise engage)
be smoake their pipe together, when the arrival of the lady be
first signify. the squire no soon hear her name, than he
immediately run down to usher her upstairs; for he be a great
observer of such ceremonial, especially to his sister, of whom he
stand more in awe than of any other human creature, though he never
would own this, nor do he perhaps know it himself.
Mrs Western, on her arrival in the dining-room, have fling herself
into a chair, begin thus to harangue: "well, surely, no one ever have
such an intolerable journey. I think the road, since so many turnpike
act, be grow bad than ever. La, brother, how could you get into
this odious place? no person of condition, I dare swear, ever set foot
here before." "I donot know," cry the squire, "I think they do well
enough; it be landlord recommend they. I think, as he know most
of the quality, he could well shew I where to get among um." "well,
and wherebe my niece?" say the lady; "have you be to wait upon Lady
Bellaston yet?" "ay, ay," cry the squire, "your niece be safe
enough; she be upstairs in chamber." "how!" answer the lady, "be my
niece in this house, and do she not know of my be here?" "no,
nobody can well get to she," say the squire, "for she be under lock
and key. I have she safe; I vetche she from my lady cousin the first
night I come to town, and I have take care o' she ever since; she be
as secure as a fox in a bag, I promise you." "Good heaven!" return
Mrs Western, "what do I hear? I think what a fine piece of work
would be the consequence of my consent to your come to town
yourself; nay, it be indeed your own headstrong will, nor can I
charge myself with have ever consent to it. do not you promise
I, brother, that you would take none of these headstrong measure?
be it not by these headstrong measure that you force my niece to
run away from you in the country? have you a mind to oblige she to
take such another step?" "Z--ds and the devil!" cry the squire,
dash his pipe on the ground; "do ever mortal hear the like? when I
expect you would have commend I for all I have do, to be fall
upon in this manner!" "how, brother!" say the lady, "have I ever
give you the least reason to imagine I should commend you for lock
up your daughter? have I not often tell you that woman in a free
country be not to be treat with such arbitrary power? we be as
free as the man, and I heartily wish I could not say we deserve that
freedom well. if you expect I should stay a moment long in this
wretched house, or that I should ever own you again as my relation, or
that I should ever trouble myself again with the affair of your
family, I insist upon it that my niece be set at liberty this
instant." this she speak with so command an air, stand with she
back to the fire, with one hand behind she, and a pinch of snuff in
the other, that I question whether Thalestris, at the head of her
Amazons, ever make a more tremendous figure. it be no wonder,
therefore, that the poor squire be not proof against the awe which
she inspire. "there," he cry, throw down the key, "there it be,
do whatever you please. I intend only to have keep she up till
Blifil come to town, which cannot be long; and now if any harm happen
in the mean time, remember who be to be blame for it."
"I will answer it with my life," cry Mrs Western, "but I shall not
intermeddle at all, unless upon one condition, and that be, that you
will commit the whole entirely to my care, without take any one
measure yourself, unless I shall eventually appoint you to act. if you
ratify these preliminary, brother, I yet will endeavour to preserve
the honour of your family; if not, I shall continue in a neutral
state."
"I pray you, good sir," say the parson, "permit yourself this once to
be admonish by her ladyship: peradventure, by commune with young
Madam Sophia, she will effect more than you have be able to
perpetrate by more rigorous measure."
"what, dost thee open upon I?" cry the squire: "if thee dost begin
to babble, I shall whip thee in presently."
"Fie, brother," answer the lady, "be this language to a clergyman?
Mr Supple be a man of sense, and give you the good advice; and the
whole world, I believe, will concur in his opinion; but I must tell
you I expect an immediate answer to my categorical proposal. either
cede your daughter to my disposal, or take she wholly to your own
surprizing discretion, and then I here, before Mr Supple, evacuate the
garrison, and renounce you and your family for ever."
"I pray you let I be a mediator," cry the parson, "let I
supplicate you."
"why, there lie the key on the table," cry the squire. "she may
take un up, if she please: who hinder she?"
"no, brother," answer the lady, "I insist on the formality of its
be deliver I, with a full ratification of all the concession
stipulate."
"why then I will deliver it to you.--There 'tis," cry the squire. "I
be sure, sister, you cannot accuse I of ever deny to trust my
daughter to you. she hath a-live wi' you a whole year and muore to a
time, without my ever zeee she."
"and it would have be happy for she," answer the lady, "if she have
always live with I. nothing of this kind would have happen under
my eye."
"ay, certainly," cry he, "I only be to blame."
"why, you be to blame, brother," answer she. "I have be often
oblige to tell you so, and shall always be oblige to tell you so.
however, I hope you will now amend, and gather so much experience from
past error, as not to defeat my wise machination by your blunder.
indeed, brother, you be not qualified for these negociation. all
your whole scheme of politic be wrong. I once more, therefore,
insist, that you do not intermeddle. remember only what be past."----
"Z--ds and bl--d, sister," cry the squire, "what would you have I
say? you be enough to provoke the devil."
"there, now," say she, "just accord to the old custom. I see,
brother, there be no talk to you. I will appeal to Mr Supple, who
be a man of sense, if I say anything which could put any human
creature into a passion; but you be so wrongheade every way."
"let I beg you, madam," say the parson, "not to irritate his
worship."
"irritate he?" say the lady; "sure, you be as great a fool as
himself. well, brother, since you have promise not to interfere, I
will once more undertake the management of my niece. Lord have mercy
upon all affair which be under the direction of man! the head of
one woman be worth a thousand of your." and now have summon a
servant to show she to Sophia, she depart, bear the key with she.
she be no soon go, than the squire (have first shut the door)
ejaculate twenty bitch, and as many hearty curse against she, not
spar himself for have ever thought of her estate; but add, "now
one hath be a slave so long, it would be pity to lose it at last,
for want of hold out a little long. the bitch cannot live for
ever, and I know I be down for it upon the will."
the parson greatly commend this resolution: and now the squire
have order in another bottle, which be his usual method when
anything either pleased or vex he, do, by drink plentifully of
this medicinal julap, so totally wash away his choler, that his temper
be become perfectly placid and serene, when Mrs Western return with
Sophia into the room. the young lady have on her hat and capuchin, and
the aunt acquaint Mr Western, "that she intend to take her niece
with she to her own lodging; for, indeed, brother," say she, "these
room be not fit to receive a christian soul in."
"very well, madam," quoth western, "whatever you please. the girl can
never be in well hand than your; and the parson here can do I the
justice to say, that I have say fifty time behind your back, that
you be one of the most sensible woman in the world."
"to this," cry the parson, "I be ready to bear testimony."
"Nay, brother," say Mrs Western, "I have always, Ibe sure, give you
as favourable a character. you must own you have a little too much
hastiness in your temper; but when you will allow yourself time to
reflect I never know a man more reasonable."
"why then, sister, if you think so," say the squire, "herebe your
good health with all my heart. I be a little passionate sometimes, but
I scorn to bear any malice. Sophy, do you be a good girl, and do
everything your aunt order you."
"I have not the least doubt of she," answer Mrs Western. "she hath
have already an example before her eye in the behaviour of that wretch
her cousin Harriet, who ruin herself by neglect my advice. O
brother, what think you? you be hardly go out of hearing, when you
set out for London, when who should arrive but that impudent fellow
with the odious irish name--that Fitzpatrick. he break in abruptly
upon I without notice, or I would not have see he. he run on a
long, unintelligible story about his wife, to which he force I to
give he a hearing; but I make he very little answer, and deliver
he the letter from his wife, which I bid he answer himself. I
suppose the wretch will endeavour to find we out, but I beg you will
not see she, for I be determined I will not."
"I zee she!" answer the squire; "you need not fear I. Iwill ge no
encouragement to such undutiful wench. it be well for the fellow,
her husband, I be not at huome. od rabbit it, he should have take a
dance thru the horse-pond, I promise un. you zee, Sophy, what
undutifulness bring volk to. you have an example in your own
family."
"Brother," cry the aunt, "you need not shock my niece by such odious
repetition. why will you not leave everything entirely to I?" "well,
well, I wull, I wull," say the squire.
and now Mrs Western, luckily for Sophia, put an end to the
conversation by order chair to be call. I say luckily, for have
it continue much long, fresh matter of dissension would, most
probably, have arise between the brother and sister; between whom
education and sex make the only difference; for both be equally
violent and equally positive: they have both a vast affection for
Sophia, and both a sovereign contempt for each other.
Chapter v.
in which Jones receive a letter from Sophia, and go to a play with
Mrs Miller and Partridge.
the arrival of Black George in town, and the good office which that
grateful fellow have promise to do for his old benefactor, greatly
comfort Jones in the midst of all the anxiety and uneasiness which
he have suffer on the account of Sophia; from whom, by the mean of
the say George, he receive the follow answer to his letter, which
Sophia, to whom the use of pen, ink, and paper be restore with her
liberty, write the very evening when she depart from her
confinement:
"Sir,
"as I do not doubt your sincerity in what you write, you will be
pleased to hear that some of my affliction be at an end, by the
arrival of my aunt Western, with whom I be at present, and with whom
I enjoy all the liberty I can desire. one promise my aunt hath
insist on my making, which be, that I will not see or converse
with any person without her knowledge and consent. this promise I
have most solemnly give, and shall most inviolably keep: and though
she hath not expressly forbid I writing, yet that must be an
omission from forgetfulness; or this, perhaps, be include in the
word converse. however, as I cannot but consider this as a breach
of her generous confidence in my honour, you cannot expect that I
shall, after this, continue to write myself or to receive letter,
without her knowledge. a promise be with I a very sacred thing, and
to be extend to everything understand from it, as well as to what
be express by it; and this consideration may, perhaps, on
reflection, afford you some comfort. but why should I mention a
comfort to you of this kind; for though there be one thing in which
I can never comply with the good of father, yet be I firmly
resolve never to act in defiance of he, or to take any step of
consequence without his consent. a firm persuasion of this must
teach you to divert your thought from what fortune hath (perhaps)
make impossible. this your own interest persuade you. this may
reconcile, I hope, Mr Allworthy to you; and if it will, you have my
injunction to pursue it. accident have lay some obligation on
I, and your good intention probably more. Fortune may, perhaps, be
some time kind to we both than at present. believe this, that I
shall always think of you as I think you deserve, and be,
Sir,
your obliged humble servant,
Sophia Western.
"I charge you write to I no more--at present at least; and accept
this, which be now of no service to I, which I know you must want,
and think you owe the trifle only to that fortune by which you find
it."[*]
[*] meaning, perhaps, the bank-bill for £100.
a child who hath just learn his letter would have spell this letter
out in less time than Jones take in read it. the sensation it
occasion be a mixture of joy and grief; somewhat like what divide
the mind of a good man when he peruse the will of his deceased
friend, in which a large legacy, which his distress make the more
welcome, be bequeath to he. upon the whole, however, he be more
pleased than displeased; and, indeed, the reader may probably wonder
that he be displeased at all; but the reader be not quite so much in
love as be poor Jones; and love be a disease which, though it may, in
some instance, resemble a consumption (which it sometimes cause), in
other proceed in direct opposition to it, and particularly in this,
that it never flatter itself, or see any one symptom in a favourable
light.
one thing give he complete satisfaction, which be, that his mistress
have regain her liberty, and be now with a lady where she might at
least assure herself of a decent treatment. another comfortable
circumstance be the reference which she make to her promise of never
marry any other man; for however disintereste he might imagine his
passion, and notwithstanding all the generous overture make in his
letter, I very much question whether he could have hear a more
afflict piece of news than that Sophia be married to another,
though the match have be never so great, and never so likely to end
in make she completely happy. that refined degree of platonic
affection which be absolutely detach from the flesh, and be, indeed,
entirely and purely spiritual, be a gift confine to the female part
of the creation; many of whom I have hear declare (and, doubtless,
with great truth), that they would, with the utmost readiness, resign
a lover to a rival, when such resignation be prove to be necessary
for the temporal interest of such lover. hence, therefore, I conclude
that this affection be in nature, though I cannot pretend to say I
have ever see an instance of it.
Mr Jones have spend three hour in read and kiss the aforesaid
letter, and be, at last, in a state of good spirit, from the
last-mention consideration, he agree to carry an appointment,
which he have before make, into execution. this be, to attend Mrs
Miller, and her young daughter, into the gallery at the play-house,
and to admit Mr Partridge as one of the company. for as Jones have
really that taste for humour which many affect, he expect to enjoy
much entertainment in the criticism of Partridge, from whom he
expect the simple dictate of nature, unimproved, indeed, but
likewise unadulterated, by art.
in the first row then of the first gallery do Mr Jones, Mrs Miller,
her young daughter, and Partridge, take their place. partridge
immediately declare it be the fine place he have ever be in. when
the first music be play, he say, "it be a wonder how so many
fiddler could play at one time, without put one another out."
while the fellow be light the upper candle, he cry out to Mrs
Miller, "look, look, madam, the very picture of the man in the end of
the common-prayer book before the gunpowder-treason service." nor
could he help observe, with a sigh, when all the candle be
light, "that here be candle enough burn in one night, to keep an
honest poor family for a whole twelvemonth."
as soon as the play, which be Hamlet, Prince of Denmark, begin,
Partridge be all attention, nor do he break silence till the
entrance of the ghost; upon which he ask Jones, "what man that be
in the strange dress; something," say he, "like what I have see in a
picture. sure it be not armour, be it?" Jones answer, "that be the
ghost." to which Partridge reply with a smile, "persuade I to that,
sir, if you can. though I cannot say I ever actually see a ghost in my
life, yet I be certain I should know one, if I see he, well than
that come to. no, no, sir, ghost donot appear in such dress as
that, neither." in this mistake, which cause much laughter in the
neighbourhood of Partridge, he be suffer to continue, till the
scene between the ghost and Hamlet, when Partridge give that credit to
Mr Garrick, which he have deny to Jones, and fall into so violent a
trembling, that his knee knock against each other. Jones ask he
what be the matter, and whether he be afraid of the warrior upon the
stage? "o la! sir," say he, "I perceive now it be what you tell I. I
be not afraid of anything; for I know it be but a play. and if it be
really a ghost, it could do one no harm at such a distance, and in so
much company; and yet if I be frightened, I be not the only person."
"why, who," cry Jones, "dost thou take to be such a coward here
besides thyself?" "Nay, you may call I coward if you will; but if
that little man there upon the stage be not frightened, I never see
any man frighten in my life. ay, ay: go along with you: ay, to be
sure! whobe fool then? will you? Lud have mercy upon such
fool-hardiness!--whatever happen, it be good enough for
you.----follow you? Iwould follow the devil as soon. Nay, perhaps it be
the devil----for they say he can put on what likeness he pleases.--oh!
here he be again.----No far! no, you have go far enough already;
far than Iwould have go for all the king's dominion." Jones
offer to speak, but Partridge cry "hush, hush! dear sir, donot you
hear he?" and during the whole speech of the ghost, he sit with his
eye fix partly on the ghost and partly on Hamlet, and with his
mouth open; the same passion which succeed each other in Hamlet,
succeed likewise in he.
when the scene be over Jones say, "why, Partridge, you exceed my
expectation. you enjoy the play more than I conceive possible."
"Nay, sir," answer Partridge, "if you be not afraid of the devil, I
cannot help it; but to be sure, it be natural to be surprize at such
thing, though I know there be nothing in they: not that it be the
ghost that surprize I, neither; for I should have know that to have
be only a man in a strange dress; but when I see the little man so
frighten himself, it be that which take hold of I." "and dost thou
imagine, then, Partridge," cry Jones, "that he be really
frightened?" "Nay, sir," say Partridge, "do not you yourself observe
afterwards, when he find it be his own father's spirit, and how he
be murder in the garden, how his fear forsook he by degree, and
he be strike dumb with sorrow, as it be, just as I should have
be, have it be my own case?--but hush! o la! what noise be that?
there he be again.----Well, to be certain, though I know there be
nothing at all in it, I be glad I be not down yonder, where those man
be." then turn his eye again upon Hamlet, "ay, you may draw your
sword; what signify a sword against the power of the devil?"
during the second act, Partridge make very few remark. he greatly
admire the fineness of the dress; nor could he help observe upon
the king's countenance. "well," say he, "how people may be deceive
by face! _Nulla fide fronti_ be, I find, a true saying. who would
think, by look in the king's face, that he have ever commit a
murder?" he then enquire after the ghost; but Jones, who intend he
should be surprize, give he no other satisfaction, than, "that he
might possibly see he again soon, and in a flash of fire."
Partridge sit in a fearful expectation of this; and now, when the
ghost make his next appearance, Partridge cry out, "there, sir, now;
what say you now? be he frighten now or no? as much frightened as
you think I, and, to be sure, nobody can help some fear. I would not
be in so bad a condition as whatbe his name, squire Hamlet, be there,
for all the world. bless I! whatbe become of the spirit? as I be a
living soul, I think I see he sink into the earth." "indeed, you
see right," answer Jones. "well, well," cry Partridge, "I know it
be only a play: and besides, if there be anything in all this, Madam
Miller would not laugh so; for as to you, sir, you would not be
afraid, I believe, if the devil be here in person.--there, there--ay,
no wonder you be in such a passion, shake the vile wicked wretch to
piece. if she be my own mother, I would serve she so. to be sure all
duty to a mother be forfeit by such wicked doings.----ay, go about
your business, I hate the sight of you."
our critic be now pretty silent till the play, which Hamlet
introduce before the king. this he do not at first understand, till
Jones explain it to he; but he no soon enter into the spirit of
it, than he begin to bless himself that he have never commit murder.
then turn to Mrs Miller, he ask she, "if she do not imagine the
king look as if he be touch; though he be," say he, "a good
actor, and doth all he can to hide it. well, I would not have so much
to answer for, as that wicked man there hath, to sit upon a much
high chair than he sit upon. no wonder he run away; for your sake
Iwill never trust an innocent face again."
the grave-dig scene next engage the attention of Partridge, who
express much surprize at the number of skull throw upon the stage.
to which Jones answer, "that it be one of the most famous
burial-place about town." "no wonder then," cry Partridge, "that
the place be haunt. but I never see in my life a bad grave-digger.
I have a sexton, when I be clerk, that should have dig three graf
while he be dig one. the fellow handle a spade as if it be the
first time he have ever have one in his hand. ay, ay, you may sing. you
have rather sing than work, I believe."--upon Hamlet's take up the
skull, he cry out, "well! it be strange to see how fearless some man
be: I never could bring myself to touch anything belong to a dead
man, on any account.--He seem frightened enough too at the ghost, I
think. _Nemo omnibus horis sapit._"
little more worth remembering occur during the play, at the end of
which Jones ask he, "which of the player he have like well?" to
this he answer, with some appearance of indignation at the question,
"the king, without doubt." "indeed, Mr Partridge," say Mrs Miller,
"you be not of the same opinion with the town; for they be all
agree, that Hamlet be act by the good player who ever be on the
stage." "he the good player!" cry Partridge, with a contemptuous
sneer, "why, I could act as well as he myself. I be sure, if I have
see a ghost, I should have look in the very same manner, and do
just as he do. and then, to be sure, in that scene, as you call it,
between he and his mother, where you tell I he act so fine, why,
Lord help I, any man, that is, any good man, that have such a mother,
would have do exactly the same. I know you be only joke with I;
but indeed, madam, though I be never at a play in London, yet I have
see act before in the country; and the king for my money; he
speak all his word distinctly, half as loud again as the
other.--anybody may see he be an actor."
while Mrs Miller be thus engage in conversation with Partridge, a
lady come up to Mr Jones, whom he immediately know to be Mrs
Fitzpatrick. she say, she have see he from the other part of the
gallery, and have take that opportunity of speak to he, as she have
something to say, which might be of great service to himself. she then
acquaint he with her lodging, and make he an appointment the next
day in the morning; which, upon recollection, she presently change to
the afternoon; at which time Jones promise to attend she.
thus end the adventure at the playhouse; where Partridge have
afford great mirth, not only to Jones and Mrs Miller, but to all who
sit within hearing, who be more attentive to what he say, than to
anything that pass on the stage.
he durst not go to bed all that night, for fear of the ghost; and for
many night after sweat two or three hour before he go to sleep,
with the same apprehension, and wake several time in great horror,
cry out, "Lord have mercy upon we! there it be."
Chapter vi.
in which the history be oblige to look back.
it be almost impossible for the good parent to observe an exact
impartiality to his child, even though no superior merit should
bias his affection; but sure a parent can hardly be blame, when that
superiority determine his preference.
as I regard all the personage of this history in the light of my
child; so I must confess the same inclination of partiality to
Sophia; and for that I hope the reader will allow I the same excuse,
from the superiority of her character.
this extraordinary tenderness which I have for my heroine never
suffer I to quit she any long time without the utmost reluctance. I
could now, therefore, return impatiently to enquire what hath happen
to this lovely creature since her departure from her father's, but
that I be oblige first to pay a short visit to Mr Blifil.
Mr Western, in the first confusion into which his mind be cast upon
the sudden news he receive of his daughter, and in the first hurry to
go after she, have not once think of send any account of the
discovery to Blifil. he have not go far, however, before he
recollect himself, and accordingly stopt at the very first inn he
come to, and dispatch away a messenger to acquaint Blifil with his
have find Sophia, and with his firm resolution to marry she to he
immediately, if he would come up after he to town.
as the love which Blifil have for Sophia be of that violent kind,
which nothing but the loss of her fortune, or some such accident,
could lessen, his inclination to the match be not at all alter by
she have run away, though he be oblige to lay this to his own
account. he very readily, therefore, embrace this offer. indeed, he
now propose the gratification of a very strong passion besides
avarice, by marry this young lady, and this be hatre; for he
conclude that matrimony afford an equal opportunity of satisfy
either hatred or love; and this opinion be very probably verify by
much experience. to say the truth, if we be to judge by the ordinary
behaviour of married person to each other, we shall perhaps be apt to
conclude that the generality seek the indulgence of the former passion
only, in their union of everything but of heart.
there be one difficulty, however, in his way, and this arise from Mr
Allworthy. that good man, when he find by the departure of Sophia
(for neither that, nor the cause of it, could be conceal from he),
the great aversion which she have for his nephew, begin to be seriously
concerned that he have be deceive into carry matter so far. he
by no mean concur with the opinion of those parent, who think it
as immaterial to consult the inclination of their child in the
affair of marriage, as to solicit the good pleasure of their servant
when they intend to take a journey; and who be by law, or decency at
least, withhold often from use absolute force. on the contrary, as
he esteem the institution to be of the most sacred kind, he think
every preparatory caution necessary to preserve it holy and inviolate;
and very wisely conclude, that the sure way to effect this be by
lay the foundation in previous affection.
Blifil indeed soon cure his uncle of all anger on the score of
deceit, by many vow and protestation that he have be deceive
himself, with which the many declaration of Western very well
tally; but now to persuade Allworthy to consent to the renew his
address be a matter of such apparent difficulty, that the very
appearance be sufficient to have deter a less enterprizing genius;
but this young gentleman so well know his own talent, that nothing
within the province of cunning seem to he hard to be achieve.
here then he represent the violence of his own affection, and the
hope of subdue aversion in the lady by perseverance. he beg
that, in an affair on which depend all his future repose, he might
at least be at liberty to try all fair mean for success. Heaven
forbid, he say, that he should ever think of prevail by any other
than the most gentle method! "besides, sir," say he, "if they fail,
you may then (which will be surely time enough) deny your consent." he
urge the great and eager desire which Mr Western have for the match;
and lastly, he make great use of the name of Jones, to whom he impute
all that have happen; and from whom, he say, to preserve so valuable
a young lady be even an act of charity.
all these argument be well second by Thwackum, who dwelt a little
strong on the authority of parent than Mr Blifil himself have do.
he ascribe the measure which Mr Blifil be desirous to take to
christian motif; "and though," say he, "the good young gentleman
hath mention charity last, I be almost convinced it be his first and
principal consideration."
Square, possibly, have he be present, would have sing to the same
tune, though in a different key, and would have discover much moral
fitness in the proceeding: but he be now go to Bath for the
recovery of his health.
Allworthy, though not without reluctance, at last yield to the
desire of his nephew. he say he would accompany he to London, where
he might be at liberty to use every honest endeavour to gain the lady:
"but I declare," say he, "I will never give my consent to any
absolute force be put on her inclination, nor shall you ever have
she, unless she can be bring freely to compliance."
thus do the affection of Allworthy for his nephew betray the superior
understanding to be triumph over by the inferior; and thus be the
prudence of the good of head often defeat by the tenderness of the
good of heart.
Blifil, have obtain this unhoped-for acquiescence in his uncle,
rest not till he carry his purpose into execution. and as no
immediate business require Mr Allworthy's presence in the country,
and little preparation be necessary to man for a journey, they set out
the very next day, and arrive in town that evening, when Mr Jones, as
we have see, be divert himself with Partridge at the play.
the morning after his arrival Mr Blifil wait on Mr Western, by whom
he be most kindly and graciously receive, and from whom he have every
possible assurance (perhaps more than be possible) that he should
very shortly be as happy as Sophia could make he; nor would the
squire suffer the young gentleman to return to his uncle till he have,
almost against his will, carry he to his sister.
Chapter vii.
in which Mr Western pay a visit to his sister, in company with Mr
Blifil.
Mrs Western be read a lecture on prudence, and matrimonial
politic, to her niece, when her brother and Blifil break in with less
ceremony than the law of visit require. Sophia no soon see
Blifil than she turn pale, and almost lose the use of all her
faculty; but her aunt, on the contrary, wax red, and, have all
her faculty at command, begin to exert her tongue on the squire.
"Brother," say she, "I be astonish at your behaviour; will you
never learn any regard to decorum? will you still look upon every
apartment as your own, or as belong to one of your country tenant?
do you think yourself at liberty to invade the privacy of woman of
condition, without the least decency or notice?"----"why, what a pox
be the matter now?" quoth the squire; "one would think I have catch
you at--"--"none of your brutality, sir, I beseech you," answer
she.----"you have surprize my poor niece so, that she can hardly, I
see, support herself.----go, my dear, retire, and endeavour to recruit
your spirit; for I see you have occasion." at which word Sophia, who
never receive a more welcome command, hastily withdraw.
"to be sure, sister," cry the squire, "you be mad, when I have
bring Mr Blifil here to court she, to force she away."
"sure, brother," say she, "you be bad than mad, when you know in
what situation affair be, to----I be sure I ask Mr Blifil's pardon,
but he know very well to whom to impute so disagreeable a reception.
for my own part, I be sure I shall always be very glad to see Mr
Blifil; but his own good sense would not have suffer he to proceed
so abruptly, have you not compel he to it."
Blifil bow and stammer, and look like a fool; but western,
without give he time to form a speech for the purpose, answer,
"well, well, I be to blame, if you will, I always be, certainly; but
come, let the girl be fetch back again, or let Mr Blifil go to
her.----He's come up on purpose, and there be no time to be lose."
"Brother," cry Mrs Western, "Mr Blifil, I be confident, understand
himself well than to think of see my niece any more this morning,
after what hath happen. woman be of a nice contexture; and our
spirit, when disorder, be not to be recompose in a moment. have
you suffer Mr Blifil to have send his compliment to my niece, and
to have desire the favour of wait on she in the afternoon, I
should possibly have prevail on she to have see he; but now I
despair of bring about any such matter."
"I be very sorry, madam," cry Blifil, "that Mr Western's
extraordinary kindness to I, which I can never enough acknowledge,
should have occasioned--" "indeed, sir," say she, interrupt he,
"you need make no apology, we all know my brother so well."
"I donot care what anybody know of I," answer the squire;----"but
when must he come to see she? for, consider, I tell you, he be come
up on purpose, and so be allworthy."--"brother," say she, "whatever
message Mr Blifil think proper to send to my niece shall be
deliver to she; and I suppose she will want no instruction to make
a proper answer. I be convinced she will not refuse to see Mr Blifil
at a proper time."--"The devil she willnot!" answer the
squire.--"Odsbud!--Don't we know--I say nothing, but some volk be
wise than all the world.----If I might have have my will, she have not
run away before: and now I expect to hear every moment she be guone
again. for as great a fool as some volk think I, I know very well
she hates----" "no matter, brother," reply Mrs Western, "I will not
hear my niece abuse. it be a reflection on my family. she be an
honour to it; and she will be an honour to it, I promise you. I will
pawn my whole reputation in the world on her conduct.----i shall be
glad to see you, brother, in the afternoon; for I have somewhat of
importance to mention to you.--At present, Mr Blifil, as well as you,
must excuse I; for I be in haste to dress." "well, but," say the
squire, "do appoint a time." "indeed," say she, "I can appoint no
time. I tell you I will see you in the afternoon."--"what the devil
would you have I do?" cry the squire, turn to Blifil; "I can no
more turn she, than a beagle can turn an old hare. perhaps she will
be in a well humour in the afternoon."--"I be condemn, I see,
sir, to misfortune," answer Blifil; "but I shall always own my
obligation to you." he then take a ceremonious leave of Mrs Western,
who be altogether as ceremonious on her part; and then they
depart, the squire mutter to himself with an oath, that Blifil
should see his daughter in the afternoon.
if Mr Western be little pleased with this interview, Blifil be less.
as to the former, he impute the whole behaviour of his sister to her
humour only, and to her dissatisfaction at the omission of ceremony in
the visit; but Blifil see a little deep into thing. he suspect
somewhat of more consequence, from two or three word which dropt from
the lady; and, to say the truth, he suspect right, as will appear
when I have unfold the several matter which will be contain in
the follow chapter.
Chapter viii.
scheme of Lady Bellaston for the ruin of Jones.
Love have take too deep a root in the mind of Lord Fellamar to be
pluck up by the rude hand of Mr Western. in the heat of resentment
he have, indeed, give a commission to Captain Egglane, which the
captain have far exceed in the execution; nor have it be execute at
all, have his lordship be able to find the captain after he have see
Lady Bellaston, which be in the afternoon of the day after he have
receive the affront; but so industrious be the captain in the
discharge of his duty, that, have after long enquiry find out the
squire's lodging very late in the evening, he sit up all night at a
tavern, that he might not miss the squire in the morning, and by that
mean miss the revocation which my lord have send to his lodging.
in the afternoon then next after the intend rape of Sophia, his
lordship, as we have say, make a visit to Lady Bellaston, who lay
open so much of the character of the squire, that his lordship plainly
see the absurdity he have be guilty of in take any offence at his
word, especially as he have those honourable design on his daughter.
he then unbosom the violence of his passion to Lady Bellaston, who
readily undertake the cause, and encourage he with certain assurance
of a most favourable reception from all the elder of the family, and
from the father himself when he should be sober, and should be make
acquaint with the nature of the offer make to his daughter. the only
danger, she say, lie in the fellow she have formerly mention, who,
though a beggar and a vagabond, have, by some mean or other, she know
not what, procure himself tolerable cloath, and past for a
gentleman. "now," say she, "as I have, for the sake of my cousin,
make it my business to enquire after this fellow, I have luckily find
out his lodging;" with which she then acquaint his lordship. "I be
think, my lord," add she "(for this fellow be too mean for your
personal resentment), whether it would not be possible for your
lordship to contrive some method of have he press and send on
board a ship. neither law nor conscience forbid this project: for the
fellow, I promise you, however well drest, be but a vagabond, and as
proper as any fellow in the street to be press into the service;
and as for the conscientious part, surely the preservation of a young
lady from such ruin be a most meritorious act; nay, with regard to the
fellow himself, unless he could succeed (which Heaven forbid) with my
cousin, it may probably be the mean of preserve he from the
gallow, and perhaps may make his fortune in an honest way."
Lord Fellamar very heartily thank her ladyship for the part which
she be pleased to take in the affair, upon the success of which his
whole future happiness entirely depend. he say, he see at present
no objection to the press scheme, and would consider of put it
in execution. he then most earnestly recommend to her ladyship to do
he the honour of immediately mention his proposal to the family;
to whom he say he offer a _carte blanche_, and would settle his
fortune in almost any manner they should require. and after utter
many ecstasy and rapture concern Sophia, he take his leave and
depart, but not before he have receive the strong charge to
beware of Jones, and to lose no time in secure his person, where he
should no long be in a capacity of make any attempt to the ruin
of the young lady.
the moment Mrs Western be arrive at her lodging, a card be
despatch with her compliment to Lady Bellaston; who no soon
receive it than, with the impatience of a lover, she fly to her
cousin, rejoice at this fair opportunity, which beyond her hope
offer itself, for she be much well pleased with the prospect of
make the proposal to a woman of sense, and who know the world, than
to a gentleman whom she honour with the appellation of Hottentot;
though, indeed, from he she apprehend no danger of a refusal.
the two lady be meet, after very short previous ceremonial, fall
to business, which be indeed almost as soon conclude as begin; for
Mrs Western no soon hear the name of Lord Fellamar than her cheek
glow with pleasure; but when she be acquaint with the eagerness
of his passion, the earnestness of his proposal, and the generosity
of his offer, she declare her full satisfaction in the most explicit
term.
in the progress of their conversation their discourse turn to Jones,
and both cousin very pathetically lament the unfortunate attachment
which both agree Sophia have to that young fellow; and Mrs Western
entirely attribute it to the folly of her brother's management. she
conclude, however, at last, with declare her confidence in the good
understanding of her niece, who, though she would not give up her
affection in favour of Blifil, will, I doubt not, say she, soon be
prevail upon to sacrifice a simple inclination to the address of a
fine gentleman, who bring she both a title and a large estate: "for,
indeed," add she, "I must do Sophy the justice to confess this
Blifil be but a hideous kind of fellow, as you know, Bellaston, all
country gentleman be, and hath nothing but his fortune to recommend
he."
"Nay," say Lady Bellaston, "I donot then so much wonder at my cousin;
for I promise you this Jones be a very agreeable fellow, and hath one
virtue, which the man say be a great recommendation to we. what do you
think, Mrs Western--I shall certainly make you laugh; nay, I can
hardly tell you myself for laugh--will you believe that the fellow
hath have the assurance to make love to I? but if you should be
inclined to disbelieve it, here be evidence enough, his own
handwriting, I assure you." she then deliver her cousin the letter
with the proposal of marriage, which, if the reader hath a desire to
see, he will find already on record in the XVth book of this history.
"upon my word I be astonish," say Mrs Western; "this be, indeed, a
masterpiece of assurance. with your leave I may possibly make some use
of this letter." "you have my full liberty," cry Lady Bellaston, "to
apply it to what purpose you please. however, I would not have it
shewn to any but Miss Western, nor to she unless you find occasion."
"well, and how do you use the fellow?" return Mrs Western. "not as
a husband," say the lady; "I be not married, I promise you, my dear.
you know, Bell, I have try the comfort once already; and once, I
think, be enough for any reasonable woman."
this letter Lady Bellaston think would certainly turn the balance
against Jones in the mind of Sophia, and she be embolden to give it
up, partly by her hope of have he instantly dispatch out of the
way, and partly by have secure the evidence of Honour, who, upon
sound she, she see sufficient reason to imagine be prepare to
testify whatever she please.
but perhaps the reader may wonder why Lady Bellaston, who in her heart
hat Sophia, should be so desirous of promote a match which be so
much to the interest of the young lady. now, I would desire such
reader to look carefully into human nature, page almost the last, and
there he will find, in scarce legible character, that woman,
notwithstanding the preposterous behaviour of mother, aunt, &c., in
matrimonial matter, do in reality think it so great a misfortune to
have their inclination in love thwart, that they imagine they ought
never to carry enmity high than upon these disappointment; again,
he will find it write much about the same place, that a woman who
hath once be pleased with the possession of a man, will go above
halfway to the devil, to prevent any other woman from enjoy the
same.
if he will not be content with these reason, I freely confess I see
no other motive to the action of that lady, unless we will conceive
she be bribe by Lord Fellamar, which for my own part I see no cause
to suspect.
now this be the affair which Mrs Western be prepare to introduce
to Sophia, by some prefatory discourse on the folly of love, and on
the wisdom of legal prostitution for hire, when her brother and Blifil
break abruptly in upon she; and hence arise all that coldness in her
behaviour to Blifil, which, though the squire, as be usual with he,
impute to a wrong cause, infuse into Blifil himself (he be a much
more cunning man) a suspicion of the real truth.
chapter ix.
in which Jones pay a visit to Mrs Fitzpatrick.
the reader may now, perhaps, be pleased to return with we to Mr Jones,
who, at the appoint hour, attend on Mrs Fitzpatrick; but before we
relate the conversation which now past it may be proper, accord to
our method, to return a little back, and to account for so great an
alteration of behaviour in this lady, that from change her lodge
principally to avoid Mr Jones, she have now industriously, as hath be
see, seek this interview.
and here we shall need only to resort to what happen the precede
day, when, hear from Lady Bellaston that Mr Western be arrive in
town, she go to pay her duty to he, at his lodging at Piccadilly,
where she be receive with many scurvy compellation too coarse to be
repeat, and be even threaten to be kick out of door. from
hence, an old servant of her aunt Western, with whom she be well
acquaint, conduct she to the lodging of that lady, who treat
she not more kindly, but more politely; or, to say the truth, with
rudeness in another way. in short, she return from both, plainly
convince, not only that her scheme of reconciliation have prove
abortive, but that she must for ever give over all thought of
bring it about by any mean whatever. from this moment desire of
revenge only fill her mind; and in this temper meeting Jones at the
play, an opportunity seem to she to occur of effecting this purpose.
the reader must remember that he be acquaint by Mrs Fitzpatrick, in
the account she give of her own story, with the fondness Mrs Western
have formerly shew for Mr Fitzpatrick at Bath, from the disappointment
of which Mrs Fitzpatrick derive the great bitterness her aunt have
express toward she. she have, therefore, no doubt but that the good
lady would as easily listen to the address of Mr Jones as she have
before do to the other; for the superiority of charm be clearly on
the side of Mr Jones; and the advance which her aunt have since make in
age, she conclude (how justly I will not say), be an argument rather
in favour of her project than against it.
therefore, when Jones attend, after a previous declaration of her
desire of serve he, arise, as she say, from a firm assurance how
much she should by so do oblige Sophia; and after some excuse for
her former disappointment, and after acquaint Mr Jones in whose
custody his mistress be, of which she think he ignorant; she very
explicitly mention her scheme to he, and advise he to make sham
address to the old lady, in order to procure an easy access to the
young, inform he at the same time of the success which Mr
Fitzpatrick have formerly owe to the very same stratagem.
Mr Jones express great gratitude to the lady for the kind intention
towards he which she have express, and indeed testify, by this
proposal; but, besides intimate some diffidence of success from the
lady's knowledge of his love to her niece, which have not be her case
in regard to Mr Fitzpatrick, he say, he be afraid Miss Western would
never agree to an imposition of this kind, as well from her utter
detestation of all fallacy as from her avow duty to her aunt.
Mrs Fitzpatrick be a little nettled at this; and indeed, if it may
not be call a lapse of the tongue, it be a small deviation from
politeness in Jones, and into which he scarce would have fall, have
not the delight he feel in praise Sophia hurry he out of all
reflection; for this commendation of one cousin be more than a tacit
rebuke on the other.
"indeed, sir," answer the lady, with some warmth, "I cannot think
there be anything easy than to cheat an old woman with a profession
of love, when her complexion be amorous; and, though she be my aunt, I
must say there never be a more liquorish one than her ladyship. cannot
you pretend that the despair of possess her niece, from her be
promise to Blifil, have make you turn your thought towards she? as to
my cousin Sophia, I cannot imagine she to be such a simpleton as to
have the least scruple on such an account, or to conceive any harm in
punish one of these haggs for the many mischief they bring upon
family by their tragi-comic passion; for which I think it be a pity
they be not punishable by law. I have no such scruple myself; and yet
I hope my cousin Sophia will not think it an affront when I say she
cannot det every real specie of falsehood more than her cousin
Fitzpatrick. to my aunt, indeed, I pretend no duty, nor doth she
deserve any. however, sir, I have give you my advice; and if you
decline pursue it, I shall have the less opinion of your
understanding--thatbe all."
Jones now clearly see the error he have commit, and exert his
utmost power to rectify it; but he only faultere and stutter into
nonsense and contradiction. to say the truth, it be often safe to
abide by the consequence of the first blunder than to endeavour to
rectify it; for by such endeavour we generally plunge deeply instead
of extricate ourselves; and few person will on such occasion have
the good-nature which Mrs Fitzpatrick display to Jones, by say,
with a smile, "you need attempt no more excuse; for I can easily
forgive a real lover, whatever be the effect of fondness for his
mistress."
she then renew her proposal, and very fervently recommend it,
omit no argument which her invention could suggest on the subject;
for she be so violently incense against her aunt, that scarce
anything be capable of afford her equal pleasure with expose
she; and, like a true woman, she would see no difficulty in the
execution of a favourite scheme.
Jones, however, persist in decline the undertaking, which have not,
indeed, the least probability of success. he easily perceive the
motif which induce Mrs Fitzpatrick to be so eager in press she
advice. he say he would not deny the tender and passionate regard he
have for Sophia; but be so conscious of the inequality of their
situation, that he could never flatter himself so far as to hope that
so divine a young lady would condescend to think on so unworthy a man;
nay, he protest, he could scarce bring himself to wish she should.
he conclude with a profession of generous sentiment, which we have
not at present leisure to insert.
there be some fine woman (for I dare not here speak in too general
term) with whom self be so predominant, that they never detach it
from any subject; and, as vanity be with they a rule principle, they
be apt to lay hold of whatever praise they meet with; and, though the
property of other, convey it to their own use. in the company of
these lady it be impossible to say anything handsome of another
woman which they will not apply to themselves; nay, they often improve
the praise they seize; as, for instance, if her beauty, her wit, her
gentility, her good humour deserve so much commendation, what do I
deserve, who possess those quality in so much more eminent a degree?
to these lady a man often recommend himself while he be commend
another woman; and, while he be express ardour and generous
sentiment for his mistress, they be consider what a charming
lover this man would make to they, who can feel all this tenderness
for an inferior degree of merit. of this, strange as it may seem, I
have see many instance besides Mrs Fitzpatrick, to whom all this
really happen, and who now begin to feel a somewhat for Mr Jones,
the symptom of which she much soon understand than poor Sophia have
formerly do.
to say the truth, perfect beauty in both sex be a more irresistible
object than it be generally think; for, notwithstanding some of we
be content with more homely lot, and learn by rote (as child to
repeat what give they no idea) to despise outside, and to value more
solid charm; yet I have always observe, at the approach of
consummate beauty, that these more solid charm only shine with that
kind of lustre which the star have after the rise of the sun.
when Jones have finish his exclamation, many of which would have
become the mouth of Oroöndates himself, Mrs Fitzpatrick heave a
deep sigh, and, take her eye off from Jones, on whom they have be
some time fix, and drop they on the ground, she cry, "indeed,
Mr Jones, I pity you; but it be the curse of such tenderness to be
throw away on those who be insensible of it. I know my cousin well
than you, Mr Jones, and I must say, any woman who make no return to
such a passion, and such a person, be unworthy of both."
"sure, madam," say Jones, "you cannot mean----" "mean!" cry Mrs
Fitzpatrick, "I know not what I mean; there be something, I think, in
true tenderness bewitch; few woman ever meet with it in man, and
few still know how to value it when they do. I never hear such
truly noble sentiment, and I cannot tell how it be, but you force one
to believe you. sure she must be the most contemptible of woman who
can overlook such merit."
the manner and look with which all this be speak infuse a suspicion
into Jones which we donot care to convey in direct word to the
reader. instead of make any answer, he say, "I be afraid, madam, I
have make too tiresome a visit;" and offer to take his leave.
"not at all, sir," answer Mrs Fitzpatrick.--"Indeed I pity you, Mr
Jones; indeed I do: but if you be go, consider of the scheme I
have mention--I be convinced you will approve it--and let I see you
again as soon as you can.--to-morrow morning if you will, or at least
some time to-morrow. I shall be at home all day."
Jones, then, after many expression of thank, very respectfully
retire; nor could Mrs Fitzpatrick forbear make he a present of a
look at parting, by which if he have understand nothing, he must have
have no understanding in the language of the eye. in reality, it
confirm his resolution of return to she no more; for, faulty as
he hath hitherto appear in this history, his whole thought be now
so confine to his Sophia, that I believe no woman upon earth could
have now draw he into an act of inconstancy.
Fortune, however, who be not his friend, resolve, as he intend to
give she no second opportunity, to make the good of this; and
accordingly produce the tragical incident which we be now in
sorrowful note to record.
Chapter x.
the consequence of the precede visit.
Mr Fitzpatrick have receive the letter before mention from Mrs
Western, and be by that mean acquaint with the place to which
his wife be retire, return directly to Bath, and thence the day
after set forward to London.
the reader hath be already often inform of the jealous temper of
this gentleman. he may likewise be pleased to remember the suspicion
which he have conceive of Jones at Upton, upon his find he in the
room with Mrs Waters; and, though sufficient reason have afterwards
appear entirely to clear up that suspicion, yet now the reading so
handsome a character of Mr Jones from his wife, cause he to reflect
that she likewise be in the inn at the same time, and jumble
together such a confusion of circumstance in a head which be
naturally none of the clear, that the whole produce that
green-eyed monster mention by Shakespear in his tragedy of Othello.
and now, as he be enquire in the street after his wife, and have
just receive direction to the door, unfortunately Mr Jones be
issue from it.
Fitzpatrick do not yet recollect the face of Jones; however, see a
young well-dress fellow come from his wife, he make directly up to
he, and ask he what he have be do in that house? "for I be
sure," say he, "you must have be in it, as I see you come out of
it."
Jones answer very modestly, "that he have be visit a lady
there." to which Fitzpatrick reply, "what business have you with the
lady?" upon which Jones, who now perfectly remember the voice,
feature, and indeed coat, of the gentleman, cry out----"ha, my good
friend! give I your hand; I hope there be no ill blood remain
between we, upon a small mistake which happen so long ago."
"upon my soul, sir," say Fitzpatrick, "I donot know your name nor
your face." "indeed, sir," say Jones, "neither have I the pleasure of
know your name, but your face I very well remember to have see
before at Upton, where a foolish quarrel happen between we, which,
if it be not make up yet, we will now make up over a bottle."
"at Upton!" cry the other;----"Ha! upon my soul, I believe your name
be Jones?" "indeed," answer he, "it be."--"O! upon my soul," cry
Fitzpatrick, "you be the very man I want to meet.--upon my soul I
will drink a bottle with you presently; but first I will give you a
great knock over the pate. there be for you, you rascal. upon my soul,
if you do not give I satisfaction for that blow, I will give you
another." and then, draw his sword, put himself in a posture of
defence, which be the only science he understand.
Jones be a little stagger by the blow, which come somewhat
unexpectedly; but presently recover himself he also draw, and
though he understand nothing of fencing, pr on so boldly upon
Fitzpatrick, that he beat down his guard, and sheathe one half of his
sword in the body of the say gentleman, who have no soon receive it
than he stept backwards, drop the point of his sword, and lean
upon it, cry, "I have satisfaction enough: I be a dead man."
"I hope not," cry Jones, "but whatever be the consequence, you must
be sensible you have draw it upon yourself." at this instant a number
of fellow rush in and seize Jones, who tell they he should make no
resistance, and beg some of they at least would take care of the
wound gentleman.
"ay," cry one of the fellow, "the wound gentleman will be take
care enough of; for I suppose he hath not many hour to live. as for
you, sir, you have a month at least good yet." "D--n I, Jack," say
another, "he hath prevent his voyage; hebe bind to another port
now;" and many other such jest be our poor Jones make the subject of
by these fellow, who be indeed the gang employ by Lord Fellamar,
and have dog he into the house of Mrs Fitzpatrick, wait for he
at the corner of the street when this unfortunate accident happen.
the officer who command this gang very wisely conclude that his
business be now to deliver his prisoner into the hand of the civil
magistrate. he order he, therefore, to be carry to a
public-house, where, have send for a constable, he deliver he to
his custody.
the constable, see Mr Jones very well dr, and hear that the
accident have happen in a duel, treat his prisoner with great
civility, and at his request dispatch a messenger to enquire after
the wound gentleman, who be now at a tavern under the surgeon's
hand. the report bring back be, that the wound be certainly
mortal, and there be no hope of life. upon which the constable
inform Jones that he must go before a justice. he answer,
"wherever you please; I be indifferent as to what happen to I; for
though I be convinced I be not guilty of murder in the eye of the law,
yet the weight of blood I find intolerable upon my mind."
Jones be now conduct before the justice, where the surgeon who
dress Mr Fitzpatrick appear, and depose that he believe the
wound to be mortal; upon which the prisoner be commit to the
Gatehouse. it be very late at night, so that Jones would not send for
Partridge till the next morning; and, as he never shut his eye till
seven, so it be near twelve before the poor fellow, who be greatly
frightened at not hear from his master so long, receive a message
which almost deprive he of his being when he hear it.
he go to the Gatehouse with tremble knee and a beat heart, and
be no soon arrive in the presence of Jones than he lament the
misfortune that have befall he with many tear, look all the
while frequently about he in great terror; for as the news now
arrive that Mr Fitzpatrick be dead, the poor fellow apprehend
every minute that his ghost would enter the room. at last he deliver
he a letter, which he have like to have forget, and which come from
Sophia by the hand of Black George.
Jones presently dispatch every one out of the room, and, have
eagerly break open the letter, read as follows:--
"you owe the hearing from I again to an accident which I own
surprize I. my aunt hath just now show I a letter from you to
Lady Bellaston, which contain a proposal of marriage. I be
convince it be your own hand; and what more surprize I be, that
it be date at the very time when you would have I imagine you be
under such concern on my account.--i leave you to comment on this
fact. all I desire be, that your name may never more be mention
to
"S. W."
of the present situation of Mr Jones's mind, and of the pang with
which he be now torment, we cannot give the reader a well idea
than by say, his misery be such that even Thwackum would almost
have pity he. but, bad as it be, we shall at present leave he in
it, as his good genius (if he really have any) seem to have do. and
here we put an end to the sixteenth book of our history.
BOOK XVII.
contain three day.
Chapter i.
contain a portion of introductory writing.
when a comic writer hath make his principal character as happy as he
can, or when a tragic writer hath bring they to the high pitch of
human misery, they both conclude their business to be do, and that
their work be come to a period.
have we be of the tragic complexion, the reader must now allow we
be very nearly arrive at this period, since it would be difficult
for the devil, or any of his representative on earth, to have
contrive much great torment for poor Jones than those in which we
leave he in the last chapter; and as for Sophia, a good-natured woman
would hardly wish more uneasiness to a rival than what she must at
present be suppose to feel. what then remain to complete the tragedy
but a murder or two and a few moral sentence!
but to bring our favourite out of their present anguish and distress,
and to land they at last on the shore of happiness, seem a much
hard task; a task indeed so hard that we do not undertake to execute
it. in regard to Sophia, it be more than probable that we shall
somewhere or other provide a good husband for she in the end--either
Blifil, or my lord, or somebody else; but as to poor Jones, such be
the calamity in which he be at present involve, owe to his
imprudence, by which if a man doth not become felon to the world, he
be at least a _felo de se_; so destitute be he now of friend, and so
persecute by enemy, that we almost despair of bring he to any
good; and if our reader delight in see execution, I think he
ought not to lose any time in take a first row at Tyburn.
this I faithfully promise, that, notwithstanding any affection which
we may be suppose to have for this rogue, whom we have unfortunately
make our heroe, we will lend he none of that supernatural assistance
with which we be entrust, upon condition that we use it only on
very important occasion. if he doth not therefore find some natural
mean of fairly extricate himself from all his distress, we will
do no violence to the truth and dignity of history for his sake; for
we have rather relate that he be hang at Tyburn (which may very
probably be the case) than forfeit our integrity, or shock the faith
of our reader.
in this the antient have a great advantage over the modern. their
mythology, which be at that time more firmly believe by the vulgar
than any religion be at present, give they always an opportunity of
deliver a favourite heroe. their deity be always ready at the
writer's elbow, to execute any of his purpose; and the more
extraordinary the invention be, the great be the surprize and
delight of the credulous reader. those writer could with great ease
have convey a heroe from one country to another, nay from one world
to another, and have bring he back again, than a poor circumscribe
modern can deliver he from a jail.
the Arabians and Persians have an equal advantage in write their
tale from the genius and fairy, which they believe in as an article
of their faith, upon the authority of the Koran itself. but we have
none of these help. to natural mean alone we be confine; let we
try therefore what, by these mean, may be do for poor Jones; though
to confess the truth, something whisper I in the ear that he doth
not yet know the bad of his fortune; and that a more shocking piece
of news than any he hath yet hear remain for he in the unopened
leaf of fate.
Chapter ii.
the generous and grateful behaviour of Mrs Miller.
Mr Allworthy and Mrs Miller be just sit down to breakfast, when
Blifil, who have go out very early that morning, return to make one
of the company.
he have not be long seat before he begin as follow: "Good Lord! my
dear uncle, what do you think hath happen? I vow I be afraid of
tell it you, for fear of shock you with the remembrance of ever
have shew any kindness to such a villain." "what be the matter,
child?" say the uncle. "I fear I have shewn kindness in my life to
the unworthy more than once. but charity doth not adopt the vice of
its object." "o, sir!" return Blifil, "it be not without the secret
direction of Providence that you mention the word adoption. your
adopt son, sir, that Jones, that wretch whom you nourish in your
bosom, hath prove one of the great villain upon earth." "by all
thatbe sacred 'tis false," cry Mrs Miller. "Mr Jones be no villain.
he be one of the worthy creature breathing; and if any other
person have call he villain, I would have throw all this boiling
water in his face." Mr Allworthy look very much amazed at this
behaviour. but she do not give he leave to speak, before, turn to
he, she cry, "I hope you will not be angry with I; I would not
offend you, sir, for the world; but, indeed, I could not bear to hear
he call so." "I must own, madam," say Allworthy, very gravely, "I
be a little surprized to hear you so warmly defend a fellow you do not
know." "o! I do know he, Mr Allworthy," say she, "indeed I do; I
should be the most ungrateful of all wretch if I deny it. o! he
hath preserve I and my little family; we have all reason to bless
he while we live.--and I pray Heaven to bless he, and turn the
heart of his malicious enemy. I know, I find, I see, he hath such."
"you surprize I, madam, still more," say allworthy; "sure you must
mean some other. it be impossible you should have any such obligation
to the man my nephew mention." "too surely," answer she, "I have
obligation to he of the great and tender kind. he hath be
the preserver of I and mine. believe I, sir, he hath be abuse,
grossly abuse to you; I know he hath, or you, whom I know to be all
goodness and honour, would not, after the many kind and tender thing
I have hear you say of this poor helpless child, have so disdainfully
call he fellow.--indeed, my good of friend, he deserve a kind
appellation from you, have you hear the good, the kind, the grateful
thing which I have hear he utter of you. he never mention your
name but with a sort of adoration. in this very room I have see he
on his knee, implore all the blessing of heaven upon your head. I
do not love that child there well than he love you."
"I see, sir, now," say Blifil, with one of those grin sneer with
which the devil mark his good belove, "Mrs Miller really doth know
he. I suppose you will find she be not the only one of your
acquaintance to whom he hath expose you. as for my character, I
perceive, by some hint she hath throw out, he hath be very free
with it, but I forgive he." "and the Lord forgive you, sir!" say Mrs
Miller; "we have all sin enough to stand in need of his forgiveness."
"upon my word, Mrs Miller," say Allworthy, "I do not take this
behaviour of yours to my nephew kindly; and I do assure you, as any
reflection which you cast upon he must come only from that wicked
of man, they would only serve, if that be possible, to heighten my
resentment against he: for I must tell you, Mrs Miller, the young man
who now stand before you hath ever be the warm advocate for the
ungrateful wretch whose cause you espouse. this, I think, when you
hear it from my own mouth, will make you wonder at so much baseness
and ingratitude."
"you be deceive, sir," answer Mrs Miller; "if they be the last
word which be to issue from my lip, I would say you be deceive;
and I once more repeat it, the Lord forgive those who have deceive
you! I do not pretend to say the young man be without fault; but they
be all the fault of wildness and of youth; fault which he may, nay,
which I be certain he will, relinquish, and, if he should not, they
be vastly overbalance by one of the most humane, tender, honest
heart that ever man be bl with."
"indeed, Mrs Miller," say Allworthy, "have this be relate of you, I
should not have believe it." "indeed, sir," answer she, "you will
believe everything I have say, I be sure you will: and when you have
hear the story which I shall tell you (for I will tell you all), you
will be so far from be offend, that you will own (I know your
justice so well), that I must have be the most despicable and most
ungrateful of wretch if I have act any other part than I have."
"well, madam," say Allworthy, "I shall be very glad to hear any good
excuse for a behaviour which, I must confess, I think want an excuse.
and now, madam, will you be pleased to let my nephew proceed in his
story without interruption. he would not have introduce a matter of
slight consequence with such a preface. perhaps even this story will
cure you of your mistake."
Mrs Miller give token of submission, and then Mr Blifil begin thus:
"I be sure, sir, if you donot think proper to resent the ill-usage of
Mrs Miller, I shall easily forgive what affect I only. I think your
goodness hath not deserve this indignity at her hand." "well,
child," say Allworthy, "but what be this new instance? what hath he
do of late?" "what," cry Blifil, "notwithstanding all Mrs Miller
hath say, I be very sorry to relate, and what you should never have
hear from I, have it not be a matter impossible to conceal from the
whole world. in short he hath kill a man; I will not say
murder--for perhaps it may not be so construed in law, and I hope
the good for his sake."
Allworthy look shocked, and bless himself; and then, turn to
Mrs Miller, he cry, "well, madam, what say you now?"
"why, I say, sir," answer she, "that I never be more concerned at
anything in my life; but, if the fact be true, I be convince the man,
whoever he be, be in fault. Heaven know there be many villain in
this town who make it their business to provoke young gentleman.
nothing but the great provocation could have tempt he; for of
all the gentleman I ever have in my house, I never see one so gentle or
so sweet-temper. he be belove by every one in the house, and every
one who come near it."
while she be thus run on, a violent knock at the door
interrupt their conversation, and prevent she from proceed
far, or from receive any answer; for, as she conclude this be
a visitor to Mr Allworthy, she hastily retire, take with her her
little girl, whose eye be all over blubber at the melancholy news
she hear of Jones, who use to call she his little wife, and not only
give she many plaything, but spend whole hour in play with she
himself.
some reader may, perhaps, be pleased with these minute circumstance,
in relate of which we follow the example of Plutarch, one of the
good of our brother historian; and other, to whom they may appear
trivial, will, we hope, at least pardon they, as we be never prolix
on such occasion.
Chapter iii.
the arrival of Mr Western, with some matter concern the paternal
authority.
Mrs Miller have not long leave the room when Mr Western enter; but not
before a small wrangle bout have pass between he and his chairman;
for the fellow, who have take up their burden at the Hercules
Pillars, have conceive no hope of have any future good customer in
the squire; and they be moreover far encouraged by his
generosity (for he have give they of his own accord sixpence more than
their fare); they therefore very boldly demand another shilling,
which so provoke the squire, that he not only bestow many hearty
curse on they at the door, but retain his anger after he come into
the room; swear that all the Londoners be like the court, and
thought of nothing but plunder country gentleman. "D--n I," say
he, "if I willnot walk in the rain rather than get into one of their
hand-barrow again. they have jolt I more in a mile than Brown Bess
would in a long fox-chase."
when his wrath on this occasion be a little appeased, he resume the
same passionate tone on another. "there," say he, "there be fine
business forwards now. the hound have change at last; and when we
imagine we have a fox to deal with, od-rat it, it turn out to be a
badger at last!"
"pray, my good neighbour," say Allworthy, "drop your metaphor, and
speak a little plainer." "why, then," say the squire, "to tell you
plainly, we have be all this time afraid of a son of a whore of a
bastard of somebody's, I donot know whose, not i. and now herebe a
confounded son of a whore of a lord, who may be a bastard too for what
I know or care, for he shall never have a daughter of mine by my
consent. they have beggar the nation, but they shall never beggar
I. my land shall never be send over to Hanover."
"you surprize I much, my good friend," say allworthy. "why, zound!
I be surprize myself," answer the squire. "I go to zee sister
Western last night, accord to her own appointment, and there I be
have into a whole room full of woman. there be my lady cousin
Bellaston, and my Lady Betty, and my Lady Catherine, and my lady I
donot know who; d--n I, if ever you catch I among such a kennel of
hoop-petticoat b--s! D--n I, Iwould rather be run by my own dog, as one
Acton be, that the story-book say be turn into a hare, and his
own dog kill un and eat un. od-rabbit it, no mortal be ever run in
such a manner; if I dodge one way, one have I; if I offer to clap
back, another snap I. `o! certainly one of the great match in
England,' say one cousin (here he attempt to mimic they); `a very
advantageous offer indeed,' cry another cousin (for you must know
they be all my cousin, thof I never zeed half o' um before).
`surely,' say that fat a--se b--, my Lady Bellaston, `cousin, you
must be out of your wit to think of refuse such an offer.'"
"now I begin to understand," say Allworthy; "some person hath make
proposal to Miss Western, which the lady of the family approve, but
be not to your liking."
"my liking!" say Western, "how the devil should it? I tell you it be
a lord, and those be always volk whom you know I always resolve to
have nothing to do with. do unt I refuse a matter of vorty year'
purchase now for a bit of land, which one o' um have a mind to put into
a park, only because I would have no dealing with lord, and dost
think I would marry my daughter zu? besides, ben't I engage to you,
and do I ever go off any bargain when I have promise?"
"as to that point, neighbour," say Allworthy, "I entirely release you
from any engagement. no contract can be bind between party who
have not a full power to make it at the time, nor ever afterwards
acquire the power of fulfil it."
"Slud! then," answer Western, "I tell you I have power, and I will
fulfil it. come along with I directly to doctor' Commons, I will get
a licence; and I will go to sister and take away the wench by force,
and she shall ha un, or I will lock she up, and keep she upon bread
and water as long as she live."
"Mr Western," say Allworthy, "shall I beg you will hear my full
sentiment on this matter?"--"hear thee; ay, to be sure I will,"
answer he. "why, then, sir," cry allworthy, "I can truly say,
without a compliment either to you or the young lady, that when this
match be propose, I embrace it very readily and heartily, from my
regard to you both. an alliance between two family so nearly
neighbour, and between whom there have always exist so mutual an
intercourse and good harmony, I think a most desirable event; and
with regard to the young lady, not only the concurrent opinion of all
who know she, but my own observation assure I that she would be an
inestimable treasure to a good husband. I shall say nothing of her
personal qualification, which certainly be admirable; her good
nature, her charitable disposition, her modesty, be too well know to
need any panegyric: but she hath one quality which exist in a high
degree in that good of woman, who be now one of the first of angel,
which, as it be not of a glaring kind, more commonly escape
observation; so little indeed be it remark, that I want a word to
express it. I must use negative on this occasion. I never hear
anything of pertness, or what be call repartee, out of her mouth; no
pretence to wit, much less to that kind of wisdom which be the result
only of great learning and experience, the affectation of which, in a
young woman, be as absurd as any of the affectation of an ape. no
dictatorial sentiment, no judicial opinion, no profound criticism.
whenever I have see she in the company of man, she hath be all
attention, with the modesty of a learner, not the forwardness of a
teacher. youwill pardon I for it, but I once, to try she only, desire
her opinion on a point which be controvert between Mr Thwackum and
Mr Square. to which she answer, with much sweetness, `you will
pardon I, good Mr Allworthy; I be sure you cannot in earnest think I
capable of decide any point in which two such gentleman disagree.'
Thwackum and Square, who both alike think themselves sure of a
favourable decision, second my request. she answer with the same
good humour, `I must absolutely be excuse: for I will affront neither
so much as to give my judgment on his side.' indeed, she always shew
the high deference to the understanding of man; a quality
absolutely essential to the making a good wife. I shall only add, that
as she be most apparently void of all affectation, this deference must
be certainly real."
here Blifil sigh bitterly; upon which Western, whose eye be full
of tear at the praise of Sophia, blubber out, "donot be
chicken-hearte, for shat ha her, d--n I, shat ha she, if she be
twenty time as good."
"remember your promise, sir," cry allworthy, "I be not to be
interrupt." "well, shat unt," answer the squire; "I willnot speak
another word."
"now, my good friend," continue Allworthy, "I have dwell so long on
the merit of this young lady, partly as I really be in love with her
character, and partly that fortune (for the match in that light be
really advantageous on my nephew's side) might not be imagine to be
my principal view in have so eagerly embrace the proposal. indeed,
I heartily wish to receive so great a jewel into my family; but
though I may wish for many good thing, I would not, therefore, steal
they, or be guilty of any violence or injustice to possess myself of
they. now to force a woman into a marriage contrary to her consent or
approbation, be an act of such injustice and oppression, that I wish
the law of our country could restrain it; but a good conscience be
never lawless in the worst regulated state, and will provide those
law for itself, which the neglect of legislator hath forget to
supply. this be surely a case of that kind; for, be it not cruel, nay,
impious, to force a woman into that state against her will; for her
behaviour in which she be to be accountable to the high and most
dreadful court of judicature, and to answer at the peril of her soul?
to discharge the matrimonial duty in an adequate manner be no easy
task; and shall we lay this burthen upon a woman, while we at the same
time deprive she of all that assistance which may enable she to
undergo it? shall we tear her very heart from she, while we enjoin her
duty to which a whole heart be scarce equal? I must speak very
plainly here. I think parent who act in this manner be accessory
to all the guilt which their child afterwards incur, and of course
must, before a just judge, expect to partake of their punishment; but
if they could avoid this, good heaven! be there a soul who can bear
the thought of have contribute to the damnation of his child?
"for these reason, my good neighbour, as I see the inclination of
this young lady be most unhappily averse to my nephew, I must decline
any further thought of the honour you intend he, though I assure
you I shall always retain the most grateful sense of it."
"well, sir," say Western (the froth burst forth from his lip the
moment they be uncorked), "you cannot say but I have hear you out,
and now I expect youwill hear I; and if I donot answer every word
on't, why then Iwill consent to gee the matter up. first then, I
desire you to answer I one question--do not I beget she? do not I
beget she? answer I that. they say, indeed, it be a wise father that
know his own child; but I be sure I have the good title to she, for
I breed she up. but I believe you will allow I to be her father, and
if I be, be I not to govern my own child? I ask you that, be I not to
govern my own child? and if I be to govern she in other matter,
surely I be to govern she in this, which concern she most. and what
be I desire all this while? be I desire she to do anything for
I? to give I anything?--zu much on t'other side, that I be only
desire she to take away half my estate now, and t'other half when I
die. well, and what be it all vor? why, be unt it to make she happy?
itbe enough to make one mad to hear volk talk; if I be go to
marry myself, then she would ha reason to cry and to blubber; but, on
the contrary, han't I offer to bind down my land in such a manner,
that I could not marry if I would, see as narro' woman upon earth
would ha I. what the devil in hell can I do more? I contribute to
her damnation!--zounds! Iwould zee all the world d--n'd bevore her
little vinger should be hurt. indeed, Mr Allworthy, you must excuse
I, but I be surprize to hear you talk in zuch a manner, and I must
say, take it how you will, that I think you have more sense."
allworthy resent this reflection only with a smile; nor could he, if
he would have endeavour it, have convey into that smile any
mixture of malice or contempt. his smile at folly be indeed such as
we may suppose the angel bestow on the absurdity of mankind.
Blifil now desire to be permit to speak a few word. "as to use
any violence on the young lady, I be sure I shall never consent to it.
my conscience will not permit I to use violence on any one, much less
on a lady for whom, however cruel she be to I, I shall always
preserve the pure and sincere affection; but yet I have read that
woman be seldom proof against perseverance. why may I not hope then
by such perseverance at last to gain those inclination, in which for
the future I shall, perhaps, have no rival; for as for this lord, Mr
Western be so kind to prefer I to he; and sure, sir, you will not
deny but that a parent hath at least a negative voice in these
matter; nay, I have hear this very young lady herself say so more
than once, and declare that she think child inexcusable who
marry in direct opposition to the will of their parent. besides,
though the other lady of the family seem to favour the pretension
of my lord, I do not find the lady herself be incline to give he any
countenance; alas! I be too well assured she be not; I be too sensible
that wicked of man remain uppermost in her heart."
"ay, ay, so he do," cry western.
"but surely," say Blifil, "when she hear of this murder which he
hath commit, if the law should spare his life----"
"whatbe that?" cry western. "murder! hath he commit a murder, and
be there any hope of see he hanged?--Tol de rol, tol lol de rol."
here he fall a singing and caper about the room.
"child," say Allworthy, "this unhappy passion of yours distress I
beyond measure. I heartily pity you, and would do every fair thing to
promote your success."
"I desire no more," cry Blifil; "I be convince my dear uncle hath a
well opinion of I than to think that I myself would accept of
more."
"Lookee," say Allworthy, "you have my leave to write, to visit, if
she will permit it--but I insist on no thought of violence. I will
have no confinement, nothing of that kind attempt."
"well, well," cry the squire, "nothing of that kind shall be
attempt; we will try a little long what fair mean will effect;
and if this fellow be but hang out of the way--Tol lol de rol! I
never hear well news in my life--I warrant everything go to my
mind.--Do, prithee, dear Allworthy, come and dine with I at the
Hercules Pillars: I have bespeak a shoulder of mutton roasted, and a
spare-rib of pork, and a fowl and egg-sauce. there will be nobody but
ourselves, unless we have a mind to have the landlord; for I have send
Parson Supple down to Basingstoke after my tobacco-box, which I leave
at an inn there, and I would not lose it for the world; for it be an
old acquaintance of above twenty year' standing. I can tell you
landlord be a vast comical bitch, you will like un hugely."
Mr Allworthy at last agree to this invitation, and soon after the
squire go off, sing and caper at the hope of see the
speedy tragical end of poor Jones.
when he be go, Mr Allworthy resume the aforesaid subject with much
gravity. he tell his nephew, "he wish with all his heart he would
endeavour to conquer a passion, in which I cannot," say he, "flatter
you with any hope of succeed. it be certainly a vulgar error, that
aversion in a woman may be conquer by perseverance. Indifference
may, perhaps, sometimes yield to it; but the usual triumph gain by
perseverance in a lover be over caprice, prudence, affectation, and
often an exorbitant degree of levity, which excite woman not
over-warm in their constitution to indulge their vanity by prolong
the time of courtship, even when they be well enough pleased with the
object, and resolve (if they ever resolve at all) to make he a very
pitiful amend in the end. but a fixed dislike, as I be afraid this
be, will rather gather strength than be conquer by time. besides, my
dear, I have another apprehension which you must excuse. I be afraid
this passion which you have for this fine young creature hath her
beautiful person too much for its object, and be unworthy of the name
of that love which be the only foundation of matrimonial felicity. to
admire, to like, and to long for the possession of a beautiful woman,
without any regard to her sentiment towards we, be, I be afraid, too
natural; but love, I believe, be the child of love only; at least, I
be pretty confident that to love the creature who we be assure hat
we be not in human nature. examine your heart, therefore, thoroughly,
my good boy, and if, upon examination, you have but the least
suspicion of this kind, I be sure your own virtue and religion will
impel you to drive so vicious a passion from your heart, and your good
sense will soon enable you to do it without pain."
the reader may pretty well guess Blifil's answer; but, if he should be
at a loss, we be not at present at leisure to satisfy he, as our
history now hasten on to matter of high importance, and we can no
long bear to be absent from Sophia.
chapter iv.
an extraordinary scene between Sophia and her aunt.
the lowing heifer and the bleat ewe, in herd and flock, may
ramble safe and unregarde through the pasture. these be, indeed,
hereafter doom to be the prey of man; yet many year be they
suffer to enjoy their liberty undisturbed. but if a plump doe be
discover to have escape from the forest, and to repose herself in
some field or grove, the whole parish be presently alarm, every man
be ready to set his dog after she; and, if she be preserve from the
rest by the good squire, it be only that he may secure she for his own
eating.
I have often consider a very fine young woman of fortune and
fashion, when first find stray from the pale of her nursery, to be
in pretty much the same situation with this doe. the town be
immediately in an uproar; she be hunt from park to play, from court
to assembly, from assembly to her own chamber, and rarely escape a
single season from the jaw of some devourer or other; for, if her
friend protect she from some, it be only to deliver she over to one
of their own chusing, often more disagreeable to she than any of the
rest; while whole herd or flock of other woman securely, and scarce
regard, traverse the park, the play, the opera, and the assembly;
and though, for the most part at least, they be at last devour, yet
for a long time do they wanton in liberty, without disturbance or
controul.
of all these paragon none ever taste more of this persecution than
poor Sophia. her ill star be not content with all that she have
suffer on account of Blifil, they now raise she another pursuer,
who seem likely to torment she no less than the other have do. for
though her aunt be less violent, she be no less assiduous in teizing
she, than her father have be before.
the servant be no soon depart after dinner than Mrs Western,
who have open the matter to Sophia, inform she, "that she expect
his lordship that very afternoon, and intend to take the first
opportunity of leave she alone with he." "if you do, madam,"
answer Sophia, with some spirit, "I shall take the first opportunity
of leave he by himself." "how! madam!" cry the aunt; "be this the
return you make I for my kindness in relieve you from your
confinement at your father's?" "you know, madam," say Sophia, "the
cause of that confinement be a refusal to comply with my father in
accept a man I detest; and will my dear aunt, who hath relieve
I from that distress, involve I in another equally bad?" "and do you
think then, madam," answer Mrs Western, "that there be no difference
between my Lord Fellamar and Mr Blifil?" "very little, in my opinion,"
cry Sophia; "and, if I must be condemn to one, I would certainly
have the merit of sacrifice myself to my father's pleasure." "then
my pleasure, I find," say the aunt, "hath very little weight with
you; but that consideration shall not move I. I act from nobler
motif. the view of aggrandize my family, of ennoble yourself, be
what I proceed upon. have you no sense of ambition? be there no
charm in the thought of have a coronet on your coach?" "none, upon
my honour," say Sophia. "a pincushion upon my coach would please I
just as well." "never mention honour," cry the aunt. "it become not
the mouth of such a wretch. I be sorry, niece, you force I to use
these word, but I cannot bear your grovel temper; you have none of
the blood of the Westerns in you. but, however mean and base your own
idea be, you shall bring no imputation on mine. I will never suffer
the world to say of I that I encourage you in refuse one of the
good match in England; a match which, besides its advantage in
fortune, would do honour to almost any family, and hath, indeed, in
title, the advantage of our." "surely," say Sophia, "I be bear
deficient, and have not the sens with which other people be
bless; there must be certainly some sense which can relish the
delight of sound and show, which I have not; for surely mankind would
not labour so much, nor sacrifice so much for the obtaining, nor would
they be so elate and proud with possess, what appear to they, as
it doth to I, the most insignificant of all trifle."
"no, no, miss," cry the aunt; "you be bear with as many sens as
other people; but I assure you you be not bear with a sufficient
understanding to make a fool of I, or to expose my conduct to the
world; so I declare this to you, upon my word, and you know, I
believe, how fix my resolution be, unless you agree to see his
lordship this afternoon, I will, with my own hand, deliver you
to-morrow morning to my brother, and will never henceforth interfere
with you, nor see your face again." Sophia stand a few moment silent
after this speech, which be utter in a most angry and peremptory
tone; and then, burst into tear, she cry, "do with I, madam,
whatever you please; I be the most miserable undone wretch upon earth;
if my dear aunt forsake I where shall I look for a protector?" "my
dear niece," cry she, "you will have a very good protector in his
lordship; a protector whom nothing but a hankering after that vile
fellow Jones can make you decline." "indeed, madam," say Sophia, "you
wrong I. how can you imagine, after what you have shew I, if I have
ever any such thought, that I should not banish they for ever? if it
will satisfy you, I will receive the sacrament upon it never to see
his face again." "but, child, dear child," say the aunt, "be
reasonable; can you invent a single objection?" "I have already, I
think, tell you a sufficient objection," answer Sophia. "what?"
cry the aunt; "I remember none." "sure, madam," say Sophia, "I tell
you he have use I in the rude and vilest manner." "indeed, child,"
answer she, "I never hear you, or do not understand you:--but what
do you mean by this rude, vile manner?" "indeed, madam," say Sophia,
"I be almost ashamed to tell you. he catch I in his arm, pull I
down upon the settee, and thrust his hand into my bosom, and kiss it
with such violence that I have the mark upon my left breast at this
moment." "indeed!" say Mrs Western. "yes, indeed, madam," answer
Sophia; "my father luckily come in at that instant, or Heaven know
what rudeness he intend to have proceed to." "I be astonish and
confound," cry the aunt. "no woman of the name of western hath
be ever treat so since we be a family. I would have tear the
eye of a prince out, if he have attempt such freedom with I. it be
impossible! sure, Sophia, you must invent this to raise my indignation
against he." "I hope, madam," say Sophia, "you have too good an
opinion of I to imagine I capable of tell an untruth. upon my
soul it be true." "I should have stab he to the heart, have I be
present," return the aunt. "yet surely he could have no
dishonourable design; it be impossible! he durst not: besides, his
proposal shew he hath not; for they be not only honourable, but
generous. I donot know; the age allow too great freedom. a distant
salute be all I would have allow before the ceremony. I have have
lover formerly, not so long ago neither; several lover, though I
never would consent to marriage, and I never encourage the least
freedom. it be a foolish custom, and what I never would agree to. no
man kiss more of I than my cheek. it be as much as one can bring
oneself to give lip up to a husband; and, indeed, could I ever have
be persuade to marry, I believe I should not have soon be bring
to endure so much." "you will pardon I, dear madam," say Sophia, "if
I make one observation: you own you have have many lover, and the
world know it, even if you should deny it. you refuse they all, and,
I be convince, one coronet at least among they." "you say true, dear
Sophy," answer she; "I have once the offer of a title." "why, then,"
say Sophia, "will you not suffer I to refuse this once?" "it be
true, child," say she, "I have refuse the offer of a title; but it
be not so good an offer; that be, not so very, very good an
offer."--"Yes, madam," say Sophia; "but you have have very great
proposal from man of vast fortune. it be not the first, nor the
second, nor the third advantageous match that offer itself." "I own
it be not," say she. "well, madam," continue Sophia, "and why may
not I expect to have a second, perhaps, well than this? you be now
but a young woman, and I be convince would not promise to yield to
the first lover of fortune, nay, or of title too. I be a very young
woman, and sure I need not despair." "well, my dear, dear Sophy,"
cry the aunt, "what would you have I say?" "why, I only beg that I
may not be leave alone, at least this evening; grant I that, and I
will submit, if you think, after what be past, I ought to see he in
your company." "well, I will grant it," cry the aunt. "Sophy, you
know I love you, and can deny you nothing. you know the easiness of my
nature; I have not always be so easy. I have be formerly think
cruel; by the man, I mean. I be call the cruel Parthenissa. I have
break many a window that have have verse to the cruel Parthenissa in
it. Sophy, I be never so handsome as you, and yet I have something of
you formerly. I be a little altered. kingdom and state, as Tully
Cicero say in his epistle, undergo alteration, and so must the
human form." thus run she on for near half an hour upon herself, and
her conquest, and her cruelty, till the arrival of my lord, who,
after a most tedious visit, during which Mrs Western never once
offer to leave the room, retire, not much more satisfied with the
aunt than with the niece; for Sophia have bring her aunt into so
excellent a temper, that she consent to almost everything her niece
say; and agree that a little distant behaviour might not be improper
to so forward a lover.
thus Sophia, by a little well-direct flattery, for which surely none
will blame she, obtain a little ease for herself, and, at least, put
off the evil day. and now we have see our heroine in a well
situation than she hath be for a long time before, we will look a
little after Mr Jones, whom we leave in the most deplorable situation
that can be well imagine.
Chapter v.
Mrs Miller and Mr Nightingale visit Jones in the prison.
when Mr Allworthy and his nephew go to meet Mr Western, Mrs Miller
set forwards to her son-in-law's lodging, in order to acquaint he
with the accident which have befall his friend Jones; but he have
know it long before from Partridge (for Jones, when he leave Mrs
Miller, have be furnish with a room in the same house with Mr
Nightingale). the good woman find her daughter under great affliction
on account of Mr Jones, whom have comfort as well as she could,
she set forwards to the Gatehouse, where she hear he be, and where
Mr Nightingale be arrive before she.
the firmness and constancy of a true friend be a circumstance so
extremely delightful to person in any kind of distress, that the
distress itself, if it be only temporary, and admit of relief, be
more than compensate by bring this comfort with it. nor be
instance of this kind so rare as some superficial and inaccurate
observer have report. to say the truth, want of compassion be not
to be number among our general fault. the black ingredient which
foul our disposition be envy. hence our eye be seldom, I be afraid,
turn upward to those who be manifestly great, well, wiser, or
happy than ourselves, without some degree of malignity; while we
commonly look downwards on the mean and miserable with sufficient
benevolence and pity. in fact, I have remark, that most of the
defect which have discover themselves in the friendship within my
observation have arise from envy only: a hellish vice; and yet one
from which I have know very few absolutely exempt. but enough of a
subject which, if pursue, would lead I too far.
whether it be that Fortune be apprehensive lest Jones should sink
under the weight of his adversity, and that she might thus lose any
future opportunity of torment he, or whether she really abate
somewhat of her severity towards he, she seem a little to relax her
persecution, by send he the company of two such faithful friend,
and what be perhaps more rare, a faithful servant. for Partridge,
though he have many imperfection, want not fidelity; and though fear
would not suffer he to be hang for his master, yet the world, I
believe, could not have bribe he to desert his cause.
while Jones be express great satisfaction in the presence of his
friend, Partridge bring an account that Mr Fitzpatrick be still
alive, though the surgeon declare that he have very little hope. upon
which, Jones fetch a deep sigh, Nightingale say to he, "my dear
Tom, why should you afflict yourself so upon an accident, which,
whatever be the consequence, can be attend with no danger to you,
and in which your conscience cannot accuse you of have be the
least to blame? if the fellow should die, what have you do more than
take away the life of a ruffian in your own defence? so will the
coroner's inquest certainly find it; and then you will be easily
admit to bail; and, though you must undergo the form of a trial,
yet it be a trial which many man would stand for you for a shilling."
"come, come, Mr Jones," say Mrs Miller, "chear yourself up. I know
you could not be the aggressor, and so I tell Mr Allworthy, and so he
shall acknowledge too, before I have do with he."
Jones gravely answer, "that whatever might be his fate, he
should always lament the having shed the blood of one of his
fellow-creature, as one of the high misfortune which could
have befall he. but I have another misfortune of the tender
kind----O! Mrs Miller, I have lose what I hold most dear upon earth."
"that must be a mistress," say Mrs Miller; "but come, come; I know
more than you imagine" (for indeed Partridge have blab all); "and I
have hear more than you know. matter go well, I promise you, than
you think; and I would not give Blifil sixpence for all the chance
which he hath of the lady."
"indeed, my dear friend, indeed," answer Jones, "you be an entire
stranger to the cause of my grief. if you be acquaint with the
story, you would allow my case admit of no comfort. I apprehend no
danger from Blifil. I have undo myself." "donot despair," reply
Mrs Miller; "you know not what a woman can do; and if anything be in
my power, I promise you I will do it to serve you. it be my duty. my
son, my dear Mr Nightingale, who be so kind to tell I he hath
obligation to you on the same account, know it be my duty. shall I
go to the lady myself? I will say anything to she you would have I
say."
"thou good of woman," cry Jones, take she by the hand, "talk not
of obligation to me;--but as you have be so kind to mention it,
there be a favour which, perhaps, may be in your power. I see you be
acquaint with the lady (how you come by your information I know
not), who sit, indeed, very near my heart. if you could contrive to
deliver this (give she a paper from his pocket), I shall for ever
acknowledge your goodness."
"give it I," say Mrs Miller. "if I see it not in her own possession
before I sleep, may my next sleep be my last! comfort yourself, my
good young man! be wise enough to take warning from past folly, and
I warrant all shall be well, and I shall yet see you happy with the
most charming young lady in the world; for I so hear from every one
she be."
"believe I, madam," say he, "I do not speak the common canot of one
in my unhappy situation. before this dreadful accident happen, I have
resolve to quit a life of which I be become sensible of the
wickedness as well as folly. I do assure you, notwithstanding the
disturbance I have unfortunately occasion in your house, for which
I heartily ask your pardon, I be not an abandon profligate. though I
have be hurry into vice, I do not approve a vicious character,
nor will I ever, from this moment, deserve it."
Mrs Miller express great satisfaction in these declaration, in the
sincerity of which she aver she have an entire faith; and now the
remainder of the conversation past in the joint attempt of that good
woman and Mr Nightingale to cheer the dejected spirit of Mr Jones, in
which they so far succeed as to leave he much well comfort and
satisfied than they find he; to which happy alteration nothing so
much contribute as the kind undertaking of Mrs Miller to deliver his
letter to Sophia, which he despair of find any mean to
accomplish; for when Black George produce the last from Sophia, he
inform Partridge that she have strictly charge he, on pain of
have it communicate to her father, not to bring she any answer. he
be, moreover, not a little pleased to find he have so warm an advocate
to Mr Allworthy himself in this good woman, who be, in reality, one
of the worthy creature in the world.
after about an hour's visit from the lady (for Nightingale have be
with he much long), they both take their leave, promise to return
to he soon; during which Mrs Miller say she hop to bring he some
good news from his mistress, and Mr Nightingale promise to enquire
into the state of Mr Fitzpatrick's wound, and likewise to find out
some of the person who be present at the rencounter.
the former of these go directly in quest of Sophia, whither we
likewise shall now attend she.
Chapter vi.
in which Mrs Miller pay a visit to Sophia.
access to the young lady be by no mean difficult; for, as she live
now on a perfect friendly footing with her aunt, she be at full
liberty to receive what visitant she please.
Sophia be dress when she be acquaint that there be a
gentlewoman below to wait on she. as she be neither afraid, nor
ashame, to see any of her own sex, Mrs Miller be immediately
admit.
curtsy and the usual ceremonial between woman who be stranger to
each other, be past, Sophia say, "I have not the pleasure to know
you, madam." "no, madam," answer Mrs Miller, "and I must beg pardon
for intrude upon you. but when you know what have induce I to give
you this trouble, I hope----" "pray, what be your business, madam?"
say Sophia, with a little emotion. "Madam, we be not alone," reply
Mrs Miller, in a low voice. "go out, Betty," say Sophia.
when Betty be depart, Mrs Miller say, "I be desire, madam, by a
very unhappy young gentleman, to deliver you this letter." Sophia
change colour when she see the direction, well know the hand, and
after some hesitation, said--"i could not conceive, madam, from your
appearance, that your business have be of such a nature.--whomever
you bring this letter from, I shall not open it. I should be sorry
to entertain an unjust suspicion of any one; but you be an utter
stranger to I."
"if you will have patience, madam," answer Mrs Miller, "I will
acquaint you who I be, and how I come by that letter." "I have no
curiosity, madam, to know anything," cry Sophia; "but I must insist
on your deliver that letter back to the person who give it you."
Mrs Miller then fall upon her knee, and in the most passionate term
implore her compassion; to which Sophia answer: "sure, madam, it be
surprize you should be so very strongly interested in the behalf of
this person. I would not think, madam"--"No, madam," say Mrs Miller,
"you shall not think anything but the truth. I will tell you all, and
you will not wonder that I be interested. he be the well-nature
creature that ever be bear."--she then begin and relate the story of
Mr Anderson.--After this she cry, "this, madam, this be his
goodness; but I have much more tender obligation to he. he hath
preserve my child."--here, after shed some tear, she relate
everything concern that fact, suppress only those circumstance
which would have most reflect on her daughter, and conclude with
say, "now, madam, you shall judge whether I can ever do enough for
so kind, so good, so generous a young man; and sure he be the good and
worthy of all human being."
the alteration in the countenance of Sophia have hitherto be chiefly
to her disadvantage, and have incline her complexion to too great
paleness; but she now wax red, if possible, than vermilion, and
cry, "I know not what to say; certainly what arise from gratitude
cannot be blame--but what service can my read this letter do your
friend, since I be resolve never----" Mrs Miller fall again to her
entreaty, and beg to be forgive, but she could not, she say,
carry it back. "well, madam," say Sophia, "I cannot help it, if you
will force it upon me.--certainly you may leave it whether I will or
no." what Sophia mean, or whether she mean anything, I will not
presume to determine; but Mrs Miller actually understand this as a
hint, and presently lay the letter down on the table, take she
leave, have first beg permission to wait again on Sophia; which
request have neither assent nor denial.
the letter lie upon the table no long than till Mrs Miller be out
of sight; for then Sophia open and read it.
this letter do very little service to his cause; for it consist of
little more than confession of his own unworthiness, and bitter
lamentation of despair, together with the most solemn protestation
of his unalterable fidelity to Sophia, of which, he say, he hop to
convince she, if he have ever more the honour of be admit to she
presence; and that he could account for the letter to Lady Bellaston
in such a manner, that, though it would not entitle he to her
forgiveness, he hop at least to obtain it from her mercy. and
conclude with vow that nothing be ever less in his thought than
to marry Lady Bellaston.
Though Sophia read the letter twice over with great attention, his
meaning still remain a riddle to she; nor could her invention
suggest to she any mean to excuse Jones. she certainly remain very
angry with he, though indeed Lady Bellaston take up so much of her
resentment, that her gentle mind have but little leave to bestow on any
other person.
that lady be most unluckily to dine this very day with her aunt
western, and in the afternoon they be all three, by appointment, to
go together to the opera, and thence to Lady Thomas Hatchet's drum.
Sophia would have gladly be excuse from all, but would not
disoblige her aunt; and as to the art of counterfeit illness, she
be so entirely a stranger to they, that it never once enter into
her head. when she be drest, therefore, down she go, resolve to
encounter all the horror of the day, and a most disagreeable one it
prove; for Lady Bellaston take every opportunity very civilly and
slily to insult she; to all which her dejection of spirit disable
she from make any return; and, indeed, to confess the truth, she be
at the very good but an indifferent mistress of repartee.
another misfortune which befel poor Sophia be the company of Lord
Fellamar, whom she meet at the opera, and who attend she to the drum.
and though both place be too publick to admit of any
particularity, and she be far relieved by the musick at the one
place, and by the card at the other, she could not, however, enjoy
herself in his company; for there be something of delicacy in woman,
which will not suffer they to be even easy in the presence of a man
whom they know to have pretension to they which they be disinclined
to favour.
have in this chapter twice mention a drum, a word which our
posterity, it be hop, will not understand in the sense it be here
apply, we shall, notwithstanding our present haste, stop a moment to
describe the entertainment here mean, and the rather as we can in a
moment describe it.
a drum, then, be an assembly of well-dress person of both sex,
most of whom play at card, and the rest do nothing at all; while the
mistress of the house perform the part of the landlady at an inn, and
like the landlady of an inn pride herself in the number of her
guest, though she doth not always, like she, get anything by it.
no wonder then, as so much spirit must be require to support any
vivacity in these scene of dulness, that we hear person of fashion
eternally complain of the want of they; a complaint confine
entirely to upper life. how insupportable must we imagine this round
of impertinence to have be to Sophia at this time; how difficult
must she have find it to force the appearance of gaiety into her
look, when her mind dictate nothing but the tender sorrow, and
when every thought be charge with torment idea!
Night, however, at last restore she to her pillow, where we will
leave she to soothe her melancholy at least, though incapable we fear
of rest, and shall pursue our history, which, something whisper we,
be now arrive at the eve of some great event.
Chapter vii.
a pathetic scene between Mr Allworthy and Mrs Miller.
Mrs Miller have a long discourse with Mr Allworthy, at his return from
dinner, in which she acquaint he with Jones's have unfortunately
lose all which he be pleased to bestow on he at their separation;
and with the distress to which that loss have subject he; of all
which she have receive a full account from the faithful retailer
Partridge. she then explain the obligation she have to Jones; not
that she be entirely explicit with regard to her daughter; for though
she have the utmost confidence in Mr Allworthy, and though there could
be no hope of keep an affair secret which be unhappily know to
more than half a dozen, yet she could not prevail with herself to
mention those circumstance which reflect most on the chastity of
poor Nancy, but smother that part of her evidence as cautiously as
if she have be before a judge, and the girl be now on her trial for
the murder of a bastard.
Allworthy say, there be few character so absolutely vicious as not
to have the least mixture of good in they. "however," say he, "I
cannot deny but that you have some obligation to the fellow, bad as
he be, and I shall therefore excuse what hath past already, but must
insist you never mention his name to I more; for, I promise you, it
be upon the full and plainest evidence that I resolve to take the
measure I have take." "well, sir," say she, "I make not the least
doubt but time will shew all matter in their true and natural
colour, and that you will be convince this poor young man deserve
well of you than some other folk that shall be nameless."
"Madam," cry allworthy, a little ruffle, "I will not hear any
reflection on my nephew; and if ever you say a word more of that
kind, I will depart from your house that instant. he be the worthy
and good of man; and I once more repeat it to you, he hath carry his
friendship to this man to a blameable length, by too long conceal
fact of the black die. the ingratitude of the wretch to this good
young man be what I most resent; for, madam, I have the great
reason to imagine he have lay a plot to supplant my nephew in my
favour, and to have disinherit he."
"I be sure, sir," answer Mrs Miller, a little frightened (for,
though Mr Allworthy have the utmost sweetness and benevolence in his
smile, he have great terror in his frown), "I shall never speak
against any gentleman you be pleased to think well of. I be sure,
sir, such behaviour would very little become I, especially when the
gentleman be your near relation; but, sir, you must not be angry
with I, you must not indeed, for my good wish to this poor wretch.
sure I may call he so now, though once you would have be angry with
I if I have speak of he with the least disrespect. how often have I
hear you call he your son? how often have you prattle to I of he
with all the fondness of a parent? Nay, sir, I cannot forget the many
tender expression, the many good thing you have tell I of his
beauty, and his part, and his virtue; of his good-nature and
generosity. I be sure, sir, I cannot forget they, for I find they all
true. I have experience they in my own cause. they have preserve my
family. you must pardon my tear, sir, indeed you must. when I
consider the cruel reverse of fortune which this poor youth, to whom I
be so much oblige, hath suffer; when I consider the loss of your
favour, which I know he value more than his life, I must, I must
lament he. if you have a dagger in your hand, ready to plunge into my
heart, I must lament the misery of one whom you have love, and I
shall ever love."
Allworthy be pretty much move with this speech, but it seem not to
be with anger; for, after a short silence, take Mrs Miller by the
hand, he say very affectionately to she, "Come, madam, let we
consider a little about your daughter. I cannot blame you for
rejoice in a match which promise to be advantageous to she, but you
know this advantage, in a great measure, depend on the father's
reconciliation. I know Mr Nightingale very well, and have formerly have
concern with he; I will make he a visit, and endeavour to serve you
in this matter. I believe he be a worldly man; but as this be an only
son, and the thing be now irretrievable, perhaps he may in time be
bring to reason. I promise you I will do all I can for you."
many be the acknowledgment which the poor woman make to Allworthy
for this kind and generous offer, nor could she refrain from take
this occasion again to express her gratitude towards Jones, "to whom,"
say she, "I owe the opportunity of give you, sir, this present
trouble." Allworthy gently stop she; but he be too good a man to
be really offend with the effect of so noble a principle as now
actuate Mrs Miller; and indeed, have not this new affair inflame his
former anger against Jones, it be possible he might have be a little
softened towards he, by the report of an action which malice itself
could not have derive from an evil motive.
Mr Allworthy and Mrs Miller have be above an hour together, when
their conversation be put an end to by the arrival of Blifil and
another person, which other person be no less than Mr Dowling, the
attorney, who be now become a great favourite with Mr Blifil, and
whom Mr Allworthy, at the desire of his nephew, have make his steward;
and have likewise recommend he to Mr Western, from whom the attorney
receive a promise of be promote to the same office upon the first
vacancy; and, in the meantime, be employ in transact some
affair which the squire then have in London in relation to a mortgage.
this be the principal affair which then bring Mr Dowling to town;
therefore he take the same opportunity to charge himself with some
money for Mr Allworthy, and to make a report to he of some other
business; in all which, as it be of much too dull a nature to find
any place in this history, we will leave the uncle, nephew, and their
lawyer concern, and resort to other matter.
Chapter viii.
contain various matter.
before we return to Mr Jones, we will take one more view of Sophia.
though that young lady have bring her aunt into great good humour by
those soothe method which we have before relate, she have not
bring she in the least to abate of her zeal for the match with Lord
Fellamar. this zeal be now inflame by Lady Bellaston, who have tell
she the precede evening, that she be well satisfied from the
conduct of Sophia, and from her carriage to his lordship, that all
delay would be dangerous, and that the only way to succeed be to
press the match forward with such rapidity that the young lady should
have no time to reflect, and be oblige to consent while she scarce
know what she do; in which manner, she say, one-half of the
marriage among people of condition be bring about. a fact very
probably true, and to which, I suppose, be owe the mutual tenderness
which afterwards exist among so many happy couple.
a hint of the same kind be give by the same lady to Lord Fellamar;
and both these so readily embrace the advice that the very next day
be, at his lordship's request, appoint by Mrs Western for a private
interview between the young party. this be communicate to Sophia
by her aunt, and insist upon in such high term, that, after have
urge everything she possibly could invent against it without the
least effect, she at last agree to give the high instance of
complacence which any young lady can give, and consent to see his
lordship.
as conversation of this kind afford no great entertainment, we shall
be excuse from recite the whole that past at this interview; in
which, after his lordship have make many declaration of the most pure
and ardent passion to the silent blushing Sophia, she at last
collect all the spirit she could raise, and with a trembling low
voice say, "my lord, you must be yourself conscious whether your
former behaviour to I hath be consistent with the profession you
now make." "be there," answer he, "no way by which I can atone for
madness? what I do I be afraid must have too plainly convinced you,
that the violence of love have deprive I of my sens." "indeed, my
lord," say she, "it be in your power to give I a proof of an
affection which I much rather wish to encourage, and to which I should
think myself more beholden." "name it, madam," say my lord, very
warmly. "my lord," say she, look down upon her fan, "I know you
must be sensible how uneasy this pretended passion of yours hath make
I." "can you be so cruel to call it pretend?" say he. "yes, my
lord," answer Sophia, "all profession of love to those whom we
persecute be most insulting pretence. this pursuit of yours be to I
a most cruel persecution: nay, it be take a most ungenerous
advantage of my unhappy situation." "most lovely, most adorable
charmer, do not accuse I," cry he, "of take an ungenerous
advantage, while I have no thought but what be direct to your
honour and interest, and while I have no view, no hope, no ambition,
but to throw myself, honour, fortune, everything at your foot." "my
lord," say she, "it be that fortune and those honour which give you
the advantage of which I complain. these be the charm which have
seduce my relation, but to I they be thing indifferent. if your
lordship will merit my gratitude, there be but one way." "pardon I,
divine creature," say he, "there can be none. all I can do for you be
so much your due, and will give I so much pleasure, that there be no
room for your gratitude." "indeed, my lord," answer she, "you may
obtain my gratitude, my good opinion, every kind think and wish
which it be in my power to bestow; nay, you may obtain they with ease,
for sure to a generous mind it must be easy to grant my request. let
I beseech you, then, to cease a pursuit in which you can never have
any success. for your own sake as well as mine I entreat this favour;
for sure you be too noble to have any pleasure in torment an
unhappy creature. what can your lordship propose but uneasiness to
yourself, by a perseverance, which, upon my honour, upon my soul,
cannot, shall not prevail with I, whatever distress you may drive
I to." here my lord fetch a deep sigh, and then said--"is it then,
madam, that I be so unhappy to be the object of your dislike and
scorn; or will you pardon I if I suspect there be some other?" here
he hesitate, and Sophia answer with some spirit, "my lord, I shall
not be accountable to you for the reason of my conduct. I be oblige
to your lordship for the generous offer you have make; I own it be
beyond either my desert or expectation; yet I hope, my lord, you
will not insist on my reason, when I declare I cannot accept it."
Lord Fellamar return much to this, which we do not perfectly
understand, and perhaps it could not all be strictly reconcile either
to sense or grammar; but he conclude his rant speech with say,
"that if she have pre-engage herself to any gentleman, however unhappy
it would make he, he should think himself bind in honour to desist."
perhaps my lord lay too much emphasis on the word gentleman; for we
cannot else well account for the indignation with which he inspire
Sophia, who, in her answer, seem greatly to resent some affront he
have give she.
while she be speak, with her voice more raise than usual, Mrs
Western come into the room, the fire glare in her cheek, and the
flame burst from her eye. "I be ashamed," say she, "my lord, of
the reception which you have meet with. I assure your lordship we be
all sensible of the honour do we; and I must tell you, Miss Western,
the family expect a different behaviour from you." here my lord
interfere on behalf of the young lady, but to no purpose; the aunt
proceed till Sophia pull out her handkerchief, throw herself into
a chair, and burst into a violent fit of tear.
the remainder of the conversation between Mrs Western and his
lordship, till the latter withdraw, consist of bitter lamentation
on his side, and on hers of the strong assurance that her niece
should and would consent to all he wish. "indeed, my lord," say
she, "the girl hath have a foolish education, neither adapt to her
fortune nor her family. her father, I be sorry to say it, be to blame
for everything. the girl hath silly country notion of bashfulness.
nothing else, my lord, upon my honour; I be convinced she hath a good
understanding at the bottom, and will be bring to reason."
this last speech be make in the absence of Sophia; for she have some
time before leave the room, with more appearance of passion than she
have ever show on any occasion; and now his lordship, after many
expression of thank to Mrs Western, many ardent profession of
passion which nothing could conquer, and many assurance of
perseverance, which Mrs Western highly encouraged, take his leave for
this time.
before we relate what now pass between Mrs Western and Sophia, it
may be proper to mention an unfortunate accident which have happen,
and which have occasion the return of Mrs Western with so much fury,
as we have see.
the reader then must know that the maid who at present attend on
Sophia be recommend by Lady Bellaston, with whom she have live for
some time in the capacity of a comb-brush: she be a very sensible
girl, and have receive the strict instruction to watch her young
lady very carefully. these instruction, we be sorry to say, be
communicate to she by Mrs Honour, into whose favour Lady Bellaston
have now so ingratiated herself, that the violent affection which the
good waiting-woman have formerly bear to Sophia be entirely
obliterate by that great attachment which she have to her new
mistress.
now, when Mrs Miller be depart, Betty (for that be the name of the
girl), return to her young lady, find she very attentively engage
in read a long letter, and the visible emotion which she betray
on that occasion might have well account for some suspicion which
the girl entertain; but indeed they have yet a strong foundation,
for she have overhear the whole scene which pass between Sophia and
Mrs Miller.
Mrs Western be acquaint with all this matter by Betty, who, after
receive many commendation and some reward for her fidelity, be
order, that, if the woman who bring the letter come again, she
should introduce she to Mrs Western herself.
Unluckily, Mrs Miller return at the very time when Sophia be
engage with his lordship. Betty, accord to order, send she
directly to the aunt; who, be mistress of so many circumstance
relate to what have past the day before, easily impose upon the poor
woman to believe that Sophia have communicate the whole affair; and so
pump everything out of she which she know relate to the letter and
relate to Jones.
this poor creature might, indeed, be call simplicity itself. she be
one of that order of mortal who be apt to believe everything which
be say to they; to whom nature hath neither indulge the offensive
nor defensive weapon of deceit, and who be consequently liable to be
impose upon by any one who will only be at the expense of a little
falshood for that purpose. Mrs Western, have drain Mrs Miller of
all she know, which, indeed, be but little, but which be sufficient
to make the aunt suspect a great deal, dismiss she with assurance
that Sophia would not see she, that she would send no answer to the
letter, nor ever receive another; nor do she suffer she to depart
without a handsome lecture on the merit of an office to which she
could afford no well name than that of procuress.--this discovery
have greatly discompose her temper, when, come into the apartment
next to that in which the lover be, she overhear Sophia very
warmly protest against his lordship's address. at which the rage
already kindle burst forth, and she rush in upon her niece in a
most furious manner, as we have already describe, together with what
past at that time till his lordship's departure.
no soon be Lord Fellamar go than Mrs Western return to Sophia,
whom she upbraid in the most bitter term for the ill use she have
make of the confidence repose in she; and for her treachery in
converse with a man with whom she have offer but the day before to
bind herself in the most solemn oath never more to have any
conversation. Sophia protest she have maintain no such
conversation. "how, how! Miss Western," say the aunt; "will you deny
your receive a letter from he yesterday?" "a letter, madam!"
answer Sophia, somewhat surprized. "it be not very well breed, miss,"
reply the aunt, "to repeat my word. I say a letter, and I insist
upon your show it I immediately." "I scorn a lie, madam," say
Sophia; "I do receive a letter, but it be without my desire, and,
indeed, I may say, against my consent." "indeed, indeed, miss," cry
the aunt, "you ought to be ashamed of own you have receive it at
all; but where be the letter? for I will see it."
to this peremptory demand, Sophia pause some time before she return
an answer; and at last only excuse herself by declare she have not
the letter in her pocket, which be, indeed, true; upon which her
aunt, lose all manner of patience, ask her niece this short
question, whether she would resolve to marry Lord Fellamar, or no? to
which she receive the strong negative. Mrs Western then reply
with an oath, or something very like one, that she would early the
next morning deliver she back into her father's hand.
Sophia then begin to reason with her aunt in the follow
manner:--"Why, madam, must I of necessity be force to marry at all?
consider how cruel you would have think it in your own case, and how
much kind your parent be in leave you to your liberty. what
have I do to forfeit this liberty? I will never marry contrary to my
father's consent, nor without ask yours----And when I ask the
consent of either improperly, it will be then time enough to force
some other marriage upon I." "can I bear to hear this," cry Mrs
Western, "from a girl who hath now a letter from a murderer in her
pocket?" "I have no such letter, I promise you," answer Sophia;
"and, if he be a murderer, he will soon be in no condition to give you
any further disturbance." "how, Miss Western!" say the aunt, "have
you the assurance to speak of he in this manner; to own your
affection for such a villain to my face?" "sure, madam," say Sophia,
"you put a very strange construction on my word." "indeed, Miss
Western," cry the lady, "I shall not bear this usage; you have
learn of your father this manner of treat I; he hath teach you
to give I the lie. he hath totally ruin you by this false system of
education; and, please heaven, he shall have the comfort of its
fruit; for once more I declare to you, that to-morrow morning I will
carry you back. I will withdraw all my force from the field, and
remain henceforth, like the wise king of Prussia, in a state of
perfect neutrality. you be both too wise to be regulate by my
measure; so prepare yourself, for to-morrow morning you shall
evacuate this house."
Sophia remonstrate all she could; but her aunt be deaf to all she
say. in this resolution therefore we must at present leave she, as
there seem to be no hope of bring she to change it.
chapter ix.
what happen to Mr Jones in the prison.
Mr Jones pass about twenty-four melancholy hour by himself, unless
when relieve by the company of Partridge, before Mr Nightingale
return; not that this worthy young man have desert or forgot his
friend; for, indeed, he have be much the great part of the time
employ in his service.
he have hear, upon enquiry, that the only person who have see the
beginning of the unfortunate rencounter be a crew belong to a
man-of-war which then lie at Deptford. to Deptford therefore he go
in search of this crew, where he be inform that the man he seek
after be all go ashore. he then trace they from place to place,
till at last he find two of they drink together, with a third
person, at a hedge-tavern near Aldersgate.
Nightingale desire to speak with Jones by himself (for Partridge be
in the room when he come in). as soon as they be alone, Nightingale,
take Jones by the hand, cry, "come, my brave friend, be not too
much deject at what I be go to tell you----I be sorry I be the
messenger of bad news; but I think it my duty to tell you." "I guess
already what that bad news be," cry Jones. "the poor gentleman then
be dead."--"I hope not," answer Nightingale. "he be alive this
morning; though I will not flatter you; I fear, from the account I
could get, that his wound be mortal. but if the affair be exactly as
you tell it, your own remorse would be all you would have reason to
apprehend, let what would happen; but forgive I, my dear Tom, if I
entreat you to make the bad of your story to your friend. if you
disguise anything to we, you will only be an enemy to yourself."
"what reason, my dear Jack, have I ever give you," say Jones, "to
stab I with so cruel a suspicion?" "have patience," cry
Nightingale, "and I will tell you all. after the most diligent enquiry
I could make, I at last meet with two of the fellow who be present
at this unhappy accident, and I be sorry to say, they do not relate
the story so much in your favour as you yourself have tell it." "why,
what do they say?" cry Jones. "indeed what I be sorry to repeat, as
I be afraid of the consequence of it to you. they say that they be
at too great a distance to overhear any word that pass between you:
but they both agree that the first blow be give by you." "then, upon
my soul," answer Jones, "they injure I. he not only strike I
first, but strike I without the least provocation. what should induce
those villain to accuse I falsely?" "Nay, that I cannot guess," say
Nightingale, "and if you yourself, and I, who be so heartily your
friend, cannot conceive a reason why they should belie you, what
reason will an indifferent court of justice be able to assign why they
should not believe they? I repeat the question to they several
time, and so do another gentleman who be present, who, I believe,
be a seafaring man, and who really act a very friendly part by you;
for he beg they often to consider that there be the life of a man
in the case; and ask they over and over, if they be certain; to
which they both answer, that they be, and would abide by their
evidence upon oath. for heaven's sake, my dear friend, recollect
yourself; for, if this should appear to be the fact, it will be your
business to think in time of make the good of your interest. I would
not shock you; but you know, I believe, the severity of the law,
whatever verbal provocation may have be give you." "alas! my
friend," cry Jones, "what interest hath such a wretch as I? besides,
do you think I would even wish to live with the reputation of a
murderer? if I have any friend (as, alas! I have none), could I have
the confidence to solicit they to speak in the behalf of a man
condemn for the black crime in human nature? believe I, I have
no such hope; but I have some reliance on a throne still greatly
superior; which will, I be certain, afford I all the protection I
merit."
he then conclude with many solemn and vehement protestation of the
truth of what he have at first assert.
the faith of Nightingale be now again stagger, and begin to incline
to credit his friend, when Mrs Miller appear, and make a sorrowful
report of the success of her embassy; which when Jones have hear, he
cry out most heroically, "well, my friend, I be now indifferent as
to what shall happen, at least with regard to my life; and if it be
the will of Heaven that I shall make an atonement with that for the
blood I have spill, I hope the Divine Goodness will one day suffer my
honour to be clear, and that the word of a die man, at least,
will be believe, so far as to justify his character."
a very mournful scene now past between the prisoner and his friend,
at which, as few reader would have be pleased to be present, so
few, I believe, will desire to hear it particularly related. we will,
therefore, pass on to the entrance of the turnkey, who acquaint
Jones that there be a lady without who desire to speak with he when
he be at leisure.
Jones declare his surprize at this message. he say, "he know no lady
in the world whom he could possibly expect to see there." however, as
he see no reason to decline see any person, Mrs Miller and Mr
Nightingale presently take their leave, and he give order to have the
lady admit.
if Jones be surprize at the news of a visit from a lady, how greatly
be he astonish when he discover this lady to be no other than Mrs
Waters! in this astonishment then we shall leave he awhile, in order
to cure the surprize of the reader, who will likewise, probably, not a
little wonder at the arrival of this lady.
who this Mrs Waters be, the reader pretty well know; what she be,
he must be perfectly satisfied. he will therefore be pleased to
remember that this lady depart from Upton in the same coach with Mr
Fitzpatrick and the other irish gentleman, and in their company
travel to Bath.
now there be a certain office in the gift of Mr Fitzpatrick at that
time vacant, namely that of a wife: for the lady who have lately fill
that office have resign, or at least desert her duty. Mr
Fitzpatrick therefore, have thoroughly examine Mrs Waters on the
road, find she extremely fit for the place, which, on their arrival
at Bath, he presently confer upon she, and she without any scruple
accept. as husband and wife this gentleman and lady continue
together all the time they stay at Bath, and as husband and wife
they arrive together in town.
whether Mr Fitzpatrick be so wise a man as not to part with one good
thing till he have secure another, which he have at present only a
prospect of regain; or whether Mrs Waters have so well discharge
her office, that he intend still to retain she as principal, and to
make his wife (as be often the case) only her deputy, I will not say;
but certain it be, he never mention his wife to she, never
communicate to she the letter give he by Mrs Western, nor ever once
hint his purpose of repossess his wife; much less do he ever
mention the name of Jones. for, though he intend to fight with he
wherever he meet he, he do not imitate those prudent person who
think a wife, a mother, a sister, or sometimes a whole family, the
safe second on these occasion. the first account therefore which
she have of all this be deliver to she from his lip, after he be
bring home from the tavern where his wound have be drest.
as Mr Fitzpatrick, however, have not the clear way of tell a
story at any time, and be now, perhaps, a little more confused than
usual, it be some time before she discover that the gentleman who
have give he this wound be the very same person from whom her heart
have receive a wound, which, though not of a mortal kind, be yet so
deep that it have leave a considerable scar behind it. but no soon be
she acquaint that Mr Jones himself be the man who have be
commit to the Gatehouse for this suppose murder, than she take the
first opportunity of commit Mr Fitzpatrick to the care of his
nurse, and hasten away to visit the conqueror.
she now enter the room with an air of gaiety, which receive an
immediate check from the melancholy aspect of poor Jones, who start
and bless himself when he see she. upon which she say, "Nay, I do
not wonder at your surprize; I believe you do not expect to see I;
for few gentleman be trouble here with visit from any lady, unless
a wife. you see the power you have over I, Mr Jones. indeed, I little
thought, when we part at Upton, that our next meeting would have
be in such a place." "indeed, madam," say Jones, "I must look upon
this visit as kind; few will follow the miserable, especially to such
dismal habitation." "I protest, Mr Jones," say she, "I can hardly
persuade myself you be the same agreeable fellow I see at Upton. why,
your face be more miserable than any dungeon in the universe. what can
be the matter with you?" "I think, madam," say Jones, "as you know
of my be here, you know the unhappy reason." "Pugh!" say she, "you
have pink a man in a duel, thatbe all." Jones expr some
indignation at this levity, and speak with the utmost contrition for
what have happen. to which she answer, "well, then, sir, if you
take it so much to heart, I will relieve you; the gentleman be not
dead, and, I be pretty confident, be in no danger of die. the
surgeon, indeed, who first dress he be a young fellow, and seem
desirous of represent his case to be as bad as possible, that he
might have the more honour from cure he: but the king's surgeon
hath see he since, and say, unless from a fever, of which there be
at present no symptom, he apprehend not the least danger of life."
Jones shew great satisfaction in his countenance at this report;
upon which she affirm the truth of it, add, "by the most
extraordinary accident in the world I lodge at the same house; and
have see the gentleman, and I promise you he doth you justice, and
say, whatever be the consequence, that he be entirely the aggressor,
and that you be not in the least to blame."
Jones express the utmost satisfaction at the account which Mrs
Waters bring he. he then inform she of many thing which she well
know before, as who Mr Fitzpatrick be, the occasion of his
resentment, &c. he likewise tell she several fact of which she be
ignorant, as the adventure of the muff, and other particular,
conceal only the name of Sophia. he then lament the folly and
vice of which he have be guilty; every one of which, he say, have
be attend with such ill consequence, that he should be
unpardonable if he do not take warning, and quit those vicious
course for the future. he lastly conclude with assure she of his
resolution to sin no more, lest a bad thing should happen to he.
Mrs Waters with great pleasantry ridicule all this, as the effect of
low spirit and confinement. she repeat some witticism about the
devil when he be sick, and tell he, "she doubt not but shortly to
see he at liberty, and as lively a fellow as ever; and then," say
she, "I donot question but your conscience will be safely deliver of
all these qualm that it be now so sick in breeding."
many more thing of this kind she utter, some of which it would do
she no great honour, in the opinion of some reader, to remember; nor
be we quite certain but that the answer make by Jones would be
treat with ridicule by other. we shall therefore suppress the rest
of this conversation, and only observe that it end at last with
perfect innocence, and much more to the satisfaction of Jones than of
the lady; for the former be greatly transport with the news she have
bring he; but the latter be not altogether so pleased with the
penitential behaviour of a man whom she have, at her first interview,
conceive a very different opinion of from what she now entertain of
he.
thus the melancholy occasion by the report of Mr Nightingale be
pretty well effaced; but the dejection into which Mrs Miller have
throw he still continue. the account she give so well tally with
the word of Sophia herself in her letter, that he make not the least
doubt but that she have disclose his letter to her aunt, and have take
a fixed resolution to abandon he. the torment this thought give he
be to be equal only by a piece of news which fortune have yet in
store for he, and which we shall communicate in the second chapter of
the ensue book.
BOOK XVIII.
contain about six day.
Chapter i.
a farewel to the reader.
we be now, reader, arrive at the last stage of our long journey. as
we have, therefore, travel together through so many page, let we
behave to one another like fellow-traveller in a stage coach, who
have pass several day in the company of each other; and who,
notwithstanding any bickering or little animosity which may have
occur on the road, generally make all up at last, and mount, for
the last time, into their vehicle with chearfulness and good humour;
since after this one stage, it may possibly happen to we, as it
commonly happen to they, never to meet more.
as I have here take up this simile, give I leave to carry it a
little far. I intend, then, in this last book, to imitate the good
company I have mention in their last journey. now, it be well know
that all joke and raillery be at this time lay aside; whatever
character any of the passenger have for the jest-sake personate on
the road be now throw off, and the conversation be usually plain and
serious.
in the same manner, if I have now and then, in the course of this
work, indulge any pleasantry for thy entertainment, I shall here lay
it down. the variety of matter, indeed, which I shall be oblige to
cram into this book, will afford no room for any of those ludicrous
observation which I have elsewhere make, and which may sometimes,
perhaps, have prevent thee from take a nap when it be begin
to steal upon thee. in this last book thou wilt find nothing (or at
most very little) of that nature. all will be plain narrative only;
and, indeed, when thou hast peruse the many great event which this
book will produce, thou wilt think the number of page contain in it
scarce sufficient to tell the story.
and now, my friend, I take this opportunity (as I shall have no other)
of heartily wish thee well. if I have be an entertaining
companion to thee, I promise thee it be what I have desire. if in
anything I have offend, it be really without any intention. some
thing, perhaps, here say, may have hit thee or thy friend; but I do
most solemnly declare they be not point at thee or they. I
question not but thou hast be tell, among other story of I, that
thou wast to travel with a very scurrilous fellow; but whoever tell
thee so do I an injury. no man detest and despise scurrility more
than myself; nor hath any man more reason; for none hath ever be
treat with more; and what be a very severe fate, I have have some of
the abusive writing of those very man father upon I, who, in other
of their work, have abuse I themselves with the utmost virulence.
all these work, however, I be well convinced, will be dead long
before this page shall offer itself to thy perusal; for however short
the period may be of my own performance, they will most probably
outlive their own infirm author, and the weakly production of his
abusive contemporary.
Chapter ii.
contain a very tragical incident.
while Jones be employ in those unpleasant meditation, with which
we leave he torment himself, Partridge come stumble into the room
with his face paler than ash, his eye fix in his head, his hair
stand an end, and every limb tremble. in short, he look as
he would have do have he see a spectre, or have he, indeed, be a
spectre himself.
Jones, who be little subject to fear, could not avoid be somewhat
shock at this sudden appearance. he do, indeed, himself change
colour, and his voice a little faultered while he ask he, what be
the matter?
"I hope, sir," say Partridge, "you will not be angry with I. indeed
I do not listen, but I be oblige to stay in the outward room. I be
sure I wish I have be a hundred mile off, rather than have hear
what I have hear." "why, what be the matter?" say Jones. "the
matter, sir? o good Heaven!" answer Partridge, "be that woman who
be just go out the woman who be with you at Upton?" "she be,
Partridge," cry Jones. "and do you really, sir, go to bed with that
woman?" say he, trembling.--"i be afraid what past between we be no
secret," say Jones.--"Nay, but pray, sir, for Heaven's sake, sir,
answer I," cry Partridge. "you know I do," cry Jones. "why then,
the Lord have mercy upon your soul, and forgive you," cry Partridge;
"but as sure as I stand here alive, you have be a-bed with your own
mother."
upon these word Jones become in a moment a great picture of horror
than Partridge himself. he be, indeed, for some time strike dumb with
amazement, and both stand star wildly at each other. at last his
word find way, and in an interrupted voice he say, "how! how!
whatbe this you tell I?" "Nay, sir," cry Partridge, "I have not
breath enough leave to tell you now, but what I have say be most
certainly true.--that woman who now go out be your own mother. how
unlucky be it for you, sir, that I do not happen to see she at that
time, to have prevent it! sure the devil himself must have contrive
to bring about this wickedness."
"sure," cry Jones, "Fortune will never have do with I till she
hath drive I to distraction. but why do I blame Fortune? I be myself
the cause of all my misery. all the dreadful mischief which have
befall I be the consequence only of my own folly and vice. what
thou hast tell I, Partridge, hath almost deprive I of my sens!
and be Mrs Waters, then--but why do I ask? for thou must certainly
know she--if thou hast any affection for I, nay, if thou hast any
pity, let I beseech thee to fetch this miserable woman back again to
I. o good Heavens! incest----with a mother! to what be I reserved!"
he then fall into the most violent and frantic agony of grief and
despair, in which Partridge declare he would not leave he; but at
last, have vent the first torrent of passion, he come a little to
himself; and then, have acquaint Partridge that he would find this
wretched woman in the same house where the wound gentleman be
lodge, he despatch he in quest of she.
if the reader will please to refresh his memory, by turn to the
scene at Upton, in the ninth book, he will be apt to admire the many
strange accident which unfortunately prevent any interview between
Partridge and Mrs Waters, when she spend a whole day there with Mr
Jones. instance of this kind we may frequently observe in life, where
the great event be produce by a nice train of little
circumstance; and more than one example of this may be discover by
the accurate eye, in this our history.
after a fruitless search of two or three hour, Partridge return
back to his master, without have see Mrs Waters. Jones, who be in
a state of desperation at his delay, be almost rave mad when he
bring he his account. he be not long, however, in this condition
before he receive the follow letter:
"SIR,
"since I leave you I have see a gentleman, from whom I have learn
something concern you which greatly surprize and affect I; but
as I have not at present leisure to communicate a matter of such
high importance, you must suspend your curiosity till our next
meeting, which shall be the first moment I be able to see you. o, Mr
Jones, little do I think, when I past that happy day at Upton, the
reflection upon which be like to embitter all my future life, who it
be to whom I owe such perfect happiness. believe I to be ever
sincerely your unfortunate
"J. water."
"P.S. I would have you comfort yourself as much as possible, for Mr
Fitzpatrick be in no manner of danger; so that whatever other
grievous crime you may have to repent of, the guilt of blood be not
among the number."
Jones have read the letter, let it drop (for he be unable to hold
it, and indeed have scarce the use of any one of his faculty).
Partridge take it up, and have receive consent by silence, read it
likewise; nor have it upon he a less sensible effect. the pencil, and
not the pen, should describe the horror which appear in both their
countenance. while they both remain speechless the turnkey enter
the room, and, without take any notice of what sufficiently
discover itself in the face of they both, acquaint Jones that a
man without desire to speak with he. this person be presently
introduce, and be no other than Black George.
as sight of horror be not so usual to George as they be to the
turnkey, he instantly see the great disorder which appear in the
face of Jones. this he impute to the accident that have happen,
which be report in the very bad light in Mr Western's family; he
conclude, therefore, that the gentleman be dead, and that Mr Jones
be in a fair way of come to a shameful end. a thought which give
he much uneasiness; for George be of a compassionate disposition,
and notwithstanding a small breach of friendship which he have be
over-tempt to commit, be, in the main, not insensible of the
obligation he have formerly receive from Mr Jones.
the poor fellow, therefore, scarce refrain from a tear at the
present sight. he tell Jones he be heartily sorry for his
misfortune, and beg he to consider if he could be of any manner
of service. "perhaps, sir," say he, "you may want a little matter of
money upon this occasion; if you do, sir, what little I have be
heartily at your service."
Jones shake he very heartily by the hand, and give he many thank
for the kind offer he have make; but answer, "he have not the least
want of that kind." upon which George begin to press his service more
eagerly than before. Jones again thank he, with assurance that he
want nothing which be in the power of any man live to give.
"come, come, my good master," answer George, "do not take the matter
so much to heart. thing may end well than you imagine; to be sure
you an't the first gentleman who hath kill a man, and yet come off."
"you be wide of the matter, George," say Partridge, "the gentleman
be not dead, nor like to die. donot disturb my master, at present, for
he be troubled about a matter in which it be not in your power to do
he any good." "you donot know what I may be able to do, Mr
Partridge," answer George; "if his concern be about my young lady, I
have some news to tell my master." "what do you say, Mr George?" cry
Jones. "hath anything lately happen in which my Sophia be concern?
my Sophia! how dare such a wretch as I mention she so profanely." "I
hope she will be yours yet," answer George. "why yes, sir, I have
something to tell you about she. Madam Western hath just bring Madam
Sophia home, and there hath be a terrible to do. I could not
possibly learn the very right of it; but my master he hath be in a
vast big passion, and so be Madam Western, and I hear she say, as
she go out of door into her chair, that she would never set she
foot in master's house again. I donot know whatbe the matter, not I,
but everything be very quiet when I come out; but Robin, who wait
at supper, say he have never see the squire for a long while in such
good humour with young madam; that he kiss she several time, and
swear she should be her own mistress, and he never would think of
confine she any more. I think this news would please you, and so I
slip out, though it be so late, to inform you of it." Mr Jones
assure George that it do greatly please he; for though he should
never more presume to lift his eye toward that incomparable creature,
nothing could so much relieve his misery as the satisfaction he should
always have in hearing of her welfare.
the rest of the conversation which pass at the visit be not
important enough to be here relate. the reader will, therefore,
forgive we this abrupt break off, and be pleased to hear how this
great good-will of the squire towards his daughter be bring about.
Mrs Western, on her first arrival at her brother's lodging, begin to
set forth the great honour and advantage which would accrue to the
family by the match with Lord Fellamar, which her niece have absolutely
refuse; in which refusal, when the squire take the part of his
daughter, she fall immediately into the most violent passion, and so
irritated and provoke the squire, that neither his patience nor his
prudence could bear it any long; upon which there ensue between
they both so warm a bout at altercation, that perhaps the region of
billingsgate never equal it. in the heat of this scold Mrs
Western depart, and have consequently no leisure to acquaint her
brother with the letter which Sophia receive, which might have
possibly produce ill effect; but, to say truth, I believe it never
once occur to her memory at this time.
when Mrs Western be go, Sophia, who have be hitherto silent, as
well indeed from necessity as inclination, begin to return the
compliment which her father have make she, in take her part against
her aunt, by take his likewise against the lady. this be the first
time of she so do, and it be in the high degree acceptable to
the squire. again, he remember that Mr Allworthy have insist on an
entire relinquishment of all violent mean; and, indeed, as he make no
doubt but that Jones would be hang, he do not in the least question
succeed with his daughter by fair mean; he now, therefore, once
more give a loose to his natural fondness for she, which have such an
effect on the dutiful, grateful, tender, and affectionate heart of
Sophia, that have her honour, give to Jones, and something else,
perhaps, in which he be concern, be remove, I much doubt whether
she would not have sacrifice herself to a man she do not like, to
have oblige her father. she promise he she would make it the whole
business of her life to oblige he, and would never marry any man
against his consent; which bring the old man so near to his high
happiness, that he be resolve to take the other step, and go to
bed completely drunk.
Chapter iii.
allworthy visit old Nightingale; with a strange discovery that he
make on that occasion.
the morning after these thing have happen, Mr Allworthy go,
accord to his promise, to visit old Nightingale, with whom his
authority be so great, that, after have sit with he three hour,
he at last prevail with he to consent to see his son.
here an accident happen of a very extraordinary kind; one indeed of
those strange chance whence very good and grave man have conclude
that Providence often interpose in the discovery of the most secret
villany, in order to caution man from quit the path of honesty,
however warily they tread in those of vice.
Mr Allworthy, at his entrance into Mr Nightingale's, see Black George;
he take no notice of he, nor do Black George imagine he have
perceive he.
however, when their conversation on the principal point be over,
Allworthy ask Nightingale, whether he know one George Seagrim, and
upon what business he come to his house? "yes," answer Nightingale,
"I know he very well, and a most extraordinary fellow he be, who, in
these day, hath be able to hoard up £500 from rent a very small
estate of £30 a year." "and be this the story which he hath tell you?"
cry allworthy. "Nay, it be true, I promise you," say Nightingale,
"for I have the money now in my own hand, in five bank-bill, which I
be to lay out either in a mortgage, or in some purchase in the north
of England." the bank-bill be no soon produce at Allworthy's
desire than he bless himself at the strangeness of the discovery. he
presently tell Nightingale that these bank-bill be formerly his,
and then acquaint he with the whole affair. as there be no man who
complain more of the fraud of business than highwayman, gamester,
and other thief of that kind, so there be none who so bitterly
exclaim against the fraud of gamester, &c., as usurer, broker, and
other thief of this kind; whether it be that the one way of cheat
be a discountenance or reflection upon the other, or that money, which
be the common mistress of all cheat, make they regard each other in
the light of rival; but Nightingale no soon hear the story than he
exclaim against the fellow in term much severe than the justice
and honesty of Allworthy have bestow on he.
Allworthy desire Nightingale to retain both the money and the secret
till he should hear far from he; and, if he should in the
meantime see the fellow, that he would not take the least notice to
he of the discovery which he have make. he then return to his
lodging, where he find Mrs Miller in a very dejected condition, on
account of the information she have receive from her son-in-law. Mr
Allworthy, with great chearfulness, tell she that he have much good
news to communicate; and, with little further preface, acquaint she
that he have bring Mr Nightingale to consent to see his son, and do
not in the least doubt to effect a perfect reconciliation between
they; though he find the father more sowere by another accident of
the same kind which have happen in his family. he then mention the
run away of the uncle's daughter, which he have be tell by the
old gentleman, and which Mrs Miller and her son-in-law do not yet
know.
the reader may suppose Mrs Miller receive this account with great
thankfulness, and no less pleasure; but so uncommon be her friendship
to Jones, that I be not certain whether the uneasiness she suffer
for his sake do not overbalance her satisfaction at hear a piece
of news tend so much to the happiness of her own family; nor
whether even this very news, as it remind she of the obligation she
have to Jones, do not hurt as well as please she; when her grateful
heart say to she, "while my own family be happy, how miserable be the
poor creature to whose generosity we owe the beginning of all this
happiness!"
Allworthy, have leave she a little while to chew the cud (if I may
use that expression) on these first tiding, tell she he have still
something more to impart, which he believe would give her pleasure.
"I think," say he, "I have discover a pretty considerable treasure
belong to the young gentleman, your friend; but perhaps, indeed,
his present situation may be such that it will be of no service to
he." the latter part of the speech give Mrs Miller to understand who
be mean, and she answer with a sigh, "I hope not, sir." "I hope so
too," cry allworthy, "with all my heart; but my nephew tell I this
morning he have hear a very bad account of the affair."----"good
Heaven! sir," say she--"Well, I must not speak, and yet it be
certainly very hard to be oblige to hold one's tongue when one
hear."--"Madam," say Allworthy, "you may say whatever you please,
you know I too well to think I have a prejudice against any one; and
as for that young man, I assure you I should be heartily pleased to
find he could acquit himself of everything, and particularly of this
sad affair. you can testify the affection I have formerly bear he.
the world, I know, censure I for love he so much. I do not
withdraw that affection from he without think I have the just
cause. believe I, Mrs Miller, I should be glad to find I have be
mistaken." Mrs Miller be go eagerly to reply, when a servant
acquaint she that a gentleman without desire to speak with she
immediately. Allworthy then enquire for his nephew, and be tell that
he have be for some time in his room with the gentleman who use to
come to he, and whom Mr Allworthy guess rightly to be Mr Dowling,
he desire presently to speak with he.
when Dowling attend, Allworthy put the case of the bank-note to
he, without mention any name, and ask in what manner such a
person might be punish. to which Dowling answer, "he think he
might be indict on the Black Act; but say, as it be a matter of
some nicety, it would be proper to go to counsel. he say he be to
attend counsel presently upon an affair of Mr Western's, and if Mr
Allworthy please he would lay the case before they." this be agree
to; and then Mrs Miller, open the door, cry, "I ask pardon, I do
not know you have company;" but Allworthy desire she to come in,
say he have finish his business. upon which Mr Dowling withdraw,
and Mrs Miller introduce Mr Nightingale the young, to return thank
for the great kindness do he by Allworthy: but she have scarce
patience to let the young gentleman finish his speech before she
interrupt he, say, "o sir! Mr Nightingale bring great news
about poor Mr Jones: he hath be to see the wound gentleman, who be
out of all danger of death, and, what be more, declare he fall upon
poor Mr Jones himself, and beat he. I be sure, sir, you would not
have Mr Jones be a coward. if I be a man myself, I be sure, if any
man be to strike I, I should draw my sword. do pray, my dear, tell
Mr Allworthy, tell he all yourself." Nightingale then confirm what
Mrs Miller have say; and conclude with many handsome thing of Jones,
who be, he say, one of the well-natured fellow in the world, and
not in the least inclined to be quarrelsome. here Nightingale be
go to cease, when Mrs Miller again beg he to relate all the
many dutiful expression he have hear he make use of towards Mr
Allworthy. "to say the utmost good of Mr Allworthy," cry
Nightingale, "be do no more than strict justice, and can have no
merit in it: but indeed, I must say, no man can be more sensible of
the obligation he hath to so good a man than be poor Jones. indeed,
sir, I be convince the weight of your displeasure be the heavy
burthen he lie under. he hath often lament it to I, and hath as
often protest in the most solemn manner he hath never be
intentionally guilty of any offence towards you; nay, he hath swear he
would rather die a thousand death than he would have his conscience
upbraid he with one disrespectful, ungrateful, or undutiful thought
towards you. but I ask pardon, sir, I be afraid I presume to
intermeddle too far in so tender a point." "you have speak no more
than what a christian ought," cry Mrs Miller. "indeed, Mr
Nightingale," answer Allworthy, "I applaud your generous friendship,
and I wish he may merit it of you. I confess I be glad to hear the
report you bring from this unfortunate gentleman; and, if that matter
should turn out to be as you represent it (and, indeed, I doubt
nothing of what you say), I may, perhaps, in time, be bring to think
well than lately I have of this young man; for this good gentlewoman
here, nay, all who know I, can witness that I love he as dearly as
if he have be my own son. indeed, I have consider he as a child
send by fortune to my care. I still remember the innocent, the
helpless situation in which I find he. I feel the tender pressure of
his little hand at this moment. he be my darling, indeed he be." at
which word he cease, and the tear stand in his eye.
as the answer which Mrs Miller make may lead we into fresh matter, we
will here stop to account for the visible alteration in Mr Allworthy's
mind, and the abatement of his anger to Jones. revolution of this
kind, it be true, do frequently occur in history and dramatic
writer, for no other reason than because the history or play draw to
a conclusion, and be justify by authority of author; yet, though
we insist upon as much authority as any author whatever, we shall use
this power very sparingly, and never but when we be drive to it by
necessity, which we do not at present foresee will happen in this
work.
this alteration then in the mind of Mr Allworthy be occasion by a
letter he have just receive from Mr Square, and which we shall give
the reader in the beginning of the next chapter.
chapter iv.
contain two letter in very different stile.
"MY WORTHY FRIEND,--I inform you in my last that I be forbid
the use of the water, as they be find by experience rather to
increase than lessen the symptom of my distemper. I must now
acquaint you with a piece of news, which, I believe, will afflict my
friend more than it hath afflict I. Dr Harrington and Dr
Brewster have inform I that there be no hope of my recovery.
"I have somewhere read, that the great use of philosophy be to learn
to die. I will not therefore so far disgrace mine as to shew any
surprize at receive a lesson which I must be think to have so
long study. yet, to say the truth, one page of the Gospel teach
this lesson well than all the volume of antient or modern
philosopher. the assurance it give we of another life be a much
strong support to a good mind than all the consolation that be
draw from the necessity of nature, the emptiness or satiety of our
enjoyment here, or any other topic of those declamation which be
sometimes capable of arm our mind with a stubborn patience in
bear the thought of death, but never of raise they to a real
contempt of it, and much less of make we think it be a real good.
I would not here be understand to throw the horrid censure of
atheism, or even the absolute denial of immortality, on all who be
call philosopher. many of that sect, as well antient as modern,
have, from the light of reason, discover some hope of a future
state; but in reality, that light be so faint and glimmering, and
the hope be so incertain and precarious, that it may be justly
doubt on which side their belief turn. Plato himself conclude
his Phaedon with declare that his good argument amount only to
raise a probability; and Cicero himself seem rather to profess an
inclination to believe, than any actual belief in the doctrine of
immortality. as to myself, to be very sincere with you, I never be
much in earnest in this faith till I be in earnest a Christian.
"you will perhaps wonder at the latter expression; but I assure you
it hath not be till very lately that I could, with truth, call
myself so. the pride of philosophy have intoxicate my reason, and
the sublimest of all wisdom appear to I, as it do to the Greeks
of old, to be foolishness. God hath, however, be so gracious to
shew I my error in time, and to bring I into the way of truth,
before I sink into utter darkness forever.
"I find myself begin to grow weak, I shall therefore hasten to
the main purpose of this letter.
"when I reflect on the action of my past life, I know of nothing
which sit heavy upon my conscience than the injustice I have be
guilty of to that poor wretch your adopt son. I have, indeed, not
only connive at the villany of other, but be myself active in
injustice towards he. believe I, my dear friend, when I tell you,
on the word of a die man, he hath be basely injure. as to the
principal fact, upon the misrepresentation of which you discard
he, I solemnly assure you he be innocent. when you lay upon your
suppose deathbe, he be the only person in the house who testify
any real concern; and what happen afterwards arise from the
wildness of his joy on your recovery; and, I be sorry to say it,
from the baseness of another person (but it be my desire to justify
the innocent, and to accuse none). believe I, my friend, this young
man hath the noble generosity of heart, the most perfect capacity
for friendship, the high integrity, and indeed every virtue which
can ennoble a man. he hath some fault, but among they be not to be
number the least want of duty or gratitude towards you. on the
contrary, I be satisfied, when you dismiss he from your house,
his heart bleed for you more than for himself.
"worldly motif be the wicked and base reason of my concealing
this from you so long; to reveal it now I can have no inducement but
the desire of serve the cause of truth, of do right to the
innocent, and of make all the amend in my power for a past
offence. I hope this declaration, therefore, will have the effect
desire, and will restore this deserve young man to your favour;
the hearing of which, while I be yet alive, will afford the utmost
consolation to,
Sir,
your most oblige,
obedient humble servant,
THOMAS SQUARE."
the reader will, after this, scarce wonder at the revolution so
visibly appear in Mr Allworthy, notwithstanding he receive from
Thwackum, by the same post, another letter of a very different kind,
which we shall here add, as it may possibly be the last time we shall
have occasion to mention the name of that gentleman.
"SIR,
"I be not at all surprize at hear from your worthy nephew a
fresh instance of the villany of Mr Square the atheist's young
pupil. I shall not wonder at any murder he may commit; and I
heartily pray that your own blood may not seal up his final
commitment to the place of wail and gnashing of tooth.
"though you cannot want sufficient call to repentance for the many
unwarrantable weakness exemplify in your behaviour to this
wretch, so much to the prejudice of your own lawful family, and of
your character; I say, though these may sufficiently be suppose to
prick and goad your conscience at this season, I should yet be
want to my duty, if I spar to give you some admonition in order
to bring you to a due sense of your error. I therefore pray you
seriously to consider the judgment which be likely to overtake this
wicked villain; and let it serve at least as a warning to you, that
you may not for the future despise the advice of one who be so
indefatigable in his prayer for your welfare.
"have not my hand be withhold from due correction, I have scourge
much of this diabolical spirit out of a boy, of whom from his
infancy I discover the devil have take such entire possession. but
reflection of this kind now come too late.
"I be sorry you have give away the living of Westerton so hastily.
I should have apply on that occasion early, have I think you
would not have acquaint I previous to the disposition.----your
objection to plurality be be righteous over-much. if there be
any crime in the practice, so many godly man would not agree to it.
if the vicar of Aldergrove should die (as we hear he be in a
decline way), I hope you will think of I, since I be certain you
must be convince of my most sincere attachment to your high
welfare--a welfare to which all worldly consideration be as
trifle as the small tithe mention in Scripture be, when
compare to the weighty matter of the law.
I be, sir,
your faithful humble servant,
ROGER THWACKUM."
this be the first time Thwackum ever write in this authoritative
stile to Allworthy, and of this he have afterwards sufficient reason to
repent, as in the case of those who mistake the high degree of
goodness for the low degree of weakness. Allworthy have indeed never
like this man. he know he to be proud and ill-natured; he also know
that his divinity itself be tincture with his temper, and such as in
many respect he himself do by no mean approve; but he be at the
same time an excellent scholar, and most indefatigable in teach the
two lad. add to this, the strict severity of his life and manner, an
unimpeached honesty, and a most devout attachment to religion. so
that, upon the whole, though Allworthy do not esteem nor love the
man, yet he could never bring himself to part with a tutor to the
boy, who be, both by learning and industry, extremely well qualified
for his office; and he hop, that as they be breed up in his own
house, and under his own eye, he should be able to correct whatever
be wrong in Thwackum's instruction.
Chapter v.
in which the history be continue.
Mr Allworthy, in his last speech, have recollect some tender idea
concern Jones, which have bring tear into the good man's eye.
this Mrs Miller observe, say, "yes, yes, sir, your goodness to this
poor young man be know, notwithstanding all your care to conceal it;
but there be not a single syllable of truth in what those villain
say. Mr Nightingale hath now discover the whole matter. it seem
these fellow be employ by a lord, who be a rival of poor Mr
Jones, to have press he on board a ship.--I assure they I donot
know who they will press next. Mr Nightingale here hath see the
officer himself, who be a very pretty gentleman, and hath tell he
all, and be very sorry for what he undertake, which he would never
have do, have he know Mr Jones to have be a gentleman; but he be
tell that he be a common stroll vagabond."
Allworthy star at all this, and declare he be a stranger to every
word she say. "yes, sir," answer she, "I believe you are.----it be
a very different story, I believe, from what those fellow tell this
lawyer."
"what lawyer, madam? what be it you mean?" say Allworthy. "Nay, nay,"
say she, "this be so like you to deny your own goodness: but Mr
Nightingale here see he." "see whom, madam?" answer he. "why, your
lawyer, sir," say she, "that you so kindly send to enquire into the
affair." "I be still in the dark, upon my honour," say Allworthy.
"why then do you tell he, my dear sir," cry she. "indeed, sir,"
say Nightingale, "I do see that very lawyer who go from you when I
come into the room, at an alehouse in Aldersgate, in company with two
of the fellow who be employ by Lord Fellamar to press Mr Jones,
and who be by that mean present at the unhappy rencounter between
he and Mr Fitzpatrick." "I own, sir," say Mrs Miller, "when I see
this gentleman come into the room to you, I tell Mr Nightingale that I
apprehend you have send he thither to inquire into the affair."
allworthy shew mark of astonishment in his countenance at this
news, and be indeed for two or three minute strike dumb by it. at
last, address himself to Mr Nightingale, he say, "I must confess
myself, sir, more surprized at what you tell I than I have ever be
before at anything in my whole life. be you certain this be the
gentleman?" "I be most certain," answer Nightingale. "at
aldersgate?" cry allworthy. "and be you in company with this lawyer
and the two fellows?"--"i be, sir," say the other, "very near half
an hour." "well, sir," say Allworthy, "and in what manner do the
lawyer behave? do you hear all that past between he and the
fellow?" "no, sir," answer Nightingale, "they have be together
before I came.--in my presence the lawyer say little; but, after I
have several time examine the fellow, who persist in a story
directly contrary to what I have hear from Mr Jones, and which I find
by Mr Fitzpatrick be a rank falshood, the lawyer then desire the
fellow to say nothing but what be the truth, and seem to speak so
much in favour of Mr Jones, that, when I see the same person with you,
I conclude your goodness have prompt you to send he thither."--"And
do you not send he thither?" say Mrs Miller.--"Indeed I do not,"
answer Allworthy; "nor do I know he have go on such an errand till
this moment."--"i see it all!" say Mrs Miller, "upon my soul, I see
it all! no wonder they have be closet so close lately. Son
Nightingale, let I beg you run for these fellow immediately----find
they out if they be above-ground. I will go myself"--"dear madam,"
say Allworthy, "be patient, and do I the favour to send a servant
upstairs to call Mr Dowling hither, if he be in the house, or, if not,
Mr Blifil." Mrs Miller go out mutter something to herself, and
presently return with an answer, "that Mr Dowling be go; but that
the t'other," as she call he, "be come."
Allworthy be of a cool disposition than the good woman, whose
spirit be all up in arm in the cause of her friend. he be not
however without some suspicion which be near akin to her. when
Blifil come into the room, he ask he with a very serious
countenance, and with a less friendly look than he have ever before
give he, "whether he know anything of Mr Dowling's have see any
of the person who be present at the duel between Jones and another
gentleman?"
there be nothing so dangerous as a question which come by surprize on
a man whose business it be to conceal truth, or to defend falshood.
for which reason those worthy personage, whose noble office it be to
save the life of their fellow-creature at the Old Bailey, take the
utmost care, by frequent previous examination, to divine every
question which may be ask their client on the day of tryal, that
they may be supply with proper and ready answer, which the most
fertile invention cannot supply in an instant. besides, the sudden and
violent impulse on the blood, occasion by these surprize, cause
frequently such an alteration in the countenance, that the man be
oblige to give evidence against himself. and such indeed be the
alteration which the countenance of Blifil undergo from this sudden
question, that we can scarce blame the eagerness of Mrs Miller, who
immediately cry out, "guilty, upon my honour! guilty, upon my soul!"
Mr Allworthy sharply rebuke she for this impetuosity; and then
turn to Blifil, who seem sink into the earth, he say, "why do
you hesitate, sir, at give I an answer? you certainly must have
employ he; for he would not, of his own accord, I believe, have
undertake such an errand, and especially without acquaint I."
Blifil then answer, "I own, sir, I have be guilty of an offence,
yet may I hope your pardon?"--"my pardon," say allworthy, very
angrily.--"Nay, sir," answer Blifil, "I know you would be offend;
yet surely my dear uncle will forgive the effect of the most amiable
of human weakness. compassion for those who do not deserve it, I own
be a crime; and yet it be a crime from which you yourself be not
entirely free. I know I have be guilty of it in more than one
instance to this very person; and I will own I do send Mr Dowling,
not on a vain and fruitless enquiry, but to discover the witness,
and to endeavour to soften their evidence. this, sir, be the truth;
which, though I intend to conceal from you, I will not deny."
"I confess," say Nightingale, "this be the light in which it appear
to I from the gentleman's behaviour."
"now, madam," say Allworthy, "I believe you will once in your life
own you have entertain a wrong suspicion, and be not so angry with
my nephew as you be."
Mrs Miller be silent; for, though she could not so hastily be please
with Blifil, whom she look upon to have be the ruin of Jones, yet
in this particular instance he have impose upon she as well as upon
the rest; so entirely have the devil stand his friend. and, indeed, I
look upon the vulgar observation, "that the devil often desert his
friend, and leave they in the lurch," to be a great abuse on that
gentleman's character. perhaps he may sometimes desert those who be
only his cup acquaintance; or who, at most, be but half his; but he
generally stand by those who be thoroughly his servant, and help
they off in all extremity, till their bargain expire.
as a conquer rebellion strengthen a government, or as health be
more perfectly establish by recovery from some disease; so anger,
when remove, often give new life to affection. this be the case of
Mr Allworthy; for Blifil have wipe off the great suspicion, the
less, which have be raise by Square's letter, sink of course, and
be forget; and Thwackum, with whom he be greatly offend, bore
alone all the reflection which Square have cast on the enemy of
Jones.
as for that young man, the resentment of Mr Allworthy begin more and
more to abate towards he. he tell Blifil, "he do not only forgive
the extraordinary effort of his good-nature, but would give he the
pleasure of follow his example." then, turn to Mrs Miller with a
smile which would have become an angel, he cry, "what say you,
madam? shall we take a hackney-coach, and all of we together pay a
visit to your friend? I promise you it be not the first visit I have
make in a prison."
every reader, I believe, will be able to answer for the worthy woman;
but they must have a great deal of good-nature, and be well acquaint
with friendship, who can feel what she feel on this occasion. few, I
hope, be capable of feel what now pass in the mind of Blifil;
but those who be will acknowledge that it be impossible for he to
raise any objection to this visit. Fortune, however, or the gentleman
lately mention above, stand his friend, and prevent his undergoing
so great a shock; for at the very instant when the coach be send for,
Partridge arrive, and, have call Mrs Miller from the company,
acquaint she with the dreadful accident lately come to light; and
hear Mr Allworthy's intention, beg she to find some mean of
stop he: "for," say he, "the matter must at all hazard be keep
a secret from he; and if he should now go, he will find Mr Jones and
his mother, who arrive just as I leave he, lament over one another
the horrid crime they have ignorantly commit."
the poor woman, who be almost deprived of her sens at his dreadful
news, be never less capable of invention than at present. however, as
woman be much readier at this than man, she bethink herself of an
excuse, and, return to Allworthy, say, "I be sure, sir, you will
be surprize at hear any objection from I to the kind proposal you
just now make; and yet I be afraid of the consequence of it, if
carry immediately into execution. you must imagine, sir, that all
the calamity which have lately befall this poor young fellow must
have throw he into the low dejection of spirit; and now, sir,
should we all on a sudden fle he into such a violent fit of joy, as
I know your presence will occasion, it may, I be afraid, produce some
fatal mischief, especially as his servant, who be without, tell I he
be very far from be well."
"be his servant without?" cry allworthy; "pray call he hither. I
will ask he some question concern his master."
Partridge be at first afraid to appear before Mr Allworthy; but be
at length persuade, after Mrs Miller, who have often hear his whole
story from his own mouth, have promise to introduce he.
Allworthy recollect Partridge the moment he come into the room,
though many year have pass since he have see he. Mrs Miller,
therefore, might have spar here a formal oration, in which, indeed,
she be something prolix; for the reader, I believe, may have observe
already that the good woman, among other thing, have a tongue always
ready for the service of her friend.
"and be you," say Allworthy to Partridge, "the servant of Mr Jones?"
"I cannot say, sir," answer he, "that I be regularly a servant, but I
live with he, an't please your honour, at present. _Non sum qualis
eram_, as your honour very well know."
Mr Allworthy then ask he many question concern Jones, as to his
health, and other matter; to all which Partridge answer, without
have the least regard to what be, but consider only what he would
have thing appear; for a strict adherence to truth be not among the
article of this honest fellow's morality or his religion.
during this dialogue Mr Nightingale take his leave, and presently
after Mrs Miller leave the room, when Allworthy likewise despatch
Blifil; for he imagine that Partridge when alone with he would be
more explicit than before company. they be no soon leave in private
together than Allworthy begin, as in the following chapter.
Chapter vi.
in which the history be far continue
"sure, friend," say the good man, "you be the strange of all human
being. not only to have suffer as you have formerly for obstinately
persist in a falshood, but to persist in it thus to the last, and
to pass thus upon the world for a servant of your own son! what
interest can you have in all this? what can be your motive?"
"I see, sir," say Partridge, fall down upon his knee, "that your
honour be prepossess against I, and resolve not to believe
anything I say, and, therefore, what signify my protestation? but
yet there be one above who know that I be not the father of this
young man."
"how!" say Allworthy, "will you yet deny what you be formerly
convict of upon such unanswerable, such manifest evidence? Nay, what
a confirmation be your be now find with this very man, of all
which twenty year ago appear against you! I think you have leave
the country! nay, I think you have be long since dead.--In what
manner do you know anything of this young man? where do you meet
with he, unless you have keep some correspondence together? do not
deny this; for I promise you it will greatly raise your son in my
opinion, to find that he hath such a sense of filial duty as privately
to support his father for so many year."
"if your honour will have patience to hear I," say Partridge, "I
will tell you all."--being bid go on, he proceed thus: "when your
honour conceive that displeasure against I, it end in my ruin soon
after; for I lose my little school; and the minister, think I
suppose it would be agreeable to your honour, turn I out from the
office of clerk; so that I have nothing to trust to but the barber's
shop, which, in a country place like that, be a poor livelihood; and
when my wife die (for till that time I receive a pension of £12 a
year from an unknown hand, which indeed I believe be your honour's
own, for nobody that ever I hear of doth these thing besides)--but,
as I be say, when she die, this pension forsook I; so that now,
as I owe two or three small debt, which begin to be troublesome to
I, particularly one[*] which an attorney bring up by law-charge
from 15s. to near £30, and as I find all my usual mean of living have
forsook I, I pack up my little all as well as I could, and go
off.
[*] this be a fact which I know happen to a poor clergyman in
Dorsetshire, by the villany of an attorney who, not content with
the exorbitant cost to which the poor man be put by a single
action, bring afterwards another action on the judgment, as it be
call. a method frequently use to oppress the poor, and bring
money into the pocket of attorney, to the great scandal of the
law, of the nation, of Christianity, and even of human nature
itself.
"the first place I come to be Salisbury, where I get into the service
of a gentleman belong to the law, and one of the good gentleman
that ever I know, for he be not only good to I, but I know a
thousand good and charitable act which he do while I staid with he;
and I have know he often refuse business because it be paultry and
oppressive." "you need not be so particular," say Allworthy; "I know
this gentleman, and a very worthy man he be, and an honour to his
profession."--"Well, sir," continue Partridge, "from hence I remove
to Lymington, where I be above three year in the service of another
lawyer, who be likewise a very good sort of a man, and to be sure one
of the merry gentleman in England. well, sir, at the end of the
three year I set up a little school, and be likely to do well again,
have it not be for a most unlucky accident. here I keep a pig; and
one day, as ill fortune would have it, this pig break out, and do a
trespass, I think they call it, in a garden belong to one of my
neighbour, who be a proud, revengeful man, and employ a lawyer,
one--one--I cannot think of his name; but he send for a writ against
I, and have I to size. when I come there, Lord have mercy upon I--to
hear what the counsellor say! there be one that tell my lord a
parcel of the confoundedest lie about I; he say that I use to
drive my hog into other folk's garden, and a great deal more; and at
last he say, he hop I have at last bring my hog to a fair market.
to be sure, one would have think that, instead of be owner only
of one poor little pig, I have be the great hog-merchant in
England. Well--" "pray," say Allworthy, "do not be so particular, I
have hear nothing of your son yet." "o it be a great many year,"
answer Partridge, "before I see my son, as you be pleased to call
him.----I go over to Ireland after this, and teach school at Cork
(for that one suit ruin I again, and I lie seven year in
Winchester jail)."--"Well," say Allworthy, "pass that over till your
return to England."--"Then, sir," say he, "it be about half a year
ago that I land at Bristol, where I staid some time, and not find
it do there, and hearing of a place between that and Gloucester where
the barber be just dead, I go thither, and there I have be about
two month when Mr Jones come thither." he then give Allworthy a very
particular account of their first meeting, and of everything, as well
as he could remember, which have happen from that day to this;
frequently interlard his story with panegyric on Jones, and not
forget to insinuate the great love and respect which he have for
Allworthy. he conclude with say, "now, sir, I have tell your
honour the whole truth." and then repeat a most solemn protestation,
"that he be no more the father of Jones than of the Pope of Rome;"
and imprecate the most bitter curse on his head, if he do not speak
truth.
"what be I to think of this matter?" cry allworthy. "for what
purpose should you so strongly deny a fact which I think it would be
rather your interest to own?" "Nay, sir," answer Partridge (for he
could hold no long), "if your honour will not believe I, you be
like soon to have satisfaction enough. I wish you have mistake the
mother of this young man, as well as you have his father."--And now
be ask what he mean, with all the symptom of horror, both in
his voice and countenance, he tell Allworthy the whole story, which he
have a little before express such desire to Mrs Miller to conceal
from he.
Allworthy be almost as much shock at this discovery as Partridge
himself have be while he relate it. "good heaven!" say he, "in
what miserable distress do vice and imprudence involve man! how much
beyond our design be the effect of wickedness sometimes carry!"
he have scarce utter these word, when Mrs Waters come hastily and
abruptly into the room. Partridge no soon see she than he cry,
"here, sir, here be the very woman herself. this be the unfortunate
mother of Mr Jones. I be sure she will acquit I before your honour.
pray, madam----"
Mrs Waters, without pay any regard to what Partridge say, and
almost without take any notice of he, advance to Mr Allworthy. "I
believe, sir, it be so long since I have the honour of see you, that
you do not recollect I." "indeed," answer Allworthy, "you be so
very much alter, on many account, that have not this man already
acquaint I who you be, I should not have immediately call you to
my remembrance. have you, madam, any particular business which bring
you to I?" Allworthy speak this with great reserve; for the reader
may easily believe he be not well pleased with the conduct of this
lady; neither with what he have formerly hear, nor with what Partridge
have now deliver.
Mrs Waters answered--"indeed, sir, I have very particular business
with you; and it be such as I can impart only to yourself. I must
desire, therefore, the favour of a word with you alone: for I assure
you what I have to tell you be of the utmost importance."
Partridge be then order to withdraw, but before he go, he beg
the lady to satisfy Mr Allworthy that he be perfectly innocent. to
which she answer, "you need be under no apprehension, sir; I shall
satisfy Mr Allworthy very perfectly of that matter."
then Partridge withdraw, and that past between Mr Allworthy and Mrs
Waters which be write in the next chapter.
Chapter vii.
Continuation of the history.
Mrs Waters remain a few moment silent, Mr Allworthy could not
refrain from say, "I be sorry, madam, to perceive, by what I have
since hear, that you have make so very ill a use----" "Mr Allworthy,"
say she, interrupt he, "I know I have fault, but ingratitude to
you be not one of they. I never can nor shall forget your goodness,
which I own I have very little deserve; but be pleased to wave all
upbraid I at present, as I have so important an affair to
communicate to you concern this young man, to whom you have give
my maiden name of Jones."
"have I then," say Allworthy, "ignorantly punish an innocent man,
in the person of he who hath just leave we? be he not the father of
the child?" "indeed he be not," say Mrs Waters. "you may be please
to remember, sir, I formerly tell you, you should one day know; and I
acknowledge myself to have be guilty of a cruel neglect, in not
have discover it to you before. indeed, I little know how
necessary it be." "well, madam," say Allworthy, "be pleased to
proceed." "you must remember, sir," say she, "a young fellow, whose
name be Summer." "very well," cry allworthy, "he be the son of a
clergyman of great learning and virtue, for whom I have the high
friendship." "so it appear, sir," answer she; "for I believe you
breed the young man up, and maintain he at the university; where, I
think, he have finish his study, when he come to reside at your
house; a fine man, I must say, the sun never shine upon; for, besides
the handsome person I ever see, he be so genteel, and have so much
wit and good breeding." "poor gentleman," say Allworthy, "he be
indeed untimely snatch away; and little do I think he have any sin
of this kind to answer for; for I plainly perceive you be go to
tell I he be the father of your child."
"indeed, sir," answer she, "he be not." "how!" say Allworthy, "to
what then tend all this preface?" "to a story," say she, "which I be
concerned fall to my lot to unfold to you. o, sir! prepare to hear
something which will surprize you, will grieve you." "speak," say
Allworthy, "I be conscious of no crime, and cannot be afraid to hear."
"Sir," say she, "that Mr Summer, the son of your friend, educate at
your expense, who, after live a year in the house as if he have be
your own son, die there of the small-pox, be tenderly lament by
you, and bury as if he have be your own; that Summer, sir, be the
father of this child." "how!" say Allworthy; "you contradict
yourself." "that I do not," answer she; "he be indeed the father of
this child, but not by I." "take care, madam," say Allworthy, "do
not, to shun the imputation of any crime, be guilty of falshood.
remember there be one from whom you can conceal nothing, and before
whose tribunal falshood will only aggravate your guilt." "indeed,
sir," say she, "I be not his mother; nor would I now think myself so
for the world." "I know your reason," say Allworthy, "and shall
rejoice as much as you to find it otherwise; yet you must remember,
you yourself confest it before I." "so far what I confest," say she,
"be true, that these hand convey the infant to your bed; convey
it thither at the command of its mother; at her command I afterwards
own it, and think myself, by her generosity, nobly reward, both
for my secrecy and my shame." "who could this woman be?" say
Allworthy. "indeed, I tremble to name she," answer Mrs Waters. "by
all this preparation I be to guess that she be a relation of mine,"
cry he. "indeed she be a near one." at which word Allworthy
start, and she continued--"you have a sister, sir." "a sister!"
repeat he, look aghast.--"As there be truth in heaven," cry
she, "your sister be the mother of that child you find between your
sheet." "can it be possible?" cry he, "good heaven!" "have
patience, sir," say Mrs Waters, "and I will unfold to you the whole
story. just after your departure for London, Miss Bridget come one day
to the house of my mother. she be pleased to say she have hear an
extraordinary character of I, for my learning and superior
understanding to all the young woman there, so she be pleased to say.
she then bid I come to she to the great house; where, when I
attend, she employ I to read to she. she express great
satisfaction in my reading, shew great kindness to I, and make I
many present. at last she begin to catechise I on the subject of
secrecy, to which I give she such satisfactory answer, that, at last,
have lock the door of her room, she take I into her closet, and
then lock that door likewise, she say she should convince I of
the vast reliance she have on my integrity, by communicate a secret
in which her honour, and consequently her life, be concern. she
then stopt, and after a silence of a few minute, during which she
often wipe her eye, she enquire of I if I think my mother might
safely be confide in. I answer, I would stake my life on her
fidelity. she then impart to I the great secret which labour in
her breast, and which, I believe, be deliver with more pain than
she afterwards suffer in child-birth. it be then contrive that my
mother and myself only should attend at the time, and that Mrs Wilkins
should be send out of the way, as she accordingly be, to the very
furth part of dorsetshire, to enquire the character of a servant;
for the lady have turn away her own maid near three month before;
during all which time I officiate about her person upon trial, as she
say, though, as she afterwards declare, I be not sufficiently handy
for the place. this, and many other such thing which she use to say
of I, be all throw out to prevent any suspicion which Wilkins
might hereafter have, when I be to own the child; for she think it
could never be believe she would venture to hurt a young woman with
whom she have intrust such a secret. you may be assure, sir, I be
well pay for all these affront, which, together with be inform
with the occasion of they, very well content I. indeed, the lady
have a great suspicion of Mrs Wilkins than of any other person; not
that she have the least aversion to the gentlewoman, but she think
she incapable of keep a secret, especially from you, sir; for I
have often hear Miss Bridget say, that, if Mrs Wilkins have commit
a murder, she believe she would acquaint you with it. at last the
expect day come, and Mrs Wilkins, who have be keep a week in
readiness, and put off from time to time, upon some pretence or other,
that she might not return too soon, be dispatch. then the child be
bear, in the presence only of myself and my mother, and be by my
mother convey to her own house, where it be privately keep by she
till the evening of your return, when I, by the command of Miss
Bridget, convey it into the bed where you find it. and all
suspicion be afterwards lay asleep by the artful conduct of your
sister, in pretend ill-will to the boy, and that any regard she
shew he be out of meer complacence to you."
Mrs Waters then make many protestation of the truth of this story,
and conclude by say, "thus, sir, you have at last discover your
nephew; for so I be sure you will hereafter think he, and I question
not but he will be both an honour and a comfort to you under that
appellation."
"I need not, madam," say Allworthy, "express my astonishment at what
you have tell I; and yet surely you would not, and could not, have
put together so many circumstance to evidence an untruth. I confess I
recollect some passage relate to that Summer, which formerly give
I a conceit that my sister have some like to he. I mention it to
she; for I have such a regard to the young man, as well on his own
account as on his father's, that I should willingly have consent to
a match between they; but she expr the high disdain of my unkind
suspicion, as she call it; so that I never speak more on the
subject. good heaven! well! the Lord disposeth all things.--yet sure
it be a most unjustifiable conduct in my sister to carry this secret
with she out of the world." "I promise you, sir," say Mrs Waters,
"she always profest a contrary intention, and frequently tell I she
intend one day to communicate it to you. she say, indeed, she be
highly rejoice that her plot have succeed so well, and that you have
of your own accord take such a fancy to the child, that it be yet
unnecessary to make any express declaration. oh! sir, have that lady
live to have see this poor young man turn like a vagabond from
your house: nay, sir, could she have live to hear that you have
yourself employ a lawyer to prosecute he for a murder of which he
be not guilty----forgive I, Mr Allworthy, I must say it be
unkind.--indeed, you have be abuse, he never deserve it of you."
"indeed, madam," say Allworthy, "I have be abuse by the person,
whoever he be, that tell you so." "Nay, sir," say she, "I would not
be mistake, I do not presume to say you be guilty of any wrong.
the gentleman who come to I propose no such matter; he only say,
take I for Mr Fitzpatrick's wife, that, if Mr Jones have murder my
husband, I should be assist with any money I want to carry on the
prosecution, by a very worthy gentleman, who, he say, be well
apprize what a villain I have to deal with. it be by this man I find
out who Mr Jones be; and this man, whose name be dowle, Mr Jones
tell I be your steward. I discover his name by a very odd
accident; for he himself refuse to tell it I; but Partridge, who meet
he at my lodging the second time he come, know he formerly at
Salisbury."
"and do this Mr Dowling," say Allworthy, with great astonishment
in his countenance, "tell you that I would assist in the
prosecution?"--"No, sir," answer she, "I will not charge he
wrongfully. he say I should be assist, but he mention no name.
yet you must pardon I, sir, if from circumstance I think it could
be no other."--"Indeed, madam," say Allworthy, "from circumstance I
be too well convinced it be another. Good Heaven! by what wonderful
mean be the black and deep villany sometimes discovered!--shall
I beg you, madam, to stay till the person you have mention come,
for I expect he every minute? nay, he may be, perhaps, already in the
house."
Allworthy then stept to the door, in order to call a servant, when in
come, not Mr Dowling, but the gentleman who will be see in the next
chapter.
Chapter viii.
further continuation.
the gentleman who now arrive be no other than Mr Western. he no
soon see Allworthy, than, without consider in the least the
presence of Mrs Waters, he begin to vociferate in the follow
manner: "fine doing at my house! a rare kettle of fish I have
discover at last! who the devil would be plague with a daughter?"
"whatbe the matter, neighbour?" say Allworthy. "Matter enough,"
answer Western: "when I think she be just a come to; nay, when
she have in a manner promise I to do as I would ha she, and when I
be a hop to have have nothing more to do than to have send for the
lawyer, and finish all; what do you think I have find out? that the
little b-- hath bin play trick with I all the while, and carry
on a correspondence with that bastard of your. Sister Western, whom I
have quarrel with upon her account, send I word o't, and I order
her pocket to be search when she be asleep, and here I have get un
sign with the son of a whore's own name. I have not have patience to
read half o't, for 'tis long than one of parson Supple's sermon;
but I find plainly it be all about love; and indeed what should it be
else? I have pack she up in chamber again, and to-morrow morning
down she go into the country, unless she consent to be marry
directly, and there she shall live in a garret upon bread and water
all her day; and the soon such a b-- break her heart the well,
though, d--n she, that I believe be too tough. she will live long
enough to plague I." "Mr Western," answer Allworthy, "you know I
have always protest against force, and you yourself consent that
none should be use." "ay," cry he, "that be only upon condition
that she would consent without. what the devil and doctor Faustus!
shallnot I do what I will with my own daughter, especially when I desire
nothing but her own good?" "well, neighbour," answer Allworthy, "if
you will give I leave, I will undertake once to argue with the young
lady." "will you?" say western; "why that be kind now, and
neighbourly, and mayhap you will do more than I have be able to do
with she; for I promise you she hath a very good opinion of you."
"well, sir," say Allworthy, "if you will go home, and release the
young lady from her captivity, I will wait upon she within this
half-hour." "but suppose," say western, "she should run away with un
in the meantime? for lawyer Dowling tell I there be no hope of
hang the fellow at last; for that the man be alive, and like to do
well, and that he think Jones will be out of prison again presently."
"how!" say Allworthy; "what, do you employ he then to enquire or to
do anything in that matter?" "not I," answer Western, "he mention
it to I just now of his own accord." "just now!" cry allworthy,
"why, where do you see he then? I want much to see Mr Dowling."
"why, you may see un an you will presently at my lodging; for there
be to be a meeting of lawyer there this morning about a mortgage.
'Icod! I shall lose two or dree thousand pound, I believe, by that
honest gentleman, Mr Nightingale." "well, sir," say Allworthy, "I
will be with you within the half-hour." "and do for once," cry the
squire, "take a fool's advice; never think of deal with she by
gentle method, take my word for it those will never do. I have try
'um long enough. she must be frighten into it, there be no other
way. tell she Ibe her father; and of the horrid sin of disobedience,
and of the dreadful punishment of it in t'other world, and then tell
she about be lock up all her life in a garret in this, and be
keep only on bread and water." "I will do all I can," say Allworthy;
"for I promise you there be nothing I wish for more than an alliance
with this amiable creature." "Nay, the girl be well enough for matter
o' that," cry the squire; "a man may go far and meet with bad
meat; that I may declare o'her, thof she be my own daughter. and if
she will but be obedient to I, there be narrow a father within a
hundred mile o' the place, that love a daughter well than I do;
but I see you be busy with the lady here, so I will go huome and
expect you; and so your humble servant."
as soon as Mr Western be go Mrs Waters say, "I see, sir, the
squire hath not the least remembrance of my face. I believe, Mr
Allworthy, you would not have know I neither. I be very considerably
alter since that day when you so kindly give I that advice, which I
have be happy have I follow." "indeed, madam," cry allworthy, "it
give I great concern when I first hear the contrary." "indeed, sir,"
say she, "I be ruin by a very deep scheme of villany, which if you
know, though I pretend not to think it would justify I in your
opinion, it would at least mitigate my offence, and induce you to pity
I: you be not now at leisure to hear my whole story; but this I
assure you, I be betray by the most solemn promise of marriage;
nay, in the eye of heaven I be married to he; for, after much
reading on the subject, I be convinced that particular ceremony be
only requisite to give a legal sanction to marriage, and have only a
worldly use in give a woman the privilege of a wife; but that she
who live constant to one man, after a solemn private affiance,
whatever the world may call she, hath little to charge on her own
conscience." "I be sorry, madam," say Allworthy, "you make so ill a
use of your learning. indeed, it would have be well that you have
be possess of much more, or have remain in a state of ignorance.
and yet, madam, I be afraid you have more than this sin to answer
for." "during his life," answer she, "which be above a dozen year,
I most solemnly assure you I have not. and consider, sir, on my behalf,
what be in the power of a woman stript of her reputation and left
destitute; whether the good-natured world will suffer such a stray
sheep to return to the road of virtue, even if she be never so
desirous. I protest, then, I would have choose it have it be in my
power; but necessity drive I into the arm of Captain water, with
whom, though still unmarried, I live as a wife for many year, and
go by his name. I part with this gentleman at Worcester, on his
march against the rebel, and it be then I accidentally meet with Mr
Jones, who rescue I from the hand of a villain. indeed, he be the
worthiest of man. no young gentleman of his age be, I believe, free
from vice, and few have the twentieth part of his virtue; nay,
whatever vice he hath have, I be firmly persuade he hath now take a
resolution to abandon they." "I hope he hath," cry allworthy, "and I
hope he will preserve that resolution. I must say, I have still the
same hope with regard to yourself. the world, I do agree, be apt to
be too unmerciful on these occasion; yet time and perseverance will
get the well of this their disinclination, as I may call it, to
pity; for though they be not, like heaven, ready to receive a
penitent sinner; yet a continue repentance will at length obtain
mercy even with the world. this you may be assure of, Mrs Waters,
that whenever I find you be sincere in such good intention, you
shall want no assistance in my power to make they effectual."
Mrs Waters fall now upon her knee before he, and, in a flood of
tear, make he many most passionate acknowledgment of his goodness,
which, as she truly say, savour more of the divine than human
nature.
Allworthy raise she up, and speak in the most tender manner, make
use of every expression which his invention could suggest to comfort
she, when he be interrupt by the arrival of Mr Dowling, who, upon
his first entrance, see Mrs Waters, start, and appear in some
confusion; from which he soon recover himself as well as he could,
and then say he be in the utmost haste to attend counsel at Mr
Western's lodging; but, however, think it his duty to call and
acquaint he with the opinion of counsel upon the case which he have
before tell he, which be that the conversion of the money in that
case could not be question in a criminal cause, but that an action
of trover might be bring, and if it appear to the jury to be the
money of plaintiff, that plaintiff would recover a verdict for the
value.
Allworthy, without make any answer to this, bolt the door, and
then, advance with a stern look to dowle, he say, "whatever be
your haste, sir, I must first receive an answer to some question. do
you know this lady?"--"that lady, sir!" answer Dowling, with great
hesitation. allworthy then, with the most solemn voice, say, "look
you, Mr Dowling, as you value my favour, or your continuance a moment
long in my service, do not hesitate nor prevaricate; but answer
faithfully and truly to every question I ask.----do you know this
lady?"--"Yes, sir," say Dowling, "I have see the lady." "where,
sir?" "at her own lodging."--"upon what business do you go thither,
sir; and who send you?" "I go, sir, to enquire, sir, about Mr
Jones." "and who send you to enquire about he?" "who, sir? why, sir,
Mr Blifil send I." "and what do you say to the lady concern that
matter?" "Nay, sir, it be impossible to recollect every word." "will
you please, madam, to assist the gentleman's memory?" "he tell I,
sir," say Mrs Waters, "that if Mr Jones have murder my husband, I
should be assist by any money I want to carry on the prosecution,
by a very worthy gentleman, who be well apprize what a villain I have
to deal with. these, I can safely swear, be the very word he
speak."--"were these the word, sir?" say Allworthy. "I cannot charge
my memory exactly," cry dowle, "but I believe I do speak to that
purpose."--"And do Mr Blifil order you to say so?" "I be sure, sir, I
should not have go on my own accord, nor have willingly exceed my
authority in matter of this kind. if I say so, I must have so
understand Mr Blifil's instruction." "look you, Mr Dowling," say
Allworthy; "I promise you before this lady, that whatever you have
do in this affair by Mr Blifil's order I will forgive, provide you
now tell I strictly the truth; for I believe what you say, that you
would not have act of your own accord and without authority in this
matter.----Mr Blifil then likewise send you to examine the two fellow
at Aldersgate?"--"He do, sir." "well, and what instruction do he
then give you? recollect as well as you can, and tell I, as near as
possible, the very word he use."--"Why, sir, Mr Blifil send I to
find out the person who be eye-witness of this fight. he say, he
fear they might be tamper with by Mr Jones, or some of his
friend. he say, blood require blood; and that not only all who
conceal a murderer, but those who omit anything in their power to
bring he to justice, be sharer in his guilt. he say, he find you
be very desirous of have the villain bring to justice, though it
be not proper you should appear in it." "he do so?" say
Allworthy.--"Yes, sir," cry dowle; "I should not, I be sure, have
proceed such length for the sake of any other person live but
your worship."--"What length, sir?" say Allworthy.--"Nay, sir,"
cry dowle, "I would not have your worship think I would, on any
account, be guilty of subornation of perjury; but there be two way
of deliver evidence. I tell they, therefore, that if any offer
should be make they on the other side, they should refuse they, and
that they might be assure they should lose nothing by be honest
man, and tell the truth. I say, we be tell that Mr Jones have
assault the gentleman first, and that, if that be the truth, they
should declare it; and I do give they some hint that they should be
no loser."--"I think you go length indeed," cry
Allworthy.--"Nay, sir," answer Dowling, "I be sure I do not desire
they to tell an untruth;----nor should I have say what I do, unless
it have be to oblige you."--"you would not have think, I believe,"
say Allworthy, "to have oblige I, have you know that this Mr Jones
be my own nephew."--"I be sure, sir," answer he, "it do not become
I to take any notice of what I think you desire to
conceal."--"How!" cry allworthy, "and do you know it then?"--"nay,
sir," answer Dowling, "if your worship bid I speak the truth, I be
sure I shall do it.--indeed, sir, I do know it; for they be almost
the last word which Madam Blifil ever speak, which she mention to
I as I stand alone by her bedside, when she deliver I the letter I
bring your worship from she."--"What letter?" cry Allworthy.--"The
letter, sir," answer Dowling, "which I bring from Salisbury, and
which I deliver into the hand of Mr Blifil."--"O heavens!" cry
Allworthy: "well, and what be the word? what do my sister say to
you?"--"she take I by the hand," answer he, "and, as she deliver
I the letter, say, `I scarce know what I have write. tell my
brother, Mr Jones be his nephew--he be my son.--bless he,' say she,
and then fall backward, as if die away. I presently call in the
people, and she never speak more to I, and die within a few minute
afterwards."--Allworthy stand a minute silent, lift up his eye;
and then, turn to Dowling, say, "how come you, sir, not to deliver
I this message?" "your worship," answer he, "must remember that you
be at that time ill in bed; and, be in a violent hurry, as indeed
I always be, I deliver the letter and message to Mr Blifil, who tell
I he would carry they both to you, which he hath since tell I he
do, and that your worship, partly out of friendship to Mr Jones, and
partly out of regard to your sister, would never have it mention,
and do intend to conceal it from the world; and therefore, sir, if
you have not mention it to I first, I be certain I should never have
think it belong to I to say anything of the matter, either to
your worship or any other person."
we have remark somewhere already, that it be possible for a man to
convey a lie in the word of truth; this be the case at present; for
Blifil have, in fact, tell dowle what he now relate, but have not
impose upon he, nor indeed have imagine he be able so to do. in
reality, the promise which Blifil have make to Dowling be the
motif which have induce he to secrecy; and, as he now very plainly
see Blifil would not be able to keep they, he think proper now to
make this confession, which the promise of forgiveness, join to the
threat, the voice, the look of Allworthy, and the discovery he have
make before, extort from he, who be besides take unawares, and
have no time to consider of evasion.
Allworthy appear well satisfied with this relation, and, have
enjoin on dowle strict silence as to what have past, conduct that
gentleman himself to the door, lest he should see Blifil, who be
return to his chamber, where he exult in the thought of his last
deceit on his uncle, and little suspect what have since pass
below-stair.
as Allworthy be return to his room he meet Mrs Miller in the entry,
who, with a face all pale and full of terror, say to he, "o! sir, I
find this wicked woman hath be with you, and you know all; yet do
not on this account abandon the poor young man. consider, sir, he be
ignorant it be his own mother; and the discovery itself will most
probably break his heart, without your unkindness."
"Madam," say Allworthy, "I be under such an astonishment at what I
have hear, that I be really unable to satisfy you; but come with I
into my room. indeed, Mrs Miller, I have make surprize discovery,
and you shall soon know they."
the poor woman follow he tremble; and now Allworthy, go up to
Mrs Waters, take she by the hand, and then, turn to Mrs Miller,
say, "what reward shall I bestow upon this gentlewoman, for the
service she hath do me?--O! Mrs Miller, you have a thousand time
hear I call the young man to whom you be so faithful a friend, my
son. little do I then think he be indeed relate to I at all.--your
friend, madam, be my nephew; he be the brother of that wicked viper
which I have so long nourish in my bosom.--She will herself tell you
the whole story, and how the youth come to pass for her son. indeed,
Mrs Miller, I be convinced that he hath be wrong, and that I have
be abuse; abuse by one whom you too justly suspect of be a
villain. he be, in truth, the bad of villain."
the joy which Mrs Miller now feel bereft she of the power of speech,
and might perhaps have deprive she of her sens, if not of life, have
not a friendly shower of tear come seasonably to her relief. at
length, recover so far from her transport as to be able to speak,
she cry, "and be my dear Mr Jones then your nephew, sir, and not the
son of this lady? and be your eye open to he at last? and shall I
live to see he as happy as he deserve?" "he certainly be my nephew,"
say Allworthy, "and I hope all the rest."--"And be this the dear good
woman, the person," cry she, "to whom all this discovery be
owing?"--"she be indeed," say Allworthy.--"Why, then," cry Mrs
Miller, upon her knee, "may Heaven shower down its choice blessing
upon her head, and for this one good action forgive she all her sin,
be they never so many!"
Mrs water then inform they that she believe Jones would very
shortly be release; for that the surgeon be go, in company with a
nobleman, to the justice who commit he, in order to certify that
Mr Fitzpatrick be out of all manner of danger, and to procure his
prisoner his liberty.
Allworthy say he should be glad to find his nephew there at his
return home; but that he be then oblige to go on some business of
consequence. he then call to a servant to fetch he a chair, and
presently leave the two lady together.
Mr Blifil, hear the chair order, come downstairs to attend upon
his uncle; for he never be deficient in such act of duty. he ask
his uncle if he be go out, which be a civil way of ask a man
whither he be go: to which the other make no answer, he again
desire to know when he would be pleased to return?--allworthy make no
answer to this neither, till he be just go into his chair, and
then, turn about, he said--"Harkee, sir, do you find out, before my
return, the letter which your mother send I on her death-bed."
Allworthy then depart, and leave Blifil in a situation to be envy
only by a man who be just go to be hang.
chapter ix.
a further continuation.
Allworthy take an opportunity, whilst he be in the chair, of read
the letter from Jones to Sophia, which Western deliver he; and
there be some expression in it concern himself which draw tear
from his eye. at length he arrive at Mr Western's, and be
introduce to Sophia.
when the first ceremony be past, and the gentleman and lady have
take their chair, a silence of some minute ensue; during which the
latter, who have be prepare for the visit by her father, sit play
with her fan, and have every mark of confusion both in her countenance
and behaviour. at length Allworthy, who be himself a little
disconcert, begin thus: "I be afraid, Miss Western, my family hath
be the occasion of give you some uneasiness; to which, I fear, I
have innocently become more instrumental than I intend. be assure,
madam, have I at first know how disagreeable the proposal have be, I
should not have suffer you to have be so long persecute. I hope,
therefore, you will not think the design of this visit be to trouble
you with any further solicitation of that kind, but entirely to
relieve you from they."
"Sir," say Sophia, with a little modest hesitation, "this behaviour
be most kind and generous, and such as I could expect only from Mr
Allworthy; but as you have be so kind to mention this matter, you
will pardon I for say it hath, indeed, give I great uneasiness,
and hath be the occasion of my suffer much cruel treatment from
a father who be, till that unhappy affair, the tender and fond
of all parent. I be convince, sir, you be too good and generous to
resent my refusal of your nephew. our inclination be not in our own
power; and whatever may be his merit, I cannot force they in his
favour." "I assure you, most amiable young lady," say Allworthy, "I
be capable of no such resentment, have the person be my own son, and
have I entertain the high esteem for he. for you say truly,
madam, we cannot force our inclination, much less can they be
direct by another." "oh! sir," answer Sophia, "every word you
speak prove you deserve that good, that great, that benevolent
character the whole world allow you. I assure you, sir, nothing less
than the certain prospect of future misery could have make I resist
the command of my father." "I sincerely believe you, madam," reply
Allworthy, "and I heartily congratulate you on your prudent
foresight, since by so justifiable a resistance you have avoid
misery indeed!" "you speak now, Mr Allworthy," cry she, "with a
delicacy which few man be capable of feeling! but surely, in my
opinion, to lead our life with one to whom we be indifferent must
be a state of wretchedness.----Perhaps that wretchedness would be
even increase by a sense of the merit of an object to whom we
cannot give our affection. if I have marry Mr blifil--" "Pardon my
interrupt you, madam," answer Allworthy, "but I cannot bear the
supposition.--believe I, Miss Western, I rejoice from my heart, I
rejoice in your escape.--i have discover the wretch for whom you
have suffer all this cruel violence from your father to be a
villain." "how, sir!" cry Sophia--"you must believe this surprize
I."--"It hath surprize I, madam," answer Allworthy, "and so it
will the world.----but I have acquaint you with the real truth."
"nothing but truth," say Sophia, "can, I be convince, come from the
lip of Mr Allworthy.----Yet, sir, such sudden, such unexpected
news.----discovere, you say----may villany be ever so!"--"you will
soon enough hear the story," cry Allworthy;--"at present let we not
mention so detest a name.--I have another matter of a very serious
nature to propose.--o! Miss Western, I know your vast worth, nor can
I so easily part with the ambition of be ally to it.--I have a
near relation, madam, a young man whose character be, I be convince,
the very opposite to that of this wretch, and whose fortune I will
make equal to what his be to have be. could I, madam, hope you
would admit a visit from he?" Sophia, after a minute's silence,
answer, "I will deal with the utmost sincerity with Mr Allworthy.
his character, and the obligation I have just receive from he,
demand it. I have determine at present to listen to no such
proposal from any person. my only desire be to be restore to the
affection of my father, and to be again the mistress of his family.
this, sir, I hope to owe to your good office. let I beseech you,
let I conjure you, by all the goodness which I, and all who know
you, have experience, do not, the very moment when you have release
I from one persecution, do not engage I in another as miserable and
as fruitless." "indeed, Miss Western," reply Allworthy, "I be
capable of no such conduct; and if this be your resolution, he must
submit to the disappointment, whatever torment he may suffer under
it." "I must smile now, Mr Allworthy," answer Sophia, "when you
mention the torment of a man whom I do not know, and who can
consequently have so little acquaintance with I." "pardon I, dear
young lady," cry allworthy, "I begin now to be afraid he hath have
too much acquaintance for the repose of his future day; since, if
ever man be capable of a sincere, violent, and noble passion, such,
I be convince, be my unhappy nephew's for Miss Western." "a nephew
of your's, Mr Allworthy!" answer Sophia. "it be surely strange. I
never hear of he before." "indeed, madam," cry allworthy, "it be
only the circumstance of his be my nephew to which you be a
stranger, and which, till this day, be a secret to me.--mr Jones,
who have long love you, he! he be my nephew!" "Mr Jones your nephew,
sir!" cry Sophia, "can it be possible?"--"he be, indeed, madam,"
answer Allworthy; "he be my own sister's son--as such I shall
always own he; nor be I ashamed of own he. I be much more
ashamed of my past behaviour to he; but I be as ignorant of his
merit as of his birth. indeed, Miss Western, I have use he
cruelly----indeed I have."--Here the good man wipe his eye, and
after a short pause proceeded--"i never shall be able to reward he
for his suffering without your assistance.----believe I, most
amiable young lady, I must have a great esteem of that offering which
I make to your worth. I know he hath be guilty of fault; but there
be great goodness of heart at the bottom. believe I, madam, there
be." here he stop, seem to expect an answer, which he presently
receive from Sophia, after she have a little recover herself from
the hurry of spirit into which so strange and sudden information have
throw she: "I sincerely wish you joy, sir, of a discovery in which
you seem to have such satisfaction. I doubt not but you will have all
the comfort you can promise yourself from it. the young gentleman
hath certainly a thousand good quality, which make it impossible
he should not behave well to such an uncle."--"I hope, madam," say
Allworthy, "he hath those good quality which must make he a good
husband.--He must, I be sure, be of all man the most abandon, if a
lady of your merit should condescend--" "you must pardon I, Mr
Allworthy," answer Sophia; "I cannot listen to a proposal of this
kind. Mr Jones, I be convince, hath much merit; but I shall never
receive Mr Jones as one who be to be my husband--upon my honour I
never will."--"Pardon me, madam," cry allworthy, "if I be a little
surprized, after what I have hear from Mr Western--I hope the
unhappy young man hath do nothing to forfeit your good opinion, if
he have ever the honour to enjoy it.--perhap, he may have be
misrepresented to you, as he be to I. the same villany may have
injure he everywhere.--he be no murderer, I assure you; as he hath
be call."--"Mr Allworthy," answer Sophia, "I have tell you my
resolution. I wonder not at what my father hath tell you; but,
whatever his apprehension or fear have be, if I know my heart, I
have give no occasion for they; since it hath always be a fix
principle with I, never to have marry without his consent. this
be, I think, the duty of a child to a parent; and this, I hope,
nothing could ever have prevail with I to swerve from. I do not
indeed conceive that the authority of any parent can oblige we to
marry in direct opposition to our inclination. to avoid a force of
this kind, which I have reason to suspect, I leave my father's house,
and seek protection elsewhere. this be the truth of my story; and
if the world, or my father, carry my intention any far, my own
conscience will acquit I." "I hear you, Miss Western," cry
Allworthy, "with admiration. I admire the justness of your
sentiment; but surely there be more in this. I be cautious of
offend you, young lady; but be I to look on all which I have
hitherto hear or see as a dream only? and have you suffer so much
cruelty from your father on the account of a man to whom you have
be always absolutely indifferent?" "I beg, Mr Allworthy," answer
Sophia, "you will not insist on my reasons;--ye, I have suffer
indeed; I will not, Mr Allworthy, conceal----i will be very sincere
with you--I own I have a great opinion of Mr Jones--I believe--I know
I have suffer for my opinion--I have be treat cruelly by my
aunt, as well as by my father; but that be now past--I beg I may not
be far press; for, whatever hath be, my resolution be now
fix. your nephew, sir, hath many virtue--he hath great virtue, Mr
Allworthy. I question not but he will do you honour in the world, and
make you happy."--"I wish I could make he so, madam," reply
Allworthy; "but that I be convince be only in your power. it be that
conviction which hath make I so earnest a solicitor in his favour."
"you be deceive indeed, sir; you be deceive," say Sophia. "I
hope not by he. it be sufficient to have deceive I. Mr Allworthy,
I must insist on be press no far on this subject. I should
be sorry--nay, I will not injure he in your favour. I wish Mr Jones
very well. I sincerely wish he well; and I repeat it again to you,
whatever demerit he may have to I, I be certain he hath many good
quality. I do not disown my former thought; but nothing can ever
recal they. at present there be not a man upon earth whom I would
more resolutely reject than Mr Jones; nor would the address of Mr
Blifil himself be less agreeable to I."
Western have be long impatient for the event of this conference, and
be just now arrive at the door to listen; when, have hear the
last sentiment of his daughter's heart, he lose all temper, and,
burst open the door in a rage, cry out--"it be a lie! it be a
d--n'd lie! it be all owe to that d--n'd rascal Jones; and if she
could get at un, shewould ha un any hour of the day." here Allworthy
interpose, and address himself to the squire with some anger in
his look, he say, "Mr Western, you have not keep your word with I.
you promise to abstain from all violence."--"why, so I do," cry
western, "as long as it be possible; but to hear a wench tell such
confound lies----zound! doth she think, if she can make vool of
other volk, she can make one of me?--No, no, I know she well than
thee dost." "I be sorry to tell you, sir," answer Allworthy, "it
doth not appear, by your behaviour to this young lady, that you know
she at all. I ask pardon for what I say: but I think our intimacy,
your own desire, and the occasion justify I. she be your daughter,
Mr Western, and I think she doth honour to your name. if I be capable
of envy, I should soon envy you on this account than any other man
whatever."--"odrabbit it!" cry the squire, "I wish she be thine,
with all my heart--wouldst soon be glad to be rid of the trouble o'
she." "indeed, my good friend," answer Allworthy, "you yourself be
the cause of all the trouble you complain of. place that confidence in
the young lady which she so well deserve, and I be certain you will
be the happy father on earth."--"I confidence in she?" cry the
squire. "'Sblood! what confidence can I place in she, when she willnot
do as I would ha' she? let she gi' but her consent to marry as I would
ha' she, and Iwill place as much confidence in she as wouldst ha'
I."--"you have no right, neighbour," answer Allworthy, "to insist
on any such consent. a negative voice your daughter allow you, and
God and nature have think proper to allow you no more."--"a negative
voice!" cry the squire, "ay! ay! Iwill show you what a negative voice
I ha.--go along, go into your chamber, go, you stubborn----." "indeed,
Mr Western," say Allworthy, "indeed you use she cruelly--I cannot
bear to see this--you shall, you must behave to she in a kind
manner. she deserve the good of treatment." "yes, yes," say the
squire, "I know what she deserve: now shebe go, Iwill shew you what
she deserve. see here, sir, here be a letter from my cousin, my Lady
Bellaston, in which she be so kind to gi' I to understand that the
fellow be get out of prison again; and here she advise I to take all
the care I can o' the wench. odzooker! neighbour Allworthy, you donot
know what it be to govern a daughter."
the squire end his speech with some compliment to his own sagacity;
and then Allworthy, after a formal preface, acquaint he with the
whole discovery which he have make concern Jones, with his anger to
Blifil, and with every particular which hath be disclose to the
reader in the precede chapter.
man over-violent in their disposition be, for the most part, as
changeable in they. no soon then be Western inform of Mr
Allworthy's intention to make Jones his heir, than he join heartily
with the uncle in every commendation of the nephew, and become as
eager for her marriage with Jones as he have before be to couple she
to Blifil.
here Mr Allworthy be again force to interpose, and to relate what
have pass between he and Sophia, at which he testify great
surprize.
the squire be silent a moment, and look wild with astonishment at
this account.--At last he cry out, "why, what can be the meaning of
this, neighbour Allworthy? Vond o'un she be, that Iwill be swear
to.----odzooker! I have hit o't. as sure as a gun I have hit o' the
very right o't. itbe all along o' zister. the girl hath get a
hankering after this son of a whore of a lord. I vound them together at
my cousin my Lady Bellaston's. he hath turn the head o' she, thatbe
certain--but d--n I if he shall ha she--i'll ha no lord nor
courtier in my vamily."
Allworthy now make a long speech, in which he repeat his resolution
to avoid all violent measure, and very earnestly recommend gentle
method to Mr Western, as those by which he might be assure of
succeed well with his daughter. he then take his leave, and
return back to Mrs Miller, but be force to comply with the earnest
entreaty of the squire, in promise to bring Mr Jones to visit he
that afternoon, that he might, as he say, "make all matter up with
the young gentleman." at Mr Allworthy's departure, Western promise to
follow his advice in his behaviour to Sophia, say, "I donot know
how 'tis, but d--n I, Allworthy, if you donot make I always do just
as you please; and yet I have as good an estate as you, and be in the
commission of the peace as well as yourself."
Chapter x.
wherein the history begin to draw towards a conclusion.
when Allworthy return to his lodging, he hear Mr Jones be just
arrive before he. he hurry therefore instantly into an empty
chamber, whither he order Mr Jones to be bring to he alone.
it be impossible to conceive a more tender or move scene than the
meeting between the uncle and nephew (for Mrs Waters, as the reader
may well suppose, have at her last visit discover to he the secret
of his birth). the first agony of joy which be feel on both side
be indeed beyond my power to describe: I shall not therefore attempt
it. after Allworthy have raise Jones from his foot, where he have
prostrate himself, and receive he into his arm, "o my child!" he
cry, "how have I be to blame! how have I injure you! what amend
can I ever make you for those unkind, those unjust suspicion which I
have entertain, and for all the suffering they have occasion to
you?" "be I not now make amend?" cry Jones. "would not my
suffering, if they have be ten time great, have be now richly
repay? o my dear uncle, this goodness, this tenderness overpower,
unman, destroy I. I cannot bear the transport which flow so fast
upon I. to be again restore to your presence, to your favour; to be
once more thus kindly receive by my great, my noble, my generous
benefactor."--"Indeed, child," cry allworthy, "I have use you
cruelly."----he then explain to he all the treachery of Blifil, and
again repeat expression of the utmost concern, for have be
induce by that treachery to use he so ill. "o, talk not so!"
answer Jones; "indeed, sir, you have use I nobly. the wise man
might be deceive as you be; and, under such a deception, the good
must have act just as you do. your goodness display itself in the
midst of your anger, just as it then seem. I owe everything to that
goodness, of which I have be most unworthy. do not put I on
self-accusation, by carry your generous sentiment too far. alas!
sir, I have not be punish more than I have deserve; and it shall
be the whole business of my future life to deserve that happiness you
now bestow on I; for, believe I, my dear uncle, my punishment hath
not be throw away upon I: though I have be a great, I be not a
harden sinner; I thank Heaven, I have have time to reflect on my past
life, where, though I cannot charge myself with any gross villany, yet
I can discern folly and vice more than enough to repent and to be
ashamed of; folly which have be attend with dreadful
consequence to myself, and have bring I to the brink of
destruction." "I be rejoice, my dear child," answer Allworthy, "to
hear you talk thus sensibly; for as I be convince hypocrisy (good
Heaven! how have I be impose on by it in other!) be never among
your fault, so I can readily believe all you say. you now see, Tom,
to what danger imprudence alone may subject virtue (for virtue, I be
now convince, you love in a great degree). Prudence be indeed the
duty which we owe to ourselves; and if we will be so much our own
enemy as to neglect it, we be not to wonder if the world be
deficient in discharge their duty to we; for when a man lay the
foundation of his own ruin, other will, I be afraid, be too apt to
build upon it. you say, however, you have see your error, and will
reform they. I firmly believe you, my dear child; and therefore, from
this moment, you shall never be remind of they by I. remember they
only yourself so far as for the future to teach you the well to
avoid they; but still remember, for your comfort, that there be this
great difference between those fault which candor may construe into
imprudence, and those which can be deduce from villany only. the
former, perhaps, be even more apt to subject a man to ruin; but if he
reform, his character will, at length, be totally retrieve; the
world, though not immediately, will in time be reconcile to he; and
he may reflect, not without some mixture of pleasure, on the danger
he hath escape; but villany, my boy, when once discover be
irretrievable; the stain which this leave behind, no time will wash
away. the censure of mankind will pursue the wretch, their scorn will
abash he in publick; and if shame drive he into retirement, he will
go to it with all those terror with which a weary child, who be
afraid of hobgoblin, retreat from company to go to bed alone. here
his murder conscience will haunt him.--Repose, like a false friend,
will fly from he. wherever he turn his eye, horror present itself;
if he look backward, unavailable repentance tread on his heel; if
forward, incurable despair stare he in the face, till, like a
condemn prisoner confine in a dungeon, he detest his present
condition, and yet dread the consequence of that hour which be to
relieve he from it. Comfort yourself, I say, my child, that this be
not your case; and rejoice with thankfulness to he who hath suffer
you to see your error, before they have bring on you that
destruction to which a persistance in even those error must have lead
you. you have desert they; and the prospect now before you be such,
that happiness seem in your own power." at these word Jones fetch
a deep sigh; upon which, when Allworthy remonstrate, he say, "Sir, I
will conceal nothing from you: I fear there be one consequence of my
vice I shall never be able to retrieve. o, my dear uncle! I have lose
a treasure." "you need say no more," answer Allworthy; "I will be
explicit with you; I know what you lament; I have see the young lady,
and have discourse with she concern you. this I must insist on, as
an earnest of your sincerity in all you have say, and of the
stedfastness of your resolution, that you obey I in one instance. to
abide intirely by the determination of the young lady, whether it
shall be in your favour or no. she hath already suffer enough from
solicitation which I hate to think of; she shall owe no far
constraint to my family: I know her father will be as ready to torment
she now on your account as he hath formerly be on another's; but I
be determined she shall suffer no more confinement, no more violence,
no more uneasy hour." "o, my dear uncle!" answer Jones, "lay, I
beseech you, some command on I, in which I shall have some merit in
obedience. believe I, sir, the only instance in which I could disobey
you would be to give an uneasy moment to my Sophia. no, sir, if I be
so miserable to have incur her displeasure beyond all hope of
forgiveness, that alone, with the dreadful reflection of cause she
misery, will be sufficient to overpower I. to call Sophia mine be the
great, and now the only additional blessing which heaven can
bestow; but it be a blessing which I must owe to she alone." "I will
not flat you, child," cry allworthy; "I fear your case be
desperate: I never see strong mark of an unalterable resolution in
any person than appear in her vehement declaration against
receive your address; for which, perhaps, you can account well
than myself." "oh, sir! I can account too well," answer Jones; "I
have sin against she beyond all hope of pardon; and guilty as I be,
my guilt unfortunately appear to she in ten time blacker than the
real colour. o, my dear uncle! I find my folly be irretrievable;
and all your goodness cannot save I from perdition."
a servant now acquaint they that Mr Western be below-stair; for
his eagerness to see Jones could not wait till the afternoon. upon
which Jones, whose eye be full of tear, beg his uncle to
entertain Western a few minute, till he a little recover himself;
to which the good man consent, and, have order Mr Western to be
shewn into a parlour, go down to he.
Mrs Miller no soon hear that Jones be alone (for she have not yet
see he since his release from prison) than she come eagerly into the
room, and, advance towards Jones, wish he heartily joy of his
new-find uncle and his happy reconciliation; add, "I wish I could
give you joy on another account, my dear child; but anything so
inexorable I never see."
Jones, with some appearance of surprize, ask she what she mean.
"why then," say she, "I have be with your young lady, and have
explain all matter to she, as they be tell to I by my son
Nightingale. she can have no long any doubt about the letter; of
that I be certain; for I tell she my son Nightingale be ready to take
his oath, if she please, that it be all his own invention, and the
letter of his inditing. I tell she the very reason of send the
letter ought to recommend you to she the more, as it be all upon she
account, and a plain proof that you be resolve to quit all your
profligacy for the future; that you have never be guilty of a single
instance of infidelity to she since your see she in town: I be
afraid I go too far there; but Heaven forgive I! I hope your future
behaviour will be my justification. I be sure I have say all I can;
but all to no purpose. she remain inflexible. she say, she have
forgive many fault on account of youth; but express such
detestation of the character of a libertine, that she absolutely
silence I. I often attempt to excuse you; but the justness of her
accusation fly in my face. upon my honour, she be a lovely woman, and
one of the sweetest and most sensible creature I ever see. I could
have almost kiss she for one expression she make use of. it be a
sentiment worthy of Seneca, or of a bishop. `I once fancy madam.'
and she, `I have discover great goodness of heart in Mr Jones; and
for that I own I have a sincere esteem; but an entire profligacy of
manner will corrupt the good heart in the world; and all which a
good-natured libertine can expect be, that we should mix some grain
of pity with our contempt and abhorrence.' she be an angelic creature,
that be the truth on't." "o, Mrs Miller!" answer Jones, "can I bear
to think that I have lose such an angel?" "Lost! no," cry Mrs
Miller; "I hope you have not lose she yet. resolve to leave such
vicious course, and you may yet have hope, nay, if she would remain
inexorable, there be another young lady, a sweet pretty young lady,
and a swing fortune, who be absolutely die for love of you. I
hear of it this very morning, and I tell it to Miss Western; nay, I
go a little beyond the truth again; for I tell she you have refuse
she; but indeed I know you would refuse she. and here I must give you
a little comfort; when I mention the young lady's name, who be no
other than the pretty widow Hunt, I think she turn pale; but when
I say you have refuse she, I will be swear her face be all over
scarlet in an instant; and these be her very word: `I will not deny
but that I believe he have some affection for I.'"
here the conversation be interrupt by the arrival of Western, who
could no long be keep out of the room even by the authority of
allworthy himself; though this, as we have often see, have a wonderful
power over he.
Western immediately go up to Jones, cry out, "my old friend Tom,
I be glad to see thee with all my heart! all past must be forget; I
could not intend any affront to thee, because, as Allworthy here
know, nay, dost know it thyself, I take thee for another person; and
where a body mean no harm, what signify a hasty word or two? one
Christian must forget and forgive another." "I hope, sir," say Jones,
"I shall never forget the many obligation I have have to you; but as
for any offence towards I, I declare I be an utter stranger." "A't,"
say Western, "then give I thy fist; a't as hearty an honest cock as
any in the kingdom. come along with I; Iwill carry thee to thy
mistress this moment." here Allworthy interpose; and the squire be
unable to prevail either with the uncle or nephew, be, after some
litigation, oblige to consent to delay introduce Jones to Sophia
till the afternoon; at which time Allworthy, as well in compassion to
Jones as in compliance with the eager desire of Western, be
prevail upon to promise to attend at the tea-table.
the conversation which now ensue be pleasant enough; and with which,
have it happen early in our history, we would have entertain our
reader; but as we have now leisure only to attend to what be very
material, it shall suffice to say that matter be entirely adjust
as to the afternoon visit Mr Western again return home.
Chapter xi.
the history draw near to a conclusion.
when Mr Western be depart, Jones begin to inform Mr Allworthy and
Mrs Miller that his liberty have be procure by two noble lord, who,
together with two surgeon and a friend of Mr Nightingale's, have
attend the magistrate by whom he have be commit, and by whom, on
the surgeon' oath, that the wounded person be out of all manner of
danger from his wound, he be discharge.
one only of these lord, he say, he have ever see before, and that no
more than once; but the other have greatly surprize he by ask his
pardon for an offence he have be guilty of towards he, occasion,
he say, entirely by his ignorance who he be.
now the reality of the case, with which Jones be not acquaint till
afterwards, be this:--the lieutenant whom Lord Fellamar have employ,
accord to the advice of Lady Bellaston, to press Jones as a
vagabond into the sea-service, when he come to report to his lordship
the event which we have before see, speak very favourably of the
behaviour of Mr Jones on all account, and strongly assure that lord
that he must have mistake the person, for that Jones be certainly a
gentleman; insomuch that his lordship, who be strictly a man of
honour, and would by no mean have be guilty of an action which the
world in general would have condemn, begin to be much concerned for
the advice which he have take.
within a day or two after this, Lord Fellamar happen to dine with
the irish peer, who, in a conversation upon the duel, acquaint his
company with the character of Fitzpatrick; to which, indeed, he do
not do strict justice, especially in what relate to his lady. he say
she be the most innocent, the most injured woman alive, and that from
compassion alone he have undertake her cause. he then declare an
intention of go the next morning to Fitzpatrick's lodging, in
order to prevail with he, if possible, to consent to a separation
from his wife, who, the peer say, be in apprehension for her life,
if she should ever return to be under the power of her husband. Lord
Fellamar agree to go with he, that he might satisfy himself more
concern Jones and the circumstance of the duel; for he be by no
mean easy concern the part he have act. the moment his lordship
give a hint of his readiness to assist in the delivery of the lady, it
be eagerly embrace by the other nobleman, who depend much on the
authority of Lord Fellamar, as he think it would greatly contribute
to awe Fitzpatrick into a compliance; and perhaps he be in the right;
for the poor Irishman no soon see these noble peer have undertake
the cause of his wife than he submit, and article of separation
be soon draw up and sign between the party.
Fitzpatrick, who have be so well satisfied by Mrs Waters concern
the innocence of his wife with Jones at Upton, or perhaps, from some
other reason, be now become so indifferent to that matter, that he
speak highly in favour of Jones to Lord Fellamar, take all the blame
upon himself, and say the other have behave very much like a
gentleman and a man of honour; and upon that lord's further enquiry
concern Mr Jones, Fitzpatrick tell he he be nephew to a gentleman
of very great fashion and fortune, which be the account he have just
receive from Mrs Waters after her interview with Dowling.
Lord Fellamar now think it behove he to do everything in his power
to make satisfaction to a gentleman whom he have so grossly injure,
and without any consideration of rivalship (for he have now give over
all thought of Sophia), determine to procure Mr Jones's liberty,
be satisfy, as well from Fitzpatrick as his surgeon, that the
wound be not mortal. he therefore prevail with the irish peer to
accompany he to the place where Jones be confine, to whom he
behave as we have already relate.
when Allworthy return to his lodging, he immediately carry Jones
into his room, and then acquaint he with the whole matter, as well
what he have hear from Mrs Waters as what he have discover from Mr
Dowling.
Jones express great astonishment and no less concern at this
account, but without make any comment or observation upon it. and
now a message be bring from Mr Blifil, desire to know if his
uncle be at leisure that he might wait upon he. Allworthy start
and turn pale, and then in a more passionate tone than I believe he
have ever use before, bid the servant tell Blifil he know he not.
"consider, dear sir," cry Jones, in a trembling voice. "I have
consider," answer Allworthy, "and you yourself shall carry my
message to the villain. no one can carry he the sentence of his own
ruin so properly as the man whose ruin he hath so villanously
contrive." "pardon I, dear sir," say Jones; "a moment's reflection
will, I be sure, convince you of the contrary. what might perhaps be
but justice from another tongue, would from mine be insult; and to
whom?--my own brother and your nephew. nor do he use I so
barbarously--indeed, that would have be more inexcusable than
anything he hath do. Fortune may tempt man of no very bad
disposition to injustice; but insult proceed only from black and
rancorous mind, and have no temptation to excuse they. let I
beseech you, sir, to do nothing by he in the present height of your
anger. consider, my dear uncle, I be not myself condemn unheard."
Allworthy stand silent a moment, and then, embrace Jones, he say,
with tear gush from his eye, "o my child! to what goodness have I
be so long blind!"
Mrs Miller enter the room at that moment, after a gentle rap which
be not perceive, and see Jones in the arm of his uncle, the poor
woman in an agony of joy fall upon her knee, and burst forth into the
most ecstatic thanksgiving to heaven for what have happen; then,
run to Jones, she embrace he eagerly, cry, "my dearest
friend, I wish you joy a thousand and a thousand time of this blest
day." and next Mr Allworthy himself receive the same congratulation.
to which he answer, "indeed, indeed, Mrs Miller, I be beyond
expression happy." some few more rapture have pass on all side,
Mrs Miller desire they both to walk down to dinner in the parlour,
where she say there be a very happy set of people assemble--be
indeed no other than Mr Nightingale and his bride, and his cousin
Harriet with her bridegroom.
Allworthy excuse himself from din with the company, say he have
order some little thing for he and his nephew in his own apartment,
for that they have much private business to discourse of; but would not
resist promise the good woman that both he and Jones would make part
of her society at supper.
Mrs Miller then ask what be to be do with Blifil? "for indeed,"
say she, "I cannot be easy while such a villain be in my
house."--Allworthy answer, "he be as uneasy as herself on the same
account." "oh!" cry she, "if that be the case, leave the matter to
I, Iwill soon show he the outside out of my door, I warrant you.
here be two or three lusty fellow below-stair." "there will be no
need of any violence," cry allworthy; "if you will carry he a
message from I, he will, I be convince, depart of his own accord."
"will I?" say Mrs Miller; "I never do anything in my life with a
well will." here Jones interfere, and say, "he have consider the
matter well, and would, if Mr Allworthy please, be himself the
messenger. I know," say he, "already enough of your pleasure, sir,
and I beg leave to acquaint he with it by my own word. let I
beseech you, sir," add he, "to reflect on the dreadful consequence
of drive he to violent and sudden despair. how unfit, alas! be this
poor man to die in his present situation." this suggestion have not the
least effect on Mrs Miller. she leave the room, cry, "you be too
good, Mr Jones, infinitely too good to live in this world." but it
make a deep impression on Allworthy. "my good child," say he, "I be
equally astonish at the goodness of your heart, and the quickness of
your understanding. Heaven indeed forbid that this wretch should be
deprive of any mean or time for repentance! that would be a shocking
consideration indeed. go to he, therefore, and use your own
discretion; yet do not flatter he with any hope of my forgiveness;
for I shall never forgive villany far than my religion oblige I,
and that extend not either to our bounty or our conversation."
Jones go up to Blifil's room, whom he find in a situation which
move his pity, though it would have raise a less amiable passion in
many beholder. he cast himself on his bed, where he lie abandon
himself to despair, and drown in tear; not in such tear as flow
from contrition, and wash away guilt from mind which have be
seduce or surprize into it unawares, against the bent of their
natural disposition, as will sometimes happen from human frailty,
even to the good; no, these tear be such as the fright thief
shed in his cart, and be indeed the effect of that concern which
the most savage nature be seldom deficient in feeling for
themselves.
it would be unpleasant and tedious to paint this scene in full length.
let it suffice to say, that the behaviour of Jones be kind to excess.
he omit nothing which his invention could supply, to raise and
comfort the droop spirit of Blifil, before he communicate to he
the resolution of his uncle that he must quit the house that evening.
he offer to furnish he with any money he want, assure he of his
hearty forgiveness of all he have do against he, that he would
endeavour to live with he hereafter as a brother, and would leave
nothing unattempte to effectuate a reconciliation with his uncle.
Blifil be at first sullen and silent, balance in his mind whether
he should yet deny all; but, find at last the evidence too strong
against he, he betake himself at last to confession. he then ask
pardon of his brother in the most vehement manner, prostrate himself
on the ground, and kiss his foot; in short he be now as remarkably
mean as he have be before remarkably wicked.
Jones could not so far check his disdain, but that it a little
discover itself in his countenance at this extreme servility. he
raise his brother the moment he could from the ground, and advise
he to bear his affliction more like a man; repeat, at the same
time, his promise, that he would do all in his power to lessen they;
for which Blifil, make many profession of his unworthiness, pour
forth a profusion of thank; and then, he have declare he would
immediately depart to another lodging, Jones return to his uncle.
among other matter, Allworthy now acquaint Jones with the discovery
which he have make concern the £500 bank-note. "I have," say he,
"already consult a lawyer, who tell I, to my great astonishment,
that there be no punishment for a fraud of this kind. indeed, when I
consider the black ingratitude of this fellow toward you, I think a
highwayman, compare to he, be an innocent person."
"Good Heaven!" say Jones, "be it possible?--i be shock beyond
measure at this news. I think there be not an honester fellow in
the world.----the temptation of such a sum be too great for he to
withstand; for small matter have come safe to I through his hand.
indeed, my dear uncle, you must suffer I to call it weakness rather
than ingratitude; for I be convince the poor fellow love I, and
hath do I some kindness, which I can never forget; nay, I believe
he hath repent of this very act; for it be not above a day or two
ago, when my affair seem in the most desperate situation, that he
visit I in my confinement, and offer I any money I want.
consider, sir, what a temptation to a man who hath taste such bitter
distress, it must be, to have a sum in his possession which must put
he and his family beyond any future possibility of suffer the
like."
"child," cry allworthy, "you carry this forgiving temper too far.
such mistaken mercy be not only weakness, but border on injustice,
and be very pernicious to society, as it encourage vice. the
dishonesty of this fellow I might, perhaps, have pardon, but never
his ingratitude. and give I leave to say, when we suffer any
temptation to atone for dishonesty itself, we be as candid and
merciful as we ought to be; and so far I confess I have go; for I
have often pity the fate of a highwayman, when I have be on the
grand jury; and have more than once apply to the judge on the behalf
of such as have have any mitigating circumstance in their case; but
when dishonesty be attend with any blacker crime, such as cruelty,
murder, ingratitude, or the like, compassion and forgiveness then
become fault. I be convince the fellow be a villain, and he shall be
punish; at least as far as I can punish he."
this be speak with so stern a voice, that Jones do not think proper
to make any reply; besides, the hour appoint by Mr Western now draw
so near, that he have barely time leave to dress himself. here therefore
end the present dialogue, and Jones retire to another room, where
Partridge attend, accord to order, with his cloath.
Partridge have scarce see his master since the happy discovery. the
poor fellow be unable either to contain or express his transport. he
behave like one frantic, and make almost as many mistake while he
be dress Jones as I have see make by Harlequin in dress
himself on the stage.
his memory, however, be not in the least deficient. he recollect
now many omen and presage of this happy event, some of which he have
remark at the time, but many more he now remember; nor do he omit
the dream he have dream the evening before his meeting with Jones;
and conclude with say, "I always tell your honour something bode
in my mind that you would one time or other have it in your power to
make my fortune." Jones assure he that this boding should as
certainly be verify with regard to he as all the other omen have
be to himself; which do not a little add to all the rapture which
the poor fellow have already conceive on account of his master.
Chapter xii.
approach still near to the end.
Jones, be now completely dress, attend his uncle to Mr
Western's. he be, indeed, one of the fine figure ever beheld, and
his person alone would have charm the great part of womankind; but
we hope it hath already appear in this history that nature, when she
form he, do not totally rely, as she sometimes doth, on this merit
only, to recommend her work.
Sophia, who, angry as she be, be likewise set forth to the good
advantage, for which I leave my female reader to account, appear so
extremely beautiful, that even Allworthy, when he see she, could not
forbear whisper Western, that he believe she be the fine
creature in the world. to which Western answer, in a whisper,
overhear by all present, "so much the well for Tom;--for d--n I if
he shallnot ha the tousle she." Sophia be all over scarlet at these
word, while Tom's countenance be altogether as pale, and he be
almost ready to sink from his chair.
the tea-table be scarce remove before Western lug Allworthy out
of the room, tell he he have business of consequence to impart, and
must speak to he that instant in private, before he forget it.
the lover be now alone, and it will, I question not, appear strange
to many reader, that those who have so much to say to one another when
danger and difficulty attend their conversation, and who seem so
eager to rush into each other's arm when so many bar lie in their
way, now that with safety they be at liberty to say or do whatever
they please, should both remain for some time silent and motionless;
insomuch that a stranger of moderate sagacity might have well
conclude they be mutually indifferent; but so it be, however
strange it may seem; both sit with their eye cast downward on the
ground, and for some minute continue in perfect silence.
Mr Jones during this interval attempt once or twice to speak, but
be absolutely incapable, mutter only, or rather sigh out, some
break word; when Sophia at length, partly out of pity to he, and
partly to turn the discourse from the subject which she know well
enough he be endeavour to open, said--
"sure, sir, you be the most fortunate man in the world in this
discovery." "and can you really, madam, think I so fortunate," say
Jones, sigh, "while I have incur your displeasure?"--"nay, sir,"
say she, "as to that you well know whether you have deserve it."
"indeed, madam," answer he, "you yourself be as well apprized of
all my demerit. Mrs Miller hath acquaint you with the whole truth.
o! my Sophia, be I never to hope for forgiveness?"--"i think, Mr
Jones," say she, "I may almost depend on your own justice, and leave
it to yourself to pass sentence on your own conduct."--"Alas! madam,"
answer he, "it be mercy, and not justice, which I implore at your
hand. justice I know must condemn me.--Yet not for the letter I send
to Lady Bellaston. of that I most solemnly declare you have have a true
account." he then insist much on the security give he by
Nightingale of a fair pretence for break off, if, contrary to their
expectation, her ladyship should have accept his offer; but conf
that he have be guilty of a great indiscretion to put such a letter
as that into her power, "which," say he, "I have dearly pay for, in
the effect it have upon you." "I do not, I cannot," say she, "believe
otherwise of that letter than you would have I. my conduct, I think,
shews you clearly I do not believe there be much in that. and yet, Mr
Jones, have I not enough to resent? after what past at Upton, so soon
to engage in a new amour with another woman, while I fancy, and you
pretend, your heart be bleed for I? indeed, you have act
strangely. can I believe the passion you have prof to I to be
sincere? or, if I can, what happiness can I assure myself of with a
man capable of so much inconstancy?" "o! my Sophia," cry he, "do not
doubt the sincerity of the pure passion that ever inflame a human
breast. think, most adorable creature, of my unhappy situation, of my
despair. could I, my Sophia, have flatter myself with the most
distant hope of be ever permit to throw myself at your foot in
the manner I do now, it would not have be in the power of any other
woman to have inspire a thought which the severe chastity could
have condemn. Inconstancy to you! o Sophia! if you can have goodness
enough to pardon what be past, do not let any cruel future
apprehension shut your mercy against I. no repentance be ever more
sincere. o! let it reconcile I to my heaven in this dear bosom."
"sincere repentance, Mr Jones," answer she, "will obtain the pardon
of a sinner, but it be from one who be a perfect judge of that
sincerity. a human mind may be impose on; nor be there any infallible
method to prevent it. you must expect, however, that if I can be
prevail on by your repentance to pardon you, I will at least insist
on the strong proof of its sincerity." "name any proof in my
power," answer Jones eagerly. "Time," reply she; "time alone, Mr
Jones, can convince I that you be a true penitent, and have resolve
to abandon these vicious course, which I should detest you for, if I
imagine you capable of persevere in they." "do not imagine it,"
cry Jones. "on my knee I intreat, I implore your confidence, a
confidence which it shall be the business of my life to deserve." "let
it then," say she, "be the business of some part of your life to shew
I you deserve it. I think I have be explicit enough in assure
you, that, when I see you merit my confidence, you will obtain it.
after what be past, sir, can you expect I should take you upon your
word?"
he reply, "donot believe I upon my word; I have a well security,
a pledge for my constancy, which it be impossible to see and to
doubt." "what be that?" say Sophia, a little surprized. "I will show
you, my charming angel," cry Jones, seize her hand and carry
her to the glass. "there, behold it there in that lovely figure, in
that face, that shape, those eye, that mind which shin through
these eye; can the man who shall be in possession of these be
inconstant? impossible! my Sophia; they would fix a Dorimant, a Lord
Rochester. you could not doubt it, if you could see yourself with any
eye but your own." Sophia blush and half smile; but, force
again her brow into a frown--"if I be to judge," say she, "of the
future by the past, my image will no more remain in your heart when I
be out of your sight, than it will in this glass when I be out of the
room." "by heaven, by all that be sacred!" say Jones, "it never be
out of my heart. the delicacy of your sex cannot conceive the
grossness of our, nor how little one sort of amour have to do with
the heart." "I will never marry a man," reply Sophia, very gravely,
"who shall not learn refinement enough to be as incapable as I be
myself of make such a distinction." "I will learn it," say Jones.
"I have learn it already. the first moment of hope that my Sophia
might be my wife teach it I at once; and all the rest of her sex
from that moment become as little the object of desire to my sense
as of passion to my heart." "well," say Sophia, "the proof of this
must be from time. your situation, Mr Jones, be now alter, and I
assure you I have great satisfaction in the alteration. you will now
want no opportunity of be near I, and convince I that your
mind be alter too." "o! my angel," cry Jones, "how shall I thank
thy goodness! and be you so good to own that you have a satisfaction
in my prosperity?----believe I, believe I, madam, it be you alone
have give a relish to that prosperity, since I owe to it the dear
hope----o! my Sophia, let it not be a distant one.--i will be all
obedience to your command. I will not dare to press anything far
than you permit I. yet let I intreat you to appoint a short trial.
o! tell I when I may expect you will be convince of what be most
solemnly true." "when I have go voluntarily thus far, Mr Jones,"
say she, "I expect not to be press. Nay, I will not."--"O! donot
look unkindly thus, my Sophia," cry he. "I do not, I dare not press
you.--Yet permit I at least once more to beg you would fix the
period. o! consider the impatience of love."--"a twelvemonth,
perhaps," say she. "o! my Sophia," cry he, "you have name an
eternity."--"perhap it may be something soon," say she; "I will
not be teaze. if your passion for I be what I would have it, I
think you may now be easy."--"Easy! Sophia, call not such an exulting
happiness as mine by so cold a name.----o! transporting thought! be I
not assure that the blessed day will come, when I shall call you
mine; when fear shall be no more; when I shall have that dear, that
vast, that exquisite, ecstatic delight of make my Sophia
happy?"--"indeed, sir," say she, "that day be in your own
power."--"o! my dear, my divine angel," cry he, "these word have
make I mad with joy.----but I must, I will thank those dear lip
which have so sweetly pronounce my bliss." he then catch she in his
arm, and kiss she with an ardour he have never venture before.
at this instant Western, who have stand some time listen, burst into
the room, and, with his hunt voice and phrase, cry out, "to she,
boy, to she, go to her.----That's it, little honey, o thatbe it!
well! what, be it all over? Hath she appoint the day, boy? what,
shall it be to-morrow or next day? it shallnot be put off a minute
long than next day, I be resolve." "let I beseech you, sir," say
Jones, "donot let I be the occasion"----"Beseech mine a----," cry
western. "I think thou hadst be a lad of high mettle than to
give way to a parcel of maidenish tricks.----I tell thee 'tis all
flimflam. zoodiker! shewould have the wedding to-night with all her
heart. Would'st not, Sophy? come, confess, and be an honest girl for
once. what, art dumb? why dost not speak?" "why should I confess,
sir," say Sophia, "since it seem you be so well acquainted with my
thoughts?"----"thatbe a good girl," cry he, "and dost consent then?"
"no, indeed, sir," say Sophia, "I have give no such consent."---"And
wunt not ha un then to-morrow, nor next day?" say Western.--"Indeed,
sir," say she, "I have no such intention." "but I can tell thee,"
reply he, "why hast nut; only because thou dost love to be
disobedient, and to plague and vex thy father." "pray, sir," say
Jones, interfering----"i tell thee thou art a puppy," cry he. "when
I vorbid she, then it be all nothing but sigh and whining, and
languishing and writing; now I be vor thee, she be against thee. all
the spirit of contrary, thatbe all. she be above be guide and
govern by her father, that be the whole truth on't. it be only to
disoblige and contradict I." "what would my papa have I do?" cry
Sophia. "what would I ha thee do?" say he, "why, gi' un thy hand this
moment."--"Well, sir," say Sophia, "I will obey you.--there be my
hand, Mr Jones." "well, and will you consent to ha un to-morrow
morning?" say western.--"i will be obedient to you, sir," cry
she.--"Why then to-morrow morning be the day," cry he. "why then
to-morrow morning shall be the day, papa, since you will have it so,"
say Sophia. Jones then fall upon his knee, and kiss her hand in an
agony of joy, while Western begin to caper and dance about the room,
presently cry out--"where the devil be allworthy? he be without
now, a talk with that d--d lawyer dowling, when he should be
mind other matter." he then sally out in quest of he, and very
opportunely leave the lover to enjoy a few tender minute alone.
but he soon return with Allworthy, say, "if you willnot believe I,
you may ask she yourself. Hast nut gin thy consent, Sophy, to be
married to-morrow?" "such be your command, sir," cry Sophia, "and
I dare not be guilty of disobedience." "I hope, madam," cry
Allworthy, "my nephew will merit so much goodness, and will be always
as sensible as myself of the great honour you have do my family. an
alliance with so charming and so excellent a young lady would indeed
be an honour to the great in England." "yes," cry western, "but
if I have suffer she to stand shill I shall I, dilly dally, you might
not have have that honour yet a while; I be force to use a little
fatherly authority to bring she to." "I hope not, sir," cry
allworthy, "I hope there be not the least constraint." "why, there,"
cry western, "you may bid she unsay all again if you will. dost
repent heartily of thy promise, dost not, Sophia?" "indeed, papa,"
cry she, "I do not repent, nor do I believe I ever shall, of any
promise in favour of Mr Jones." "then, nephew," cry allworthy, "I
felicitate you most heartily; for I think you be the happy of man.
and, madam, you will give I leave to congratulate you on this joyful
occasion: indeed, I be convinced you have bestow yourself on one who
will be sensible of your great merit, and who will at least use his
good endeavour to deserve it." "his good endeavour!" cry western,
"that he will, I warrant un.----Harkee, Allworthy, Iwill bet thee five
pound to a crown we have a boy to-morrow nine month; but prithee
tell I what wut ha! Wut ha Burgundy, Champaigne, or what? for, please
Jupiter, wewill make a night on't." "indeed, sir," say Allworthy, "you
must excuse I; both my nephew and I be engage before I suspect
this near approach of his happiness."--"engage!" quoth the squire,
"never tell me.--I willnot part with thee to-night upon any occasion.
Shalt sup here, please the lord Harry." "you must pardon I, my dear
neighbour!" answer Allworthy; "I have give a solemn promise, and
that you know I never break." "why, prithee, who art engage to?"
cry the squire.----allworthy then inform he, as likewise of the
company.----"odzooker!" answer the squire, "I will go with thee,
and so shall Sophy! for I willnot part with thee to-night; and it would
be barbarous to part Tom and the girl." this offer be presently
embrace by Allworthy, and Sophia consent, have first obtain a
private promise from her father that he would not mention a syllable
concern her marriage.
chapter the last.
in which the history be conclude.
Young Nightingale have be that afternoon, by appointment, to wait on
his father, who receive he much more kindly than he expect. there
likewise he meet his uncle, who be return to town in quest of his
new-married daughter.
this marriage be the lucky incident which could have happen to
the young gentleman; for these brother live in a constant state of
contention about the government of their child, both heartily
despise the method which each other take. each of they therefore now
endeavour, as much as he could, to palliate the offence which his
own child have commit, and to aggravate the match of the other. this
desire of triumph over his brother, add to the many argument
which Allworthy have use, so strongly operate on the old gentleman
that he meet his son with a smile countenance, and actually agree to
sup with he that evening at Mrs Miller's.
as for the other, who really love his daughter with the most
immoderate affection, there be little difficulty in incline he to
a reconciliation. he be no soon inform by his nephew where his
daughter and her husband be, than he declare he would instantly go
to she. and when he arrive there he scarce suffer she to fall upon
her knee before he take she up, and embrace she with a tenderness
which affect all who see he; and in less than a quarter of an hour
be as well reconcile to both she and her husband as if he have
himself join their hand.
in this situation be affair when Mr Allworthy and his company
arrive to complete the happiness of Mrs Miller, who no soon see
Sophia than she guess everything that have happen; and so great be
her friendship to Jones, that it add not a few transport to those
she feel on the happiness of her own daughter.
there have not, I believe, be many instance of a number of people
meet together, where every one be so perfectly happy as in this
company. amongst whom the father of young Nightingale enjoy the
least perfect content; for, notwithstanding his affection for his son,
notwithstanding the authority and the argument of Allworthy, together
with the other motive mention before, he could not so entirely be
satisfied with his son's choice; and, perhaps, the presence of Sophia
herself tend a little to aggravate and heighten his concern, as a
thought now and then suggest itself that his son might have have that
lady, or some other such. not that any of the charm which adorn
either the person or mind of Sophia create the uneasiness; it be the
content of her father's coffer which set his heart a longing. these
be the charm which he could not bear to think his son have
sacrifice to the daughter of Mrs Miller.
the bride be both very pretty woman; but so totally be they
eclipse by the beauty of Sophia, that, have they not be two of the
well-temper girl in the world, it would have raise some envy in
their breast; for neither of their husband could long keep his eye
from Sophia, who sit at the table like a queen receive homage, or,
rather, like a superior be receive adoration from all around she.
but it be an adoration which they give, not which she exact; for
she be as much distinguish by her modesty and affability as by all
her other perfection.
the evening be spend in much true mirth. all be happy, but those
the most who have be most unhappy before. their former suffering and
fear give such a relish to their felicity as even love and fortune,
in their full flow, could not have give without the advantage of
such a comparison. yet, as great joy, especially after a sudden change
and revolution of circumstance, be apt to be silent, and dwell
rather in the heart than on the tongue, Jones and Sophia appear the
least merry of the whole company; which Western observe with great
impatience, often cry out to they, "why dost not talk, boy? why
dost look so grave? Hast lose thy tongue, girl? drink another glass of
wine; sha't drink another glass." and, the more to enliven she, he
would sometimes sing a merry song, which bear some relation to
matrimony and the loss of a maidenhead. Nay, he would have proceed
so far on that topic as to have drive she out of the room, if Mr
Allworthy have not checkt he, sometimes by look, and once or twice by
a "Fie! Mr Western!" he begin, indeed, once to debate the matter, and
assert his right to talk to his own daughter as he think fit; but,
as nobody second he, he be soon reduce to order.
Notwithstanding this little restraint, he be so pleased with the
chearfulness and good-humour of the company, that he insist on their
meeting the next day at his lodging. they all do so; and the lovely
Sophia, who be now in private become a bride too, officiate as the
mistress of the ceremony, or, in the polite phrase, do the honour
of the table. she have that morning give her hand to Jones, in the
chapel at doctors'-common, where Mr Allworthy, Mr Western, and Mrs
Miller, be the only person present.
Sophia have earnestly desire her father that no other of the company,
who be that day to dine with he, should be acquaint with her
marriage. the same secrecy be enjoin to Mrs Miller, and Jones
undertake for Allworthy. this somewhat reconcile the delicacy of
Sophia to the public entertainment which, in compliance with her
father's will, she be oblige to go to, greatly against her own
inclination. in confidence of this secrecy she go through the day
pretty well, till the squire, who be now advanced into the second
bottle, could contain his joy no long, but, fill out a bumper,
drink a health to the bride. the health be immediately pledge by all
present, to the great confusion of our poor blushing Sophia, and the
great concern of Jones upon her account. to say truth, there be not a
person present make wise by this discovery; for Mrs Miller have
whisper it to her daughter, her daughter to her husband, her husband
to his sister, and she to all the rest.
Sophia now take the first opportunity of withdraw with the lady,
and the squire sit in to his cup, in which he be, by degree,
desert by all the company except the uncle of young Nightingale, who
love his bottle as well as Western himself. these two, therefore, sit
stoutly to it during the whole evening, and long after that happy hour
which have surrender the charming Sophia to the eager arm of she
enrapture Jones.
thus, reader, we have at length bring our history to a conclusion,
in which, to our great pleasure, though contrary, perhaps, to thy
expectation, Mr Jones appear to be the happy of all humankind; for
what happiness this world afford equal to the possession of such a
woman as Sophia, I sincerely own I have never yet discover.
as to the other person who have make any considerable figure in this
history, as some may desire to know a little more concern they, we
will proceed, in as few word as possible, to satisfy their curiosity.
allworthy hath never yet be prevail upon to see Blifil, but he
hath yield to the importunity of Jones, back by Sophia, to settle
£200 a-year upon he; to which Jones hath privately add a third.
upon this income he live in one of the northern county, about 200
mile distant from London, and lay up £200 a-year out of it, in order
to purchase a seat in the next parliament from a neighbouring borough,
which he have bargain for with an attourney there. he be also lately
turn Methodist, in hope of marry a very rich widow of that sect,
whose estate lie in that part of the kingdom.
Square die soon after he writ the before-mention letter; and as to
Thwackum, he continue at his vicarage. he hath make many fruitless
attempt to regain the confidence of Allworthy, or to ingratiate
himself with Jones, both of whom he flatter to their face, and
abuse behind their back. but in his stead, Mr Allworthy hath lately
take Mr Abraham Adams into his house, of whom Sophia be grow
immoderately fond, and declare he shall have the tuition of her
child.
Mrs Fitzpatrick be separate from her husband, and retain the little
remain of her fortune. she live in reputation at the polite end of
the town, and be so good an economist, that she spend three time
the income of her fortune, without run into debt. she maintain a
perfect intimacy with the lady of the irish peer; and in act of
friendship to her repay all obligation she owe her husband.
Mrs Western be soon reconcile to her niece Sophia, and hath spend
two month together with she in the country. Lady Bellaston make the
latter a formal visit at her return to town, where she behave to
Jones as a perfect stranger, and, with great civility, wish he joy
on his marriage.
Mr Nightingale hath purchase an estate for his son in the
neighbourhood of Jones, where the young gentleman, his lady, Mrs
Miller, and her little daughter reside, and the most agreeable
intercourse subsist between the two family.
as to those of low account, Mrs Waters return into the country,
have a pension of £60 a-year settle upon she by Mr Allworthy, and be
married to Parson Supple, on whom, at the instance of Sophia, Western
hath bestow a considerable living.
Black George, hear the discovery that have be make, run away, and
be never since hear of; and Jones bestow the money on his family,
but not in equal proportion, for Molly have much the great share.
as for Partridge, Jones hath settle £50 a-year on he; and he hath
again set up a school, in which he meet with much well
encouragement than formerly, and there be now a treaty of marriage on
foot between he and Miss Molly Seagrim, which, through the mediation
of Sophia, be likely to take effect.
we now return to take leave of Mr Jones and Sophia, who, within two
day after their marriage, attend Mr Western and Mr Allworthy into
the country. western hath resign his family seat, and the great
part of his estate, to his son-in-law, and hath retire to a less
house of his in another part of the country, which be well for
hunting. indeed, he be often as a visitant with Mr Jones, who, as well
as his daughter, hath an infinite delight in do everything in their
power to please he. and this desire of theirs be attend with such
success, that the old gentleman declare he be never happy in his
life till now. he hath here a parlour and ante-chamber to himself,
where he get drunk with whom he please: and his daughter be still as
ready as formerly to play to he whenever he desire it; for Jones
hath assure she that, as, next to please she, one of his high
satisfaction be to contribute to the happiness of the old man; so,
the great duty which she express and perform to her father, render
she almost equally dear to he with the love which she bestow on
himself.
Sophia hath already produce he two fine child, a boy and a girl,
of whom the old gentleman be so fond, that he spend much of his time
in the nursery, where he declare the tattling of his little
grand-daughter, who be above a year and a half old, be sweet music
than the fine cry of dog in England.
Allworthy be likewise greatly liberal to Jones on the marriage, and
hath omit no instance of shew his affection to he and his lady,
who love he as a father. whatever in the nature of Jones have a
tendency to vice, have be correct by continual conversation with
this good man, and by his union with the lovely and virtuous Sophia.
he hath also, by reflection on his past folly, acquire a discretion
and prudence very uncommon in one of his lively part.
to conclude, as there be not to be find a worthy man and woman,
than this fond couple, so neither can any be imagine more happy. they
preserve the pure and tender affection for each other, an
affection daily encrease and confirm by mutual endearment and
mutual esteem. nor be their conduct towards their relation and
friend less amiable than towards one another. and such be their
condescension, their indulgence, and their beneficence to those below
they, that there be not a neighbour, a tenant, or a servant, who doth
not most gratefully bless the day when Mr Jones be married to his
Sophia.
_FINIS_.
