PAMELA;
or,
VIRTUE rewarded
letter I
DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
I have great trouble, and some comfort, to acquaint you with. the
trouble be, that my good lady die of the illness I mention to you, and
leave we all much grieve for the loss of she; for she be a dear good
lady, and kind to all we her servant. much I fear, that as I be
take by her ladyship to wait upon her person, I should be quite
destitute again, and force to return to you and my poor mother, who have
enough to do to maintain yourself; and, as my lady's goodness have put
I to write and cast account, and make I a little expert at my needle,
and otherwise qualified above my degree, it be not every family that
could have find a place that your poor Pamela be fit for: but God,
whose graciousness to we we have so often experience at a pinch, put it
into my good lady's heart, on her death-bed, just an hour before she
expire, to recommend to my young master all her servant, one by one;
and when it come to my turn to be recommend, (for I be sob and
cry at her pillow) she could only say, my dear son!--and so break off
a little; and then recover--remember my poor Pamela--and these be
some of her last word! o how my eye run--don't wonder to see the paper
so blot.
well, but God's will must be done!--and so come the comfort, that I
shall not be oblige to return back to be a clog upon my dear parent!
for my master say, I will take care of you all, my good maiden; and for
you, Pamela, (and take I by the hand; yes, he take my hand before they
all,) for my dear mother's sake, I will be a friend to you, and you shall
take care of my linen. God bless he! and pray with I, my dear father
and mother, for a blessing upon he, for he have give mourning and a
year's wage to all my lady's servant; and I have no wage as yet, my
lady have say she should do for I as I deserve, order the
housekeeper to give I mourn with the rest; and give I with his own
hand four golden guineas, and some silver, which be in my old lady's
pocket when she die; and say, if I be a good girl, and faithful and
diligent, he would be a friend to I, for his mother's sake. and so I
send you these four guineas for your comfort; for Providence will not let
I want: and so you may pay some old debt with part, and keep the other
part to comfort you both. if I get more, I be sure it be my duty, and it
shall be my care, to love and cherish you both; for you have love and
cherish I, when I could do nothing for myself. I send they by John,
our footman, who go your way: but he do not know what he carry;
because I seal they up in one of the little pill-box, which my lady
have, wrapt close in paper, that they maynot chink; and be sure donot open
it before he.
I know, dear father and mother, I must give you both grief and pleasure;
and so I will only say, pray for your Pamela; who will ever be
your most dutiful DAUGHTER.
I have be scar out of my sens; for just now, as I be fold up
this letter in my late lady's dressing-room, in come my young master!
good sir! how be I frightened! I go to hide the letter in my bosom;
and he, see I tremble, say, smile, to whom have you be write,
pamela?--i say, in my confusion, pray your honour forgive me!--only to
my father and mother. he say, well then, let I see how you be come on
in your writing! o how ashamed I was!--He take it, without say more,
and read it quite through, and then give it I again;--and I say, pray
your honour forgive me!--Yet I know not for what: for he be always
dutiful to his parent; and why should he be angry that I be so to mine?
and indeed he be not angry; for he take I by the hand, and say, you
be a good girl, Pamela, to be kind to your aged father and mother. I be
not angry with you for write such innocent matter as these: though you
ought to be wary what tale you send out of a family.--Be faithful and
diligent; and do as you should do, and I like you the well for this.
and then he say, why, Pamela, you write a very pretty hand, and spell
tolerably too. I see my good mother's care in your learning have not be
throw away upon you. she use to say you love reading; you may look
into any of her book, to improve yourself, so you take care of they. to
be sure I do nothing but courtesy and cry, and be all in confusion, at
his goodness. indeed he be the good of gentleman, I think! but I be
make another long letter: so will only add to it, that I shall ever be
your dutiful daughter, PAMELA ANDREWS.
LETTER II
[in answer to the preceding.]
DEAR PAMELA,
your letter be indeed a great trouble, and some comfort, to I and your
poor mother. we be troubled, to be sure, for your good lady's death,
who take such care of you, and give you learn, and, for three or four
year past, have always be give you clothe and linen, and every thing
that a gentlewoman need not be ashamed to appear in. but our chief
trouble be, and indeed a very great one, for fear you should be bring
to anything dishonest or wicked, by be set so above yourself. every
body talk how you have come on, and what a genteel girl you be; and
some say you be very pretty; and, indeed, six month since, when I see
you last, I should have think so myself, if you be not our child. but
what avail all this, if you be to be ruin and undone!--indeed, my
dear Pamela, we begin to be in great fear for you; for what signify all
the rich in the world, with a bad conscience, and to be dishonest! we
be, 'tis true, very poor, and find it hard enough to live; though once,
as you know, it be well with we. but we would soon live upon the
water, and, if possible, the clay of the ditch I contentedly dig, than
live well at the price of our child's ruin.
I hope the good 'squire have no design: but when he have give you so much
money, and speak so kindly to you, and praise your come on; and, oh,
that fatal word! that he would be kind to you, if you would do as you
should do, almost kill we with fear.
I have speak to good old widow Mumford about it, who, you know, have
formerly live in good family; and she put we in some comfort; for she
say it be not unusual, when a lady die, to give what she have about her
person to her waiting-maid, and to such as sit up with she in her
illness. but, then, why should he smile so kindly upon you? why should
he take such a poor girl as you by the hand, as your letter say he have
do twice? why should he stoop to read your letter to we; and commend
your writing and spelling? and why should he give you leave to read his
mother's books?--indeed, indeed, my dear child, our heart ache for
you; and then you seem so full of joy at his goodness, so take with his
kind expression, (which, truly, be very great favour, if he mean
well) that we fear--yes, my dear child, we fear--you should be too
grateful,--and reward he with that jewel, your virtue, which no rich,
nor favour, nor any thing in this life, can make up to you.
I, too, have write a long letter, but will say one thing more; and that
be, that, in the midst of our poverty and misfortune, we have trust in
God's goodness, and be honest, and doubt not to be happy hereafter, if
we continue to be good, though our lot be hard here; but the loss of our
dear child's virtue would be a grief that we could not bear, and would
bring our grey hair to the grave at once.
if, then, you love we, if you wish for God's blessing, and your own
future happiness, we both charge you to stand upon your guard: and, if
you find the least attempt make upon your virtue, be sure you leave every
thing behind you, and come away to we; for we have rather see you all
cover with rag, and even follow you to the churchyard, than have it
say, a child of ours prefer any worldly convenience to her virtue.
we accept kindly your dutiful present; but, till we be out of pain,
cannot make use of it, for fear we should partake of the price of our
poor daughter's shame: so have lay it up in a rag among the thatch, over
the window, for a while, lest we should be rob. with our blessing,
and our hearty prayer for you, we remain,
your careful, but love Father and Mother,
JOHN and ELIZABETH ANDREWS.
LETTER III
DEAR FATHER,
I must need say, your letter have fill I with trouble, for it have make
my heart, which be overflow with gratitude for my master's goodness,
suspicious and fearful: and yet I hope I shall never find he to act
unworthy of his character; for what could he get by ruin such a poor
young creature as I? but that which give I most trouble be, that you
seem to mistrust the honesty of your child. no, my dear father and
mother, be assure, that, by God's grace, I never will do any thing that
shall bring your grey hair with sorrow to the grave. I will die a
thousand death, rather than be dishonest any way. of that be assure,
and set your heart at rest; for although I have live above myself for
some time past, yet I can be content with rag and poverty, and bread and
water, and will embrace they, rather than forfeit my good name, let who
will be the tempter. and of this pray rest satisfied, and think well
of your dutiful daughter till death.
my master continue to be very affable to I. as yet I see no cause to
fear any thing. Mrs. Jervis, the housekeeper, too, be very civil to I,
and I have the love of every body. sure they cannot all have design
against I, because they be civil! I hope I shall always behave so as
to be respect by every one; and that nobody would do I more hurt than
I be sure I would do they. our John so often go your way, that I will
always get he to call, that you may hear from I, either by writing,
(for it bring my hand in,) or by word of mouth.
LETTER IV
DEAR MOTHER,
for the last be to my father, in answer to his letter; and so I will now
write to you; though I have nothing to say, but what will make I look
more like a vain hussy, than any thing else: however, I hope I shallnot be
so proud as to forget myself. yet there be a secret pleasure one have to
hear one's self praise. you must know, then, that my Lady Davers, who,
I need not tell you, be my master's sister, have be a month at our
house, and have take great notice of I, and give I good advice to keep
myself to myself. she tell I I be a pretty wench, and that every body
give I a very good character, and love I; and bid I take care to keep
the fellow at a distance; and say, that I might do, and be more value
for it, even by themselves.
but what please I much be, what I be go to tell you; for at table,
as Mrs. Jervis say, my master and her ladyship talk of I, she tell
he she think I the prettiest wench she ever see in her life; and that
I be too pretty to live in a bachelor's house; since no lady he might
marry would care to continue I with she. he say, I be vastly
improve, and have a good share of prudence, and sense above my year; and
that it would be pity, that what be my merit should be my misfortune.--
no, say my good lady, Pamela shall come and live with I, I think. he
say, with all his heart; he should be glad to have I so well provide
for. well, say she, Iwill consult my lord about it. she ask how old I
be; and Mrs. Jervis say, I be fifteen last February. o! say she, if
the wench (for so she call all us maiden servant) take care of
herself, shewill improve yet more and more, as well in her person as mind.
now, my dear father and mother, though this may look too vain to be
repeat by I; yet be you not rejoice, as well as I, to see my master
so willing to part with me?--this shews that he have nothing bad in his
heart. but John be just go away; and so I have only to say, that I
be, and will always be,
your honest as well as dutiful DAUGHTER.
pray make use of the money. you may now do it safely.
LETTER V
MY DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
John be to go your way, I be willing to write, because he be so
willing to carry any thing for I. he say it do he good at his heart
to see you both, and to hear you talk. he say you be both so sensible,
and so honest, that he always learn something from you to the purpose.
it be a thousand pity, he say, that such worthy heart should not have
well luck in the world! and wonder, that you, my father, who be so
well able to teach, and write so good a hand, succeed no well in the
school you attempt to set up; but be force to go to such hard labour.
but this be more pride to I, that I be come of such honest parent, than
if I have be bear a lady.
I hear nothing yet of go to Lady Davers; and I be very easy at present
here: for Mrs. Jervis use I as if I be her own daughter, and be a
very good woman, and make my master's interest her own. she be always
give I good counsel, and I love she next to you two, I think, good of
any body. she keep so good rule and order, she be mightily respect by
we all; and take delight to hear I read to she; and all she love to
hear read, be good book, which we read whenever we be alone; so that I
think I be at home with you. she hear one of our man, Harry, who be no
well than he should be, speak freely to I; I think he call I his
pretty Pamela, and take hold of I, as if he would have kiss I; for
which, you may be sure, I be very angry: and she take he to task, and
be as angry at he as could be; and tell I she be very well pleased to
see my prudence and modesty, and that I keep all the fellow at a
distance. and indeed I be sure I be not proud, and carry it civilly to
every body; but yet, methink, I cannot bear to be look upon by these
man-servant, for they seem as if they would look one through; and, as I
generally breakfast, dine, and sup, with Mrs. Jervis, (so good she be to
I,) I be very easy that I have so little to say to they. not but they
be civil to I in the main, for Mrs. Jervis's sake, who they see love
I; and they stand in awe of she, know she to be a gentlewoman bear,
though she have have misfortune. I be go on again with a long letter;
for I love writing, and shall tire you. but, when I begin, I only
intend to say, that I be quite fearless of any danger now: and, indeed,
cannot but wonder at myself, (though your caution to I be your watchful
love,) that I should be so foolish as to be so uneasy as I have be: for
I be sure my master would not demean himself, so as to think upon such a
poor girl as I, for my harm. for such a thing would ruin his credit, as
well as mine, you know: who, to be sure, may expect one of the good
lady in the land. so no more at present, but that I be
your ever dutiful DAUGHTER.
LETTER VI
DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
my master have be very kind since my last; for he have give I a suit of
my late lady's clothe, and half a dozen of her shift, and six fine
handkerchief, and three of her cambric apron, and four holland one.
the clothe be fine silk, and too rich and too good for I, to be sure.
I wish it be no affront to he to make money of they, and send it to
you: it would do I more good.
you will be full of fear, I warrant now, of some design upon I, till I
tell you, that he be with Mrs. Jervis when he give they I; and he give
she a mort of good thing, at the same time, and bid she wear they in
remembrance of her good friend, my lady, his mother. and when he give I
these fine thing, he say, these, Pamela, be for you; have they make
fit for you, when your mourning be lay by, and wear they for your good
mistress's sake. Mrs. Jervis give you a very good word; and I would
have you continue to behave as prudently as you have do hitherto, and
every body will be your friend.
I be so surprised at his goodness, that I could not tell what to say. I
courtesie to he, and to Mrs. Jervis for her good word; and say, I
wish I might be deserve of his favour, and her kindness: and nothing
should be want in I, to the good of my knowledge.
o how amiable a thing be do good!--it be all I envy great folk for.
I always think my young master a fine gentleman, as every body say he
be: but he give these good thing to we both with such a graciousness, as
I think he look like an angel.
Mrs. Jervis say, he ask she, if I keep the man at a distance? for, he
say, I be very pretty; and to be draw in to have any of they, might be
my ruin, and make I poor and miserable betime. she never be want to
give I a good word, and take occasion to lanch out in my praise, she
say. but I hope she have say no more than I shall try to deserve,
though I maynot at present. I be sure I will always love she, next to
you and my dear mother. so I rest
your ever dutiful DAUGHTER.
LETTER VII
DEAR FATHER,
since my last, my master give I more fine thing. he call I up to my
late lady's closet, and, pull out her drawer, he give I two suit of
fine Flanders lace headclothe, three pair of fine silk shoe, two
hardly the bad, and just fit for I, (for my lady have a very little
foot,) and the other with wrought silver buckle in they; and several
riband and top-knot of all colour; four pair of white fine cotton
stocking, and three pair of fine silk one; and two pair of rich stay.
I be quite astonish, and unable to speak for a while; but yet I be
inwardly ashamed to take the stocking; for Mrs. Jervis be not there: if
she have, it would have be nothing. I believe I receive they very
awkwardly; for he smile at my awkwardness, and say, donot blush,
Pamela: dost think I donot know pretty maid should wear shoe and
stocking?
I be so confound at these word, you might have beat I down with a
feather. for you must think, there be no answer to be make to this: so,
like a fool, I be ready to cry; and go away courtesye and blushing,
I be sure, up to the ear; for, though there be no harm in what he say,
yet I do not know how to take it. but I go and tell all to Mrs.
Jervis, who say, God put it into his heart to be good to I; and I must
double my diligence. it look to she, she say, as if he would fit I
in dress for a waiting-maid's place on Lady Davers's own person.
but still your kind fatherly caution come into my head, and make all
these gift nothing near to I what they would have be. but yet, I
hope, there be no reason; for what good could it do to he to harm such a
simple maiden as I? besides, to be sure no lady would look upon he, if
he should so disgrace himself. so I will make myself easy; and, indeed,
I should never have be otherwise, if you have not put it into my head;
for my good, I know very well. but, may be, without these uneasiness
to mingle with these benefit, I might be too much puff up: so I will
conclude, all that happen be for our good; and God bless you, my dear
father and mother; and I know you constantly pray for a blessing upon I;
who be, and shall always be,
your dutiful daughter.
LETTER viii
DEAR PAMELA,
I cannot but renew my caution on your master's kindness, and his free
expression to you about the stocking. yet there may not be, and I hope
there be not, any thing in it. but when I reflect, that there possibly
may, and that if there should, no less depend upon it than my child's
everlaste happiness in this world and the next; it be enough to make
one fearful for you. arm yourself, my dear child, for the bad; and
resolve to lose your life soon than your virtue. what though the
doubt I fill you with, lessen the pleasure you would have have in your
master's kindness; yet what signify the delight that arise from a few
paltry fine clothe, in comparison with a good conscience?
these be, indeed, very great favour that he heap upon you, but so much
the more to be suspect; and when you say he look so amiably, and like
an angel, how afraid I be, that they should make too great an impression
upon you! for, though you be bless with sense and prudence above your
year, yet I tremble to think, what a sad hazard a poor maiden of little
more than fifteen year of age stand against the temptation of this
world, and a design young gentleman, if he should prove so, who have so
much power to oblige, and have a kind of authority to command, as your
master.
I charge you, my dear child, on both our blessing, poor as we be, to be
on your guard; there can be no harm in that. and since Mrs. Jervis be so
good a gentlewoman, and so kind to you, I be the easy a great deal, and
so be your mother; and we hope you will hide nothing from she, and take
her counsel in every thing. so, with our blessing, and assure prayer
for you, more than for ourselves, we remain,
your love FATHER and MOTHER.
be sure donot let people's tell you, you be pretty, puff you up; for
you do not make yourself, and so can have no praise due to you for it.
it be virtue and goodness only, that make the true beauty. remember
that, Pamela.
LETTER ix
DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
I be sorry to write you word, that the hope I have of go to wait on
Lady Davers, be quite over. my lady would have have I; but my master,
as I hear by the by, would not consent to it. he say her nephew might
be take with I, and I might draw he in, or be draw in by he; and he
think, as his mother love I, and commit I to his care, he ought
to continue I with he; and Mrs. Jervis would be a mother to I. Mrs.
Jervis tell I the lady shake her head, and say, ah! brother! and that
be all. and as you have make I fearful by your caution, my heart at
time misgive I. but I say nothing yet of your caution, or my own
uneasiness, to Mrs. Jervis; not that I mistrust she, but for fear she
should think I presumptuous, and vain and conceite, to have any fear
about the matter, from the great distance between such a gentleman, and
so poor a girl. but yet Mrs. Jervis seem to build something upon Lady
Davers's shake her head, and say, ah! brother! and no more. God, I
hope, will give I his grace: and so I will not, if I can help it, make
myself too uneasy; for I hope there be no occasion. but every little
matter that happen, I will acquaint you with, that you may continue to
I your good advice, and pray for
your sad-hearted pamela.
LETTER x
DEAR MOTHER,
you and my good father may wonder you have not have a letter from I in so
many week; but a sad, sad scene, have be the occasion of it. for to be
sure, now it be too plain, that all your caution be well ground. O
my dear mother! I be miserable, truly miserable!--but yet, donot be
frightened, I be honest!--God, of his goodness, keep I so!
o this angel of a master! this fine gentleman! this gracious benefactor
to your poor Pamela! who be to take care of I at the prayer of his good
die mother; who be so apprehensive for I, lest I should be draw in
by Lord Davers's nephew, that he would not let I go to Lady Davers's:
this very gentleman (yes, I must call he gentleman, though he have fall
from the merit of that title) have degrade himself to offer freedom to
his poor servant! he have now shew himself in his true colour; and, to
I, nothing appear so black, and so frightful.
I have not be idle; but have writ from time to time, how he, by sly mean
degree, expose his wicked view; but somebody steal my letter, and I
know not what have become of it. it be a very long one. I fear, he that
be mean enough to do bad thing, in one respect, do not stick at this.
but be it as it will, all the use he can make of it will be, that he may
be ashamed of his part; I not of mine: for he will see I be resolve to
be virtuous, and glory in the honesty of my poor parent.
I will tell you all, the next opportunity; for I be watch very
narrowly; and he say to Mrs. Jervis, this girl be always scribble; I
think she may be well employ. and yet I work all hour with my
needle, upon his linen, and the fine linen of the family; and be,
besides, about flower he a waistcoat.--But, oh! my heart's break
almost; for what be I likely to have for my reward, but shame and
disgrace, or else ill word, and hard treatment! Iwill tell you all soon,
and hope I shall find my long letter.
your most afflicted DAUGHTER.
May-be, I he and he too much: but it be his own fault if I do. for why
do he lose all his dignity with I?
LETTER XI
DEAR MOTHER,
well, I cannot find my letter, and so Iwill try to recollect it all, and be
as brief as I can. all go well enough in the main for some time after
my letter but one. at last, I see some reason to suspect; for he would
look upon I, whenever he see I, in such a manner, as shew not well;
and one day he come to I, as I be in the summer-house in the little
garden, at work with my needle, and Mrs. Jervis be just go from I;
and I would have go out, but he say, no donot go, Pamela; I have
something to say to you; and you always fly I when I come near you, as
if you be afraid of I.
I be much out of countenance, you may well think; but say, at last, it
do not become your good servant to stay in your presence, sir, without
your business require it; and I hope I shall always know my place.
well, say he, my business do require it sometimes; and I have a mind
you should stay to hear what I have to say to you.
I stand still confound, and begin to tremble, and the more when he take
I by the hand; for now no soul be near we.
my sister Davers, say he, (and seem, I think, to be as much at a
loss for word as I,) would have have you live with she; but she would not
do for you what I be resolve to do, if you continue faithful and
oblige. what say'st thou, my girl? say he, with some eagerness;
had'st thou not rather stay with I, than go to my sister Davers? he
look so, as fill I with affrightment; I donot know how; wildly, I
think.
I say, when I could speak, your honour will forgive I; but as you have
no lady for I to wait upon, and my good lady have be now dead this
twelvemonth, I have rather, if it would not displease you, wait upon Lady
Davers, because--
I be proceed, and he say, a little hastily--because you be a little
fool, and know not whatbe good for yourself. I tell you I will make a
gentlewoman of you, if you be oblige, and donot stand in your own
light; and so say, he put his arm about I, and kiss I!
now, you will say, all his wickedness appear plainly. I struggle and
tremble, and be so benumb with terror, that I sink down, not in a
fit, and yet not myself; and I find myself in his arm, quite void of
strength; and he kiss I two or three time, with frightful eagerness.
--at last I burst from he, and be get out of the summer-house; but
he hold I back, and shut the door.
I would have give my life for a farthing. and he say, Iwill do you no
harm, Pamela; donot be afraid of I. I say, I willnot stay. you willnot,
hussy! say he: do you know whom you speak to? I lose all fear, and all
respect, and say, yes, I do, sir, too well!--well may I forget that I be
your servant, when you forget what belong to a master.
I sob and cry most sadly. what a foolish hussy you be! say he:
have I do you any harm? yes, sir, say I, the great harm in the
world: you have teach I to forget myself and what belong to I, and
have lessen the distance that fortune have make between we, by demean
yourself, to be so free to a poor servant. yet, sir, I will be bold to
say, I be honest, though poor: and if you be a prince, I would not be
otherwise.
he be angry, and say, who would have you otherwise, you foolish slut!
cease your blubbering. I own I have demean myself; but it be only to
try you. if you can keep this matter secret, youwill give I the well
opinion of your prudence; and herebe something, say he, put some
gold in my hand, to make you amend for the fright I put you in. go,
take a walk in the garden, and donot go in till your blubbering be over:
and I charge you say nothing of what be past, and all shall be well, and
Iwill forgive you.
I willnot take the money, indeed, sir, say I, poor as I be I willnot take
it. for, to say truth, I think it look like take earnest, and so I
put it upon the bench; and as he seem vex and confuse at what he have
do, I take the opportunity to open the door, and go out of the
summer-house.
he call to I, and say, be secret; I charge you, Pamela; and donot go
in yet, as I tell you.
o how poor and mean must those action be, and how little must they make
the good of gentleman look, when they offer such thing as be unworthy
of themselves, and put it into the power of their inferior to be great
than they!
I take a turn or two in the garden, but in sight of the house, for fear
of the bad; and breathe upon my hand to dry my eye, because I would
not be too disobedient. my next shall tell you more.
pray for I, my dear father and mother: and donot be angry I have not yet
run away from this house, so late my comfort and delight, but now my
terror and anguish. I be force to break off hastily.
your dutiful and honest daughter.
LETTER XII
DEAR MOTHER,
well, I will now proceed with my sad story. and so, after I have dry my
eye, I go in, and begin to ruminate with myself what I have good to do.
sometimes I think I would leave the house and go to the next town, and
wait an opportunity to get to you; but then I be at a loss to resolve
whether to take away the thing he have give I or no, and how to take
they away: sometimes I think to leave they behind I, and only go with
the clothe on my back, but then I have two mile and a half, and a byway,
to the town; and be pretty well dressed, I might come to some harm,
almost as bad as what I would run away from; and then may-be, think I,
it will be report, I have steal something, and so be force to run
away; and to carry a bad name back with I to my dear parent, would be a
sad thing indeed!--O how I wish for my grey russet again, and my poor
honest dress, with which you fit I out, (and hard enough too it be
for you to do it!) for go to this place, when I be not twelve year
old, in my good lady's day! sometimes I think of tell Mrs. Jervis,
and take her advice, and only fear his command to be secret; for,
think I, he may be ashamed of his action, and never attempt the like
again: and as poor Mrs. Jervis depend upon he, through misfortune,
that have attend she, I think it would be a sad thing to bring his
displeasure upon she for my sake.
in this quandary, now consider, now cry, and not know what to
do, I pass the time in my chamber till evening; when desire to be
excuse go to supper, Mrs. Jervis come up to I, and say, why must I
sup without you, Pamela? Come, I see you be trouble at something; tell
I what be the matter.
I beg I might be permit to be with she on night; for I be afraid
of spirit, and they would not hurt such a good person as she. that be
a silly excuse, she say; for why be not you afraid of spirit before?--
(indeed I do not think of that.) but you shall be my bed-fellow with
all my heart, add she, let your reason be what it will; only come down
to supper. I beg to be excuse; for, say I, I have be cry so,
that it will be take notice of by my fellow-servant; and I will hide
nothing from you, Mrs. Jervis, when we be alone.
she be so good to indulge I; but make haste to come up to bed; and tell
the servant, that I should be with she, because she could not rest well,
and would get I to read she to sleep; for she know I love reading, she
say.
when we be alone, I tell she all that have pass; for I think, though
he have bid I not, yet if he should come to know I have tell, it would be
no worse; for to keep a secret of such a nature, would be, as I
apprehend, to deprive myself of the good advice which I never want
more; and might encourage he to think I do not resent it as I ought,
and would keep bad secret, and so make he do bad by I. be I
right, my dear mother?
Mrs. Jervis could not help mingle tear with my tear; for I cry all
the time I be tell she the story, and beg she to advise I what to
do; and I shew she my dear father's two letter, and she praise the
honesty and enditing of they, and say please thing to I of you both.
but she beg I would not think of leave my service; for, say she, in
all likelihood, you behave so virtuously, that he will be ashamed of
what he have do, and never offer the like to you again: though, my dear
Pamela, say she, I fear more for your prettiness than for anything else;
because the good man in the land might love you: so she be pleased to
say. she wish it be in her power to live independent; then she would
take a little private house, and I should live with she like her
daughter.
and so, as you order I to take her advice, I resolve to tarry to see
how thing go, except he be to turn I away; although, in your first
letter, you order I to come away the moment I have any reason to be
apprehensive. so, dear father and mother, it be not disobedience, I
hope, that I stay; for I could not expect a blessing, or the good fruit
of your prayer for I, if I be disobedient.
all the next day I be very sad, and begin my long letter. he see I
writing, and say (as I mention) to Mrs. Jervis, that girl be always
scribble; methink she might find something else to do, or to that
purpose. and when I have finish my letter, I put it under the toilet in
my late lady's dressing-room, whither nobody come but myself and Mrs.
Jervis, besides my master; but when I come up again to seal it, to my
great concern, it be go; and Mrs. Jervis know nothing of it; and
nobody know of my master's have be near the place in the time; so I
have be sadly trouble about it: but Mrs. Jervis, as well as I, think
he have it, some how or other; and he appear cross and angry, and seem
to shun I, as much as he say I do he. it have well be so than
bad!
but he have order Mrs. Jervis to bid I not pass so much time in
writing; which be a poor matter for such a gentleman as he to take notice
of, as I be not idle other way, if he do not resent what he think I
write upon. and this have no very good look.
but I be a good deal easy since I lie with Mrs. Jervis; though, after
all, the fear I live in on one side, and his frowning and displeasure at
what I do on the other, make I more miserable than enough.
o that I have never leave my little bed in the loft, to be thus expose to
temptation on one hand, or disgust on the other! how happy be I
awhile ago! how contrary now!--pity and pray for
your afflicted pamela.
LETTER XIII
my dearest child,
our heart bleed for your distress, and the temptation you be expose
to. you have our hourly prayer; and we would have you flee this evil
great house and man, if you find he renew his attempt. you ought to
have do it at first, have you not have Mrs. Jervis to advise with. we
can find no fault in your conduct hitherto: but it make our heart ache
for fear of the bad. o my child! temptation be sore things,--but
yet, without they, we know not ourselves, nor what we be able to do.
your danger be very great; for you have rich, youth, and a fine
gentleman, as the world reckon he, to withstand; but how great will be
your honour to withstand they! and when we consider your past conduct,
and your virtuous education, and that you have be breed to be more
ashamed of dishonesty than poverty, we trust in God, that he will enable
you to overcome. yet, as we cannot see but your life must be a burthen to
you, through the great apprehension always upon you; and that it may be
presumptuous to trust too much to our own strength; and that you be but
very young; and the devil may put it into his heart to use some
stratagem, of which great man be full, to decoy you: I think you have
well come home to share our poverty with safety, than live with so much
discontent in a plenty, that itself may be dangerous. God direct you for
the good! while you have Mrs. Jervis for an adviser and bed-fellow,
(and, o my dear child! that be prudently do of you,) we be easy
than we should be; and so commit you to the divine protection, remain
your truly loving, but careful,
FATHER and MOTHER.
LETTER XIV
DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
Mrs. Jervis and I have live very comfortably together for this fortnight
past; for my master be all that time at his Lincolnshire estate, and at
his sister's, the Lady Davers. but he come home yesterday. he have some
talk with Mrs. Jervis soon after, and mostly about I. he say to she,
it seem, well, Mrs. Jervis, I know Pamela have your good word; but do you
think she of any use in the family? she tell I she be surprised at the
question, but say, that I be one of the most virtuous and industrious
young creature that ever she know. why that word virtuous, say he, I
pray you? be there any reason to suppose she otherwise? or have any
body take it into his head to try her?--i wonder, sir, say she, you ask
such a question! who dare offer any thing to she in such an orderly and
well-govern house as your, and under a master of so good a character
for virtue and honour? your servant, Mrs. Jervis, say he, for your good
opinion: but pray, if any body do, do you think Pamela would let you
know it? why, sir, say she, she be a poor innocent young creature, and
I believe have so much confidence in I, that she would take my advice as
soon as she would her mother's. innocent! again, and virtuous, I
warrant! well, Mrs. Jervis, you abound with your epithet; but I take
she to be an artful young baggage; and have I a young handsome butler or
steward, shewould soon make her market of one of they, if she think it
worth while to snap at he for a husband. Alack-a-day, sir, say she, it
be early day with Pamela; and she do not yet think of a husband, I
dare say: and your steward and butler be both man in year, and think
nothing of the matter. no, say he, if they be young, theywould have
more wit than to think of such a girl; Iwill tell you my mind of she, Mrs.
Jervis: I donot think this same favourite of yours so very artless a girl
as you imagine. I be not to dispute with your honour, say Mrs. Jervis;
but I dare say, if the man will let she alone, shewill never trouble
herself about they. why, Mrs. Jervis, say he, be there any man that
will not let she alone, that you know of? no, indeed, sir, say she; she
keep herself so much to herself, and yet behave so prudently, that they
all esteem she, and shew she as great a respect as if she be a
gentlewoman bear.
ay, say he, thatbe her art, that I be speak of: but, let I tell
you, the girl have vanity and conceit, and pride too, or I be mistaken;
and, perhaps, I could give you an instance of it. Sir, say she, you can
see far than such a poor silly woman as I be; but I never see any
thing but innocence in she--and virtue too, Iwill warrant ye! say he.
but suppose I could give you an instance, where she have talk a little
too freely of the kindness that have be shew she from a certain
quarter; and have have the vanity to impute a few kind word, utter in
mere compassion to her youth and circumstance, into a design upon she,
and even dare to make free with name that she ought never to mention
but with reverence and gratitude; what would you say to that?--say, sir!
say she, I cannot tell what to say. but I hope Pamela incapable of such
ingratitude.
well, no more of this silly girl, say he; you may only advise she, as
you be her friend, not to give herself too much licence upon the favour
she meet with; and if she stay here, that she will not write the
affair of my family purely for an exercise to her pen, and her
invention. I tell you she be a subtle, artful gipsy, and time will shew
it you.
be ever the like heard, my dear father and mother? it be plain he do
not expect to meet with such a repulse, and mistrust that I have tell
Mrs. Jervis, and have my long letter too, that I intend for you; and so
be vex to the heart. but I cannot help it. I have well be think
artful and subtle, than be so, in his sense; and, as light as he make of
the word virtue and innocence in I, he would have make a less angry
construction, have I less deserve that he should do so; for then, may be,
my crime should have be my virtue with he naughty gentleman as he be!
I will soon write again; but must now end with say, that I be, and
shall always be, your honest daughter.
LETTER XV
DEAR MOTHER,
I break off abruptly my last letter; for I fear he be come; and so
it happen. I put the letter in my bosom, and take up my work, which
lie by I; but I have so little of the artful, as he call it, that I
look as confuse as if I have be do some great harm.
sit still, Pamela, say he, mind your work, for all me.--you donot tell
I I be welcome home, after my journey to Lincolnshire. it would be
hard, sir, say I, if you be not always welcome to your honour's own
house.
I would have go; but he say, donot run away, I tell you. I have a
word or two to say to you. good sir, how my heart go pit-a-pat! when
I be a little kind to you, say he, in the summer-house, and you carry
yourself so foolishly upon it, as if I have intend to do you great harm,
do I not tell you you should take no notice of what pass to any
creature? and yet you have make a common talk of the matter, not
consider either my reputation, or your own.--I make a common talk of
it, sir! say I: I have nobody to talk to, hardly.
he interrupt I, and say, hardly! you little equivocator! what do you
mean by hardly? let I ask you, have not you tell Mrs. Jervis for one?
pray your honour, say I, all in agitation, let I go down; for it be not
for I to hold an argument with your honour. Equivocator, again! say
he, and take my hand, what do you talk of an argument? be it hold an
argument with I to answer a plain question? answer I what I ask. o,
good sir, say I, let I beg you will not urge I far, for fear I
forget myself again, and be saucy.
answer I then, I bid you, say he, have you not tell Mrs. Jervis? it
will be saucy in you if you donot answer I directly to what I ask. Sir,
say I, and fain would have pull my hand away, perhaps I should be for
answer you by another question, and that would not become I. what be
it you would say? reply he; speak out.
then, sir, say I, why should your honour be so angry I should tell Mrs.
Jervis, or any body else, what pass, if you intend no harm?
well say, pretty innocent and artless! as Mrs. Jervis call you, say
he; and be it thus you taunt and retort upon I, insolent as you be!
but still I will be answer directly to my question. why then, sir,
say I, I will not tell a lie for the world: I do tell Mrs. Jervis; for
my heart be almost break; but I open not my mouth to any other. very
well, boldface, say he, and equivocator again! you do not open your
mouth to any other; but do not you write to some other? why, now, and
please your honour, say I, (for I be quite courageous just then,) you
could not have ask I this question, if you have not take from I my
letter to my father and mother, in which I own I have break my mind
freely to they, and ask their advice, and pour forth my grief!
and so I be to be expose, be I, say he, in my own house, and out of my
house, to the whole world, by such a sauce-box as you? no, good sir,
say I, and I hope your honour willnot be angry with I; it be not I that
expose you, if I say nothing but the truth. so, taunt again!
Assurance as you be! say he: I will not be thus talk to!
Pray, sir, say I, of whom can a poor girl take advice, if it must not be
of her father and mother, and such a good woman as Mrs. Jervis, who, for
her sex-sake, should give it I when ask? Insolence! say he, and
stamp with his foot, be I to be question thus by such a one as you?
I fall down on my knee, and say, for Heaven's sake, your honour, pity a
poor creature, that know nothing of her duty, but how to cherish her
virtue and good name: I have nothing else to trust to: and, though poor
and friendless here, yet I have always be teach to value honesty above
my life. here's ado with your honesty, say he, foolish girl! be it not
one part of honesty to be dutiful and grateful to your master, do you
think? indeed, sir, say I, it be impossible I should be ungrateful to
your honour, or disobedient, or deserve the name of bold-face or
insolent, which you call I, but when your command be contrary to that
first duty which shall ever be the principle of my life!
he seem to be move, and rise up, and walk into the great chamber two
or three turn, leave I on my knee; and I throw my apron over my
face, and lay my head on a chair, and cry as if my heart would break,
have no power to stir.
at last he come in again, but, alas! with mischief in his heart! and
raise I up, he say, Rise, Pamela, rise; you be your own enemy. your
perverse folly will be your ruin: I tell you this, that I be very much
displeased with the freedom you have take with my name to my
housekeeper, as also to your father and mother; and you may as well have
real cause to take these freedom with I, as to make my name suffer for
imaginary one. and say so, he offer to take I on his knee, with
some force. o how I be terrify! I say, like as I have read in a book
a night or two before, Angels and saint, and all the host of heaven,
defend I! and may I never survive one moment that fatal one in which I
shall forfeit my innocence! pretty fool! say he, how will you forfeit
your innocence, if you be oblige to yield to a force you cannot
withstand? be easy, say he; for let the bad happen that can, you will
have the merit, and I the blame; and it will be a good subject for
letter to your father and mother, and a tale into the bargain for Mrs.
Jervis.
he by force kiss my neck and lip; and say, whoever blame Lucretia?
all the shame lie on the ravisher only and I be content to take all the
blame upon I, as I have already bear too great a share for what I have
not deserve.
may I, say I, Lucretia like, justify myself with my death, if I be use
barbarously! o my good girl! say he, tauntingly, you be well read, I
see; and we shall make out between we, before we have do, a pretty
story in romance, I warrant ye.
he then put his hand in my bosom, and indignation give I double
strength, and I get loose from he by a sudden spring, and run out of the
room! and the next chamber be open, I make shift to get into it, and
throw to the door, and it lock after I; but he follow I so close,
he get hold of my gown, and tear a piece off, which hang without the
door; for the key be on the inside.
I just remember I get into the room; for I know nothing far of the
matter till afterwards; for I fall into a fit with my terror, and there I
lay, till he, as I suppose, look through the key-hole, spy I upon
the floor, stretch out at length, on my face; and then he call Mrs.
Jervis to I, who, by his assistance, burst open the door, he go
away, see I come to myself; and bid she say nothing of the matter,
if she be wise.
Poor Mrs. Jervis think it be bad, and cry over I like as if she
be my mother; and I be two hour before I come to myself; and just as I
get a little up on my foot, he come in, I faint away again with the
terror; and so he withdraw: but he staid in the next room to let nobody
come near we, that his foul proceeding might not be know.
Mrs. Jervis give I her smell-bottle, and have cut my lace, and set I
in a great chair, and he call she to he: how be the girl? say he: I
never see such a fool in my life. I do nothing at all to she. Mrs.
Jervis could not speak for cry. so he say, she have tell you, it
seem, that I be kind to she in the summer-house, though Iwill assure
you, I be quite innocent then as well as now; and I desire you to keep
this matter to yourself, and let I not be name in it.
O, sir, say she, for your honour's sake, and for Christ's sake!--But he
would not hear she, and say--for your own sake, I tell you, Mrs. Jervis,
say not a word more. I have do she no harm. and I willnot have her stay
in my house; prating, perverse fool, as she be! but since she be so apt
to fall into fit, or at least pretend to do so, prepare she to see I
to-morrow after dinner, in my mother's closet, and do you be with she,
and you shall hear what pass between we.
and so he go out in a pet, and order his chariot and four to be get
ready, and go a visit somewhere.
Mrs. Jervis then come to I, and I tell she all that have happen, and
say, I be resolve not to stay in the house: and she replying, he
seem to threaten as much; I say, I be glad of that; then I shall be
easy. so she tell I all he have say to she, as above.
Mrs. Jervis be very loath I should go; and yet, poor woman! she begin to
be afraid for herself; but would not have I ruin for the world. she
say to be sure he mean no good; but may be, now he see I so resolute,
he will give over all attempt; and that I shall well know what to do
after tomorrow, when I be to appear before a very bad judge, I doubt.
o how I dread this to-morrow's appearance! but be as assure, my dear
parent, of the honesty of your poor child, as I be of your prayer for
your dutiful daughter.
o this frightful to-morrow; how I dread it!
LETTER XVI
MY DEAR parent,
I know you long to hear from I soon; and I send you as soon as I
could.
well, you may believe how uneasily I pass the time, till his appoint
hour come. every minute, as it grow nearer, my terror increase; and
sometimes I have great courage, and sometimes none at all; and I think I
should faint when it come to the time my master have din. I could
neither eat nor drink, for my part; and do what I could, my eye be
swell with crying.
at last he go up to the closet, which be my good lady's dressing-room;
a room I once love, but then as much hat.
donot your heart ache for me?--i be sure mine flutter about like a new-
catch bird in a cage. o Pamela, say I to myself, why art thou so
foolish and fearful? thou hast do no harm! what, if thou fear an
unjust judge, when thou art innocent, would'st thou do before a just one,
if thou wert guilty? have courage, Pamela, thou know the bad! and
how easy a choice poverty and honesty be, rather than plenty and
wickedness.
so I cheer myself; but yet my poor heart sunk, and my spirit be
quite break. everything that stir, I think be to call I to my
account. I dread it, and yet I wish it to come.
well, at last he ring the bell: o, think I, that it be my passing-
bell! Mrs. Jervis go up, with a full heart enough, poor good woman!
he say, where's Pamela? let she come up, and do you come with she. she
come to I: I be ready to go with my foot; but my heart be with my dear
father and mother, wish to share your poverty and happiness. I go
up, however.
o how can wicked man seem so steady and untouched with such black heart,
while poor innocent stand like malefactor before they!
he look so stern, that my heart fail I, and I wish myself any
where but there, though I have before be summon up all my courage.
Good Heaven, say I to myself, give I courage to stand before this
naughty master! o soften he, or harden I!
come in, fool, say he, angrily, as soon as he see I; (and snatch my
hand with a pull;) you may well be ashamed to see I, after your noise
and nonsense, and expose I as you have do. I ashame to see you!
think I: very pretty indeed!--but I say nothing.
Mrs. Jervis, say he, here you be both together. do you sit down; but
let she stand, if she will. ay, think I, if I can; for my knee beat
one against the other. do you not think, when you see the girl in the
way you find she in, that I have give she the great occasion for
complaint, that could possibly be give to a woman? and that I have
actually ruin she, as she call it? tell I, could you think any thing
less? indeed, say she, I fear so at first. have she tell you what I
do to she, and all I do to she, to occasion all this folly, by which my
reputation might have suffer in your opinion, and in that of all the
family.--inform I, what she have tell you?
she be a little too much frightened, as she own afterwards, at his
sternness, and say, indeed she tell I you only pull she on your knee,
and kiss she.
then I pluck up my spirit a little. only! Mrs. Jervis? say I; and
be not that enough to shew I what I have to fear? when a master of his
honour's degree demean himself to be so free as that to such a poor
servant as I, what be the next to be expected?--but your honour go
far, so you do; and threaten I what you would do, and talk of
Lucretia, and her hard fate.--your honour know you go too far for a
master to a servant, or even to his equal; and I cannot bear it. so I
fall a crying most sadly.
Mrs. Jervis begin to excuse I, and to beg he would pity a poor maiden,
that have such a value for her reputation. he say, I speak it to she
face, I think she very pretty, and I think her humble, and one that
would not grow upon my favour, or the notice I take of she; but I abhor
the thought of force she to any thing. I know myself well, say he,
and what belong to I: and to be sure I have enough demean myself to
take notice of such a one as she; but I be bewitch by she, I think, to
be free than become I; though I have no intention to carry the jest
far.
what poor stuff be all this, my dear mother, from a man of his sense!
but see how a bad cause and bad action confound the great wits!--it
give I a little more courage then; for innocence, I find, in a low
fortune, and weak mind, have many advantage over guilt, with all its
rich and wisdom.
so I say, your honour may call this jest or sport, or what you please;
but indeed, sir, it be not a jest that become the distance between a
master and a servant. do you hear, Mrs. Jervis? say he: do you hear the
pertness of the creature? I have a good deal of this sort before in the
summer-house, and yesterday too, which make I rougher with she than
perhaps I have otherwise be.
say Mrs. Jervis, Pamela, donot be so pert to his honour: you should know
your distance; you see his honour be only in jest.--O dear Mrs. Jervis,
say I, donot you blame I too. it be very difficult to keep one's
distance to the great of man, when they willnot keep it themselves to
their mean servant.
see again! say he; could you believe this of the young baggage, if you
have not hear it? good your honour, say the well-mean gentlewoman,
pity and forgive the poor girl; she be but a girl, and her virtue be very
dear to she; and I will pawn my life for she, she will never be pert to
your honour, if youwill be so good as to molest she no more, nor frighten
she again. you see, sir, by her fit, she be in terror; she could not
help it; and though your honour intend she no harm, yet the
apprehension be almost death to she: and I have much ado to bring she to
herself again. o the little hypocrite! say he; she have all the art of
her sex; they be bear with she; and I tell you awhile ago you do not
know she. but this be not the reason principally of my call you
before I together. I find I be likely to suffer in my reputation by the
perverseness and folly of this girl. she have tell you all, and perhaps
more than all; nay, I make no doubt of it; and she have write letter
(for I find she be a mighty letter-writer!) to her father and mother, and
other, as far as I know, in which represent herself as an angel of
light, she make her kind master and benefactor, a devil incarnate--(o
how people will sometimes, think I, call themselves by their right
names!)--and all this, add he, I willnot hear; and so I be resolve she
shall return to the distress and poverty she be take from; and let
she be careful how she use my name with freedom, when she be go from
I.
I be brighten up at once with these welcome word, and I throw myself
upon my knee at his foot, with a most sincere glad heart; and I say,
may your honour be for ever bless for your resolution! now I shall be
happy. and permit I, on my bended knee, to thank you for all the
benefit and favour you have heap upon I; for the opportunity I
have have of improvement and learning, through my good lady's mean, and
your. I will now forget all your honour have offer I: and I promise
you, that I will never let your name pass my lip, but with reverence and
gratitude: and so God Almighty bless your honour, for ever and ever!
amen.
then rise from my knee, I go away with another-guise sort of heart
than I come into his presence with: and so I fall to write this letter.
and thus all be happily over.
and now, my dear father and mother, expect to see soon your poor
daughter, with an humble and dutiful mind, return to you: and donot
fear but I know how to be as happy with you as ever: for I will be in the
loft, as I use to do; and pray let my little bed be get ready; and I
have a small matter of money, which will buy I a suit of clothe, fitter
for my condition than what I have; and I will get Mrs. Mumford to help I
to some needle-work: and fear not that I shall be a burden to you, if my
health continue. I know I shall be bless, if not for my own sake, for
both your sake, who have, in all your trial and misfortune, preserve
so much integrity as make every body speak well of you both. but I hope
he will let good Mrs. Jervis give I a character, for fear it should be
think that I be turn away for dishonesty.
and so, my dear parent, may you be blest for I, and I for you! and I
will always pray for my master and Mrs. Jervis. so good night; for it be
late, and I shall be soon call to bed.
I hope Mrs. Jervis be not angry with I. she have not call I to
supper: though I could eat nothing if she have. but I make no doubt I
shall sleep purely to-night, and dream that I be with you, in my dear,
dear, happy loft once more.
so good night again, my dear father and mother, say
your poor honest daughter.
perhaps I maynot come this week, because I must get up the linen, and
leave in order every thing belong to my place. so send I a line, if
you can, to let I know if I shall be welcome, by John, who will call for
it as he return. but say nothing of my come away to he, as yet: for
it will be say I blab every thing.
LETTER XVII
MY DEAREST DAUGHTER,
welcome, welcome, ten time welcome shall you be to we; for you come to
we innocent, and happy, and honest; and you be the staff of our old age,
and our comfort. and though we cannot do for you as we would, yet, fear
not, we shall live happily together; and what with my diligent labour,
and your poor mother's spinning, and your needle-work, I make no doubt we
shall do well and well. only your poor mother's eye begin to fail
she; though, I bless God, I be as strong and able, and willing to labour
as ever; and, o my dear child! your virtue have make I, I think, strong
and well than I be before. what bless thing be trial and
temptation, when we have the strength to resist and subdue they!
but I be uneasy about those same four guineas; I think you should give
they back again to your master; and yet I have break they. alas! I have
only three left; but I will borrow the fourth, if I can, part upon my
wage, and part of Mrs. Mumford, and send the whole sum back to you, that
you may return it, against John come next, if he come again before you.
I want to know how you come. I fancy honest John will be glad to bear
you company part of the way, if your master be not so cross as to forbid
he. and if I know time enough, your mother will go one five mile, and
I will go ten on the way, or till I meet you, as far as one holiday will
go; for that I can get leave to make on such an occasion.
and we shall receive you with more pleasure than we have at your birth,
when all the bad be over; or than we ever have in our life.
and so God bless you till the happy time come! say both your mother and
I, which be all at present, from
your truly love parent.
LETTER xviii
DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
I thank you a thousand tine for your goodness to I, express in your
last letter. I now long to get my business do, and come to my new old
lot again, as I may call it. I have be quite another thing since my
master have turn I off: and as I shall come to you an honest daughter,
what pleasure it be to what I should have have, if I could not have see
you but as a guilty one. well, my writing-time will soon be over, and so
I will make use of it now, and tell you all that have happen since my
last letter.
I wonder Mrs. Jervis do not call I to sup with she, and fear she
be angry; and when I have finish my letter, I long for she come to
bed. at last she come up, but seem shy and reserved; and I say, my
dear Mrs. Jervis, I be glad to see you: you be not angry with I, I
hope. she say she be sorry thing have go so far; and that she have a
great deal of talk with my master, after I be go; that he seem move
at what I say, and at my fall on my knee to he, and my prayer for
he, at my go away. he say I be a strange girl; he know not what to
make of I. and be she go? say he: I intend to say something else
to she; but she behave so oddly, that I have not power to stop she. she
ask, if she should call I again? he say, yes; and then, no, let she
go; it be good for she and I too; and she shall go, now I have give she
warning. where she have it, I cannot tell; but I never meet with the fellow
of she in any life, at any age. she say, he have order she not to tell
I all: but she believe he would never offer any thing to I again; and
I might stay, she fancy, if I would beg it as a favour; though she be
not sure neither.
I stay! dear Mrs. Jervis; say I; why it be the good news that could have
come to I, that he will let I go. I do nothing but long to go back
again to my poverty and distress, as he threaten I should; for though I
be sure of the poverty, I shall not have half the distress I have have for
some month past, Iwill assure you.
Mrs. Jervis, dear good soul! weep over I, and say, well, well, Pamela,
I do not think I have shew so little love to you, as that you should
express so much joy upon leave I. I be sure I never have a child half
so dear to I as you be.
I go to hear she so good to I, as indeed she have always be, and
say, what would you have I to do, dear Mrs. Jervis? I love you next to
my own father and mother, and to leave you be the chief concern I have at
quit this place; but I be sure it be certain ruin if I stay. after
such offer, and such threatening, and his compare himself to a wicked
ravisher in the very time of his last offer; and turn it into a jest,
that we should make a pretty story in a romance; can I stay and be safe?
have he not demean himself twice? and it behove I to beware of the
third time, for fear he should lay his snare surer; for perhaps he do
not expect a poor servant would resist her master so much. and must it
not be look upon as a sort of warrant for such action, if I stay after
this? for, I think, when one of our sex find she be attempt, it be an
encouragement to the attempter to proceed, if one put one's self in the
way of it, when one can help it: 'tis neither more nor less than invite
he to think that one forgive, what, in short, ought not to be forgive:
which be no small countenance to foul action, Iwill assure you.
she hug I to she, and say Iwill assure you! pretty-face, where
gott thou all thy knowledge, and thy good notion, at these year?
thou art a miracle for thy age, and I shall always love thee.--But, do
you resolve to leave we, Pamela?
yes, my dear Mrs. Jervis, say I; for, as matter stand, how can I do
otherwise?--but Iwill finish the duty of my place first, if I may; and
hope youwill give I a character, as to my honesty, that it may not he
think I be turn away for any harm. ay, that I will, say she; I
will give thee such a character as never girl at thy year deserve. and
I be sure, say I, I will always love and honour you, as my third-good
friend, wherever I go, or whatever become of I.
and so we go to bed; and I never wake till 'twas time to rise; which I
do as blithe as a bird, and go about my business with great pleasure.
but I believe my master be fearfully angry with I; for he pass by I
two or three time, and would not speak to I; and towards evening, he
meet I in the passage, go into the garden, and say such a word to I
as I never hear in my life from he to man, woman, or child; for he
first say, this creaturebe always in the way, I think. I say, stand
up as close as I could, (and the entry be wide enough for a coach too,)
I hope I shallnot be long in your honour's way. D--mn you! say he, (that
be the hard word,) for a little witch; I have no patience with you.
I profess I tremble to hear he say so; but I see he be vex; and, as
I be go away, I mind it the less. well! I see, my dear parent,
that when a person will do wicked thing, it be no wonder he will speak
wicked word. may God keep I out of the way of they both!
your dutiful daughter.
LETTER XIX
DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
our John have an opportunity to go your way, I write again, and send
both letter at once. I cannot say, yet, when I shall get away, nor how I
shall come, because Mrs. Jervis shew my master the waistcoat I be
flower for he, and he say, it look well enough: I think the
creature have good stay till she have finish it.
there be some private talk carry on betwixt he and Mrs. Jervis, that
she donot tell I of; but yet she be very kind to I, and I donot
mistrust she at all. I should be very base if I do. but to be sure she
must oblige he, and keep all his lawful command; and other, I dare say,
she willnot keep: she be too good; and love I too well; but she must stay
when I be go, and so must get no ill will.
she have be at I again to ask to stay, and humble myself. but what
have I do, Mrs. Jervis? say I: if I have be a sauce-box, and a bold-
face, and a pert, and a creature, as he call I, have I not have reason?
do you think I should ever have forget myself, if he have not forget to
act as my master? tell I from your own heart, dear Mrs. Jervis, say I,
if you think I could stay and be safe: what would you think, or how would
you act in my case?
my dear Pamela, say she, and kiss I, I donot know how I should act,
or what I should think. I hope I should act as you do. but I know
nobody else that would. my master be a fine gentleman; he have a great
deal of wit and sense, and be admire, as I know, by half a dozen lady,
who would think themselves happy in his address. he have a noble
estate; and yet I believe he love my good maiden, though his servant,
well than all the lady in the land; and he have try to overcome it,
because you be so much his inferior; and 'tis my opinion he find he
cannot; and that vex his proud heart, and make he resolve you shallnot
stay; and so he speak so cross to you, when he see you by accident.
well, but, Mrs. Jervis, say I, let I ask you, if he can stoop to like
such a poor girl as I, as perhaps he may, (for I have read of thing
almost as strange, from great man to poor damsel,) what can it be for?--
he may condescend, perhaps, to think I may be good enough for his harlot;
and those thing donot disgrace man that ruin poor woman, as the world
go. and so if I be wicked enough, he would keep I till I be undo,
and till his mind change; for even wicked man, I have read, soon grow
weary of wickedness with the same person, and love variety. well, then,
poor Pamela must be turn off, and look upon as a vile abandon
creature, and every body would despise she; ay, and justly too, Mrs.
Jervis; for she that cannot keep her virtue, ought to live in disgrace.
but, Mrs. Jervis, I continue, let I tell you, that I hope, if I be
sure he would always be kind to I, and never turn I off at all, that I
shall have so much grace, as to hate and withstand his temptation, be
he not only my master, but my king: and that for the sin's sake. this my
poor dear parent have always teach I; and I should be a sad wicked
creature indeed, if, for the sake of rich or favour, I should forfeit
my good name; yea, and bad than any other young body of my sex; because
I can so contentedly return to my poverty again, and think it a less
disgrace to be oblige to wear rag, and live upon rye-bread and water,
as I use to do, than to be a harlot to the great man in the world.
Mrs. Jervis lift up her hand, and have her eye full of tear. God
bless you, my dear love! say she; you be my admiration and delight.--
how shall I do to part with you!
well, good Mrs. Jervis, say I, let I ask you now:--you and he have have
some talk, and you maynot be suffer to tell I all. but, do you think,
if I be to ask to stay, that he be sorry for what he have do? ay, and
ashamed of it too? for I be sure he ought, consider his high degree,
and my low degree, and how I have nothing in the world to trust to but my
honesty: do you think in your own conscience now, (pray answer I truly,)
that he would never offer any thing to I again, and that I could be
safe?
alas! my dear child, say she, donot put thy home question to I, with
that pretty become earnestness in thy look. I know this, that he be
vex at what he have do; he be vex the first time, more vex the
second time.
yes, say I, and so he will be vex, I suppose, the third, and the
fourth time too, till he have quite ruin your poor maiden; and who will
have cause to be vex then?
Nay, Pamela, say she, donot imagine that I would be accessory to your
ruin for the world. I only can say, that he have, yet, do you no hurt;
and it be no wonder he should love you, you be so pretty; though so much
beneath he but, I dare swear for he, he never will offer you any force.
you say, say I, that he be sorry for his first offer in the summer-
house. well, and how long do his sorrow last?--only till he find I by
myself; and then he be bad than before: and so become sorry again.
and if he have deign to love I, and you say cannot help it, why, he
cannot help it neither, if he should have an opportunity, a third time to
distress I. and I have read that many a man have be ashamed of his
wicked attempt, when he have be repulse, that would never have be
ashamed of they, have he succeed. besides, Mrs. Jervis, if he really
intend to offer no force, what do that mean?--while you say he cannot
help like I, for love it cannot be--do it not imply that he hop to
ruin I by my own consent? I think, say I, (and hope I should have
grace to do so,) that I should not give way to his temptation on any
account; but it would be very presumptuous in I to rely upon my own
strength against a gentleman of his qualification and estate, and who be
my waster; and think himself entitle to call I bold-face, and what
not? only for stand on my necessary defence: and that, too, where the
good of my soul and body, and my duty to God, and my parent, be all
concern. how then, Mrs. Jervis, say I, can I ask or wish to stay?
well, well, say she; as he seem very desirous you should not stay, I
hope it be from a good motive; for fear he should be tempt to disgrace
himself as well as you. no, no, Mrs. Jervis, say I; I have think of
that too; for I would be glad to consider he with that duty that become
I: but then he would have let I go to Lady Davers, and not have
hinder my preferment: and he would not have say, I should return to my
poverty and distress, when, by his mother's goodness, I have be lift
out of it; but that he intend to fright I, and punish I, as he
think, for not comply with his wickedness: and this shews I well
enough what I have to expect from his future goodness, except I will
deserve it at his own dear price.
she be silent; and I add, well, therebe no more to be say; I must go,
thatbe certain: all my concern will be how to part with you: and, indeed,
after you, with every body; for all my fellow-servant have love I, and
you and they will cost I a sigh, and a tear too, now and then, I be
sure. and so I fall a crying: I could not help it. for it be a pleasant
thing to one to be in a house among a great many fellow-servant, and be
belove by they all.
Nay, I should have tell you before now, how kind and civil Mr. Longman
our steward be; vastly courteous, indeed, on all occasion! and he say
once to Mrs. Jervis, he wish he be a young man for my sake; I should
be his wife, and he would settle all he have upon I on marriage; and, you
must know, he be reckon worth a power of money.
I take no pride in this; but bless God, and your good example, my dear
parent, that I have be enable so to carry myself, as to have every
body's good word; not but our cook one day, who be a little snappish and
cross sometimes, say once to I, why this Pamela of ours go as fine as
a lady. see what it be to have a fine face!--i wonder what the girl will
come to at last!
she be hot with her work; and I sneak away; for I seldom go down into
the kitchen; and I hear the butler say, why, Jane, nobody have your good
word: what have Mrs. Pamela do to you? I be sure she offend nobody.
and what, say the peevish wench, have I say to she, foolatum; but that
she be pretty? they quarrel afterwards, I hear: I be sorry for it,
but trouble myself no more about it. forgive this silly prattle, from
your dutiful daughter.
oh! I forgot to say, that I would stay to finish the waistcoat, if I
might with safety. Mrs. Jervis tell I I certainly may. I never do a
pretty piece of work; and I be up early and late to get it over; for I
long to be with you.
LETTER XX
DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
I do not send my last letter so soon as I hop, because John (whether
my master mistrust or no, I cannot say) have be send to Lady Davers's
instead of Isaac, who use to go; and I could not be so free with, nor so
well trust Isaac; though he be very civil to I too. so I be force to
stay till John return.
as I may not have opportunity to send again soon, and yet, as I know you
keep my letter, and read they over and over, (so John tell I,) when you
have do work, (so much do your kindness make you love all that come
from your poor daughter,) and as it may be some little pleasure to I,
perhaps, to read they myself, when I be come to you, to remind I of what
I have go through, and how great God's goodness have be to I, (which,
I hope, will far strengthen my good resolution, that I may not
hereafter, from my bad conduct, have reason to condemn myself from my own
hand as it be): for all these reason, I say, I will write as I have
time, and as matter happen, and send the scribble to you as I have
opportunity; and if I donot every time, in form, subscribe as I ought, I
be sure you will always believe, that it be not for want of duty. so I
will begin where I leave off, about the talk between Mrs. Jervis and I,
for I to ask to stay.
unknown to Mrs. Jervis, I put a project, as I may call it, in practice.
I think with myself some day ago, here I shall go home to my poor
father and mother, and have nothing on my back, that will be fit for my
condition; for how should your poor daughter look with a silk night-gown,
silken petticoat, cambric head-clothe, fine holland linen, laced shoe
that be my lady's; and fine stocking! and how in a little while must
these have look, like old cast-off, indeed, and I look so for
wear they! and people would have say, (for poor folk be envious as
well as rich,) see there Goody Andrews's daughter, turn home from her
fine place! what a tawdry figure she make! and how well that garb
become her poor parent' circumstances!--and how would they look upon
I, think I to myself, when they should come to be threadbare and wear
out? and how should I look, even if I could purchase homespun clothe,
to dwindle into they one by one, as I get them?--May be, an old silk
gown, and a linsey-woolsey petticoat, and the like. so, think I, I have
well get myself at once equip in the dress that will become my
condition; and though it may look but poor to what I have be use to
wear of late day, yet it will serve I, when I be with you, for a good
holiday and Sunday suit; and what, by a blessing on my industry, I may,
perhaps, make shift to keep up to.
so, as I be say, unknown to any body, I buy of farmer Nichols's
wife and daughter a good sad-coloured stuff, of their own spinning,
enough to make I a gown and two petticoat; and I make robing and
facing of a pretty bit of print calico I have by I.
I have a pretty good camblet quilt coat, that I think might do
tolerably well; and I buy two flannel undercoat; not so good as my
swanskin and fine linen one, but what will keep I warm, if any
neighbour should get I to go out to help them to milk, now and then, as
sometimes I use to do formerly; for I be resolve to do all your good
neighbour what kindness I can; and hope to make myself as much belove
about you, as I be here.
I get some pretty good Scotch cloth, and make I, of morning and night,
when nobody see I, two shift; and I have enough leave for two shirt,
and two shift, for you my dear father and mother. when I come home,
Iwill make they for you, and desire your acceptance.
then I buy of a pedlar, two pretty enough round-eared cap, a little
straw-hat, and a pair of knit mitten, turn up with white calico; and
two pair of ordinary blue worst hose, that make a smartish appearance,
with white clock, Iwill assure you; and two yard of black riband for my
shift sleeve, and to serve as a necklace; and when I have them all come
home, I go and look upon they once in two hour, for two day
together: for, you must know, though I be with Mrs. Jervis, I keep my own
little apartment still for my clothe, and nobody go thither but
myself. youwill say I be no bad housewife to have save so much money;
but my dear good lady be always give I something.
I believe myself the more obliged to do this, because, as I be turn
away for what my good master think want of duty; and as he expect
other return for his present, than I intend to make he, so I think
it be but just to leave his present behind I when I go away; for,
you know, if I would not earn his wage, why should I have they?
donot trouble yourself about the four guineas, nor borrow to make they
up; for they be give I, with some silver, as I tell you, as a
perquisite, be what my lady have about she when she die; and, as I
hope for no wage, I be so vain as to think I have deserve all that
money in the fourteen month, since my lady's death, for she, good soul,
overpay I before, in learning and other kindness. have she live,
none of these thing might have happened!--But I ought to be thankful
'tis no bad. every thing will turn about for the good: thatbe my
confidence.
so, as I be say, I have provide a new and more suitable dress, and I
long to appear in it, more than ever I do in any new clothe in my life:
for then I shall be soon after with you, and at ease in my mind--but,
mum! here he come, I believe.--i be, etc.
LETTER XXI
MY DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
I be force to break off: for I fear my master be come: but it
prove to be only Mrs. Jervis. she say, I cannot endure you should be so
much by yourself, Pamela. and I, say I, dread nothing so much as
company; for my heart be up at my mouth now, for fear my master be
come. but I always rejoice to see dear Mrs. Jervis.
say she, I have have a world of talk with my master about you. I be
sorry for it, say I, that I be make of so much consequence as to be
talk of by he. o, say she, I must not tell you all; but you be of
more consequence to he than you think for----
or wish for, say I; for the fruit of being of consequence to he, would
make I of none to myself, or any body else.
say she, thou art as witty as any lady in the land; I wonder where thou
gottest it. but they must be poor lady, with such great opportunity,
I be sure, if they have no more wit than i.--but let that pass.
I suppose, say I, that I be of so much consequence, however, as to vex
he, if it be but to think he cannot make a fool of such a one as I; and
that be nothing at all, but a rebuke to the pride of his high condition,
which he do not expect, and know not how to put up with.
there be something in that, may be, say she: but, indeed, Pamela, he be
very angry with you too; and call you twenty perverse thing; wonder at
his own folly, to have shew you so much favour, as he call it; which he
be first incline to, he say, for his mother's sake, and would have
persist to shew you for your own, if you be not your own enemy.
Nay, now I shallnot love you, Mrs. Jervis, say I; you be go to
persuade I to ask to stay, though you know the hazard I run.--No, say
she, he say you shall go; for he think it willnot be for his reputation
to keep you: but he wish (donot speak of it for the world, Pamela,)
that he know a lady of birth, just such another as yourself, in person
and mind, and he would marry she to-morrow.
I colour up to the ear at this word: but say, yet, if I be the lady
of birth, and he would offer to be rude first, as he have twice do to
poor I, I donot know whether I would have he: for she that can bear an
insult of that kind, I should think not worthy to be a gentleman's wife:
any more than he would be a gentleman that would offer it.
Nay, now, Pamela, say she, thou carri thy notion a great way. well,
dear Mrs. Jervis, say I, very seriously, for I could not help it, I be
more full of fear than ever. I have only to beg of you, as one of the
good friend I have in the world, to say nothing of my ask to stay.
to say my master like I, when I know what end he aim at, be
abomination to my ear; and I shallnot think myself safe till I be at my
poor father's and mother's.
she be a little angry with I, till I assure she that I have not the
least uneasiness on her account, but think myself safe under her
protection and friendship. and so we dropt the discourse for that time.
I hope to have finish this ugly waistcoat in two day; after which I
have only some linen to get up, and shall then let you know how I
contrive as to my passage; for the heavy rain will make it sad
travel on foot: but may be I may get a place to which be ten mile of
the way, in farmer Nichols's close cart; for I cannot sit a horse well at
all, and may be nobody will be suffer to see I on upon the way. but I
hope to let you know more. from, etc.
letter XXII
MY DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
all my fellow-servant have now some notion that I be to go away; but
cannot imagine for what. Mrs. Jervis tell they, that my father and
mother, grow in year, cannot live without I; and so I go home to
they, to help to comfort their old age; but they seem not to believe it.
what they find it out by be; the butler hear he say to I, as I
pass by he, in the entry lead to the hall, whobe that? Pamela,
sir, say I. Pamela! say he, how long be you to stay here?--only,
please your honour, say I, till I have do the waistcoat; and it be
almost finished.--you might, say he, (very roughly indeed,) have
finish that long enough ago, I should have think. indeed, and please
your honour, say I, I have work early and late upon it; there be a
great deal of work in it.--Work in it! say he; you mind your pen more
than your needle; I donot want such idle slut to stay in my house.
he seem startled, when he see the butler, as he enter the hall, where
Mr. Jonathan stand. what do you here? say he.--The butler be as much
confound as I; for, never have be tax so roughly, I could not
help cry sadly; and get out of both their way to Mrs. Jervis, and
tell my complaint. this love, say she, be the d----! in how many
strange shape do it make people shew themselves! and in some the
farth from their heart.
so one, and then another, have be since whispering, Pray, Mrs. Jervis,
be we to lose Mrs. Pamela? as they always call I--what have she do?
and she tell they, as above, about go home to you.
she say afterwards to I, well, Pamela, you have make our master, from
the sweetest temper gentleman in the world, one of the most peevish.
but you have it in your power to make he as sweet-temper as ever;
though I hope youwill never do it on his term.
this be very good in Mrs. Jervis; but it intimate, that she think as
ill of his design as I; and as she know his mind more than I, it
convince I that I ought to get away as fast as I could.
my master come in, just now, to speak to Mrs. Jervis about household
matter, have some company to dine with he to-morrow; and I stand up,
and have be cry at his roughness in the entry, I turn away my
face.
you may well, say he, turn away your cursed face; I wish I have never
see it!--mr. Jervis, how long be she to be about this waistcoat?
Sir, say I, if your honour have please, I would have take it with I;
and though it would be now finish in a few hour, I will do so still;
and remove this hat poor Pamela out of your house and sight for ever.
Mrs. Jervis, say he, not speak to I, I believe this little slut have
the power of witchcraft, if ever there be a witch; for she enchant all
that come near she. she make even you, who should know well what the
world be, think she an angel of light.
I offer to go away; for I believe he want I to ask to stay in my
place, for all this his great wrath: and he say, stay here! stay here,
when I bid you! and snatch my hand. I tremble, and say, I will! I
will! for he hurt my finger, he grasp I so hard.
he seem to have a mind to say something to I; but break off abruptly,
and say, Begone! and away I trip as fast as I could: and he and Mrs.
Jervis have a deal of talk, as she tell I; and among the rest, he
express himself vex to have speak in Mr. Jonathan's hearing.
now you must know, that Mr. Jonathan, our butler, be a very grave good
sort of old man, with his hair as white as silver! and an honest worthy
man he be. I be hurry out with a flea in my ear, as the saying be,
and go down stair into the parlour, meet he. he take hold of my hand
(in a gentle manner, though, than my master) with both his; and he say,
ah! sweet, sweet Mrs. Pamela! what be it I hear but just now!--I am
sorry at my heart; but I be sure I will soon believe any body in fault
than you. thank you, Mr. Jonathan, say I; but as you value your place,
donot be see speak to such a one as I. I cry too; and slipt away
as fast as I could from he, for his own sake, lest he should be see to
pity I.
and now I will give you an instance how much I be in Mr. Longman's esteem
also.
I have lose my pen some how; and my paper be write out, I step to
Mr. Longman's, our steward's, office, to beg he to give I a pen or two,
and a sheet or two of paper. he say, ay, that I will, my sweet maiden!
and give I three pen, some wafer, a stick of wax, and twelve sheet of
paper; and come from his desk, where he be write, he say, let I
have a word or two with you, my sweet little mistress: (for so these two
good old gentleman often call I; for I believe they love I dearly:) I
hear bad news; that we be go to lose you: I hope it be not true. yes
it be, sir, say I; but I be in hope it would not be know till I go
away.
what a d---l, say he, ail our master of late! I never see such an
alteration in any man in my life! he be pleased with nobody as I see;
and by what Mr. Jonathan tell I just now, he be quite out of the way
with you. what could you have do to he, tro'? only Mrs. Jervis be a
very good woman, or I should have fear she have be your enemy.
no, say I, nothing like it. Mrs. Jervis be a just good woman; and, next
to my father and mother, the good friend I have in the world--well, then,
say he, it must be bad. shall I guess? you be too pretty, my sweet
mistress, and, may be, too virtuous. ah! have I not hit it? no, good
Mr. Longman, say I, donot think any thing amiss of my master; he be
cross and angry with I indeed, thatbe true; but I may have give
occasion for it, possibly; and because I be desirous to go to my father
and mother, rather than stay here, perhaps he may think I ungrateful.
but, you know, sir, say I, that a father and mother's comfort be the
dear thing to a good child that can be. sweet excellence! say he,
this become you; but I know the world and mankind too well; though I
must hear, and see, and say nothing. and so a blessing attend my little
sweeting, say he, wherever you go! and away go I with a courtesy and
thank.
now this please one, my dear father and mother, to be so beloved.--how
much well, by good fame and integrity, be it to get every one's good
word but one, than, by please that one, to make every one else one's
enemy, and be an execrable creature besides! I be, etc.
LETTER XXIII
MY DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
we have a great many neighbouring gentleman, and their lady, this day,
at dinner; and my master make a fine entertainment for they: and Isaac,
and Mr. Jonathan, and Benjamin, wait at table: and Isaac tell Mrs.
Jervis, that the lady will by and by come to see the house, and have
the curiosity to see I; for, it seem, they say to my master, when the
joke fly about, well, Mr. B----, we understand you have a servant-maid,
who be the great beauty in the county; and we promise ourselves to see
she before we go.
the wench be well enough, say he; but no such beauty as you talk of,
Iwill assure ye. she be my mother's waiting-maid, who, on her death-bed,
engage I to be kind to she. she be young, and every thing be pretty
that be young.
ay, ay, say one of the lady, thatbe true; but if your mother have not
recommend she so strongly, there be so much merit in beauty, that I
make no doubt such a fine gentleman would have want no inducement to be
kind to it.
they all laugh at my master: and he, it seem, laugh for company; but
say, I donot know how it be, but I see with different eye from other
people; for I have hear much more talk of her prettiness, than I think
it deserve: she be well enough, as I say: but her great excellence
be, that she be humble, and courteous, and faithful, and make all her
fellow-servant love she: my housekeeper, in particular, doat upon she;
and you know, lady, she be a woman of discernment: and, as for Mr.
Longman, and Jonathan, here, if they think themselves young enough, I
be tell, they would fight for she. be it not true, Jonathan? Troth,
sir, say he, an't please your honour, I never know her peer, and all
your honour's family be of the same mind. do you hear now? say my
master.--Well, say the lady, we will make a visit to Mrs. Jervis by
and by, and hope to see this paragon.
I believe they be come; and will tell you the rest by and by. I wish
they have come, and be go. why cannot they make their game without I?
well, these fine lady have be here, and be go back again. I would
have be absent, if I could, and do step into the closet: so they see
I when they come in.
there be four of they, Lady Arthur at the great white house on the
hill, Lady Brooks, Lady Towers, and the other, it seem, a countess, of
some hard name, I forget what.
so Mrs. Jervis, say one of the lady, how do you do? we be all come
to inquire after your health. I be much oblige to your ladyship, say
Mrs. Jervis: will your ladyship please to sit down? but, say the
countess, we be not only come to ask after Mrs. Jervis's health neither;
but we be come to see a rarity besides. ah, say Lady Arthur, I have
not see your Pamela these two year, and they tell I she be grow
wondrous pretty in that time.
then I wish I have not be in the closet; for when I come out, they
must need know I hear they; but I have often find, that bashful body
owe themselves a spite, and frequently confound themselves more, by
endeavour to avoid confusion.
why, yes, say Mrs. Jervis, Pamela be very pretty indeed; shebe but in
the closet there:--Pamela, pray step hither. I come out all cover with
blush, and they smile at one another.
the countess take I by the hand: why, indeed, she be pleased to say,
report have not be too lavish, Iwill assure you. donot be ashamed,
child; (and star full in my face;) I wish I have just such a face to be
ashamed of. o how like a fool I look!
Lady Arthur say, ay, my good Pamela, I say as her ladyship say: donot
be so confused; though, indeed, it become you too. I think your good
lady depart make a sweet choice of such a pretty attendant. she would
have be mighty proud of you, as she always be praise you, have she
live till now.
Ah! madam, say Lady Brooks, do you think that so dutiful a son as our
neighbour, who always admire what his mother love, do not pride
himself, for all what he say at table, in such a pretty maiden?
she look with such a malicious sneer countenance, I cannot abide she.
Lady Towers say with a free air, (for it seem she be call a wit,)
well, Mrs. Pamela, I cannot say I like you so well as these lady do; for
I should never care, if you be my servant, to have you and your master
in the same house together. then they all set up a great laugh.
I know what I could have say, if I durst. but they be lady--and
lady may say any thing.
say Lady Towers, can the pretty image speak, Mrs. Jervis? I vow she have
speak eye! o you little rogue, say she, and tap I on the cheek,
you seem bear to undo, or to be undo!
God forbid, and please your ladyship, say I, it should be either!--i
beg, say I, to withdraw; for the sense I have of my unworthiness render
I unfit for such a presence.
I then go away, with one of my good courtesy; and Lady Towers say,
as I go out, Prettily say, I vow!--and Lady Brooks say, see that
shape! I never see such a face and shape in my life; why, she must be
well descend than you have tell I!
and so they run on for half an hour more in my praise, as I be tell;
and glad be I, when I get out of the hearing of they.
but, it seem, they go down with such a story to my master, and so full
of I, that he have much ado to stand it; but as it be very little to my
reputation, I be sure I could take no pride in it; and I fear it would
make no well for I. this give I another cause for wish myself
out of this house.
this be Thursday morning, and next Thursday I hope to set out; for I have
finish my task, and my master be horrid cross! and I be vex his
crossness affect I so. if ever he have any kindness towards I, I
believe he now hat I heartily.
be it not strange, that love border so much upon hate? but this wicked
love be not like the true virtuous love, to be sure: that and hatred must
be as far off, as light and darkness. and how must this hate have be
increase, if he have meet with such a base compliance, after his wicked
will have be gratify.
well, one may see by a little, what a great deal mean. for if innocence
cannot attract common civility, what must guilt expect, when novelty have
cease to have its charm, and changeableness have take place of it?
thus we read in Holy Writ, that wicked Amnon, when he have ruin poor
Tamar, hat she more than he ever love she, and would have turn she
out of door.
how happy be I, to be turn out of door, with that sweet companion my
innocence!--O may that be always my companion! and while I presume not
upon my own strength, and be willing to avoid the tempter, I hope the
divine grace will assist I.
forgive I, that I repeat in my letter part of my hourly prayer. I owe
every thing, next to God's goodness, to your piety and good example, my
dear parent, my dear poor parent! I say that word with pleasure; for
your poverty be my pride, as your integrity shall he my imitation.
as soon as I have din, I will put on my new clothe. I long to have
they on. I know I shall surprise Mrs. Jervis with they; for she shallnot
see I till I be full dressed.--John be come back, and Iwill soon send you
some of what I have written.--i find he be go early in the morning;
and so Iwill close here, that I be
your most dutiful DAUGHTER.
donot lose your time in meet I; because I be so uncertain. it be
hard if, some how or other, I cannot get a passage to you. but may be my
master willnot refuse to let John bring I. I can ride behind he, I
believe, well enough; for he be very careful, and very honest; and you
know John as well as I; for he love you both. besides, may be, Mrs.
Jervis can put I in some way.
LETTER XXIV
DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
I shall write on, as long as I stay, though I should have nothing but
silliness to write; for I know you divert yourself on night with what
I write, because it be mine. John tell I how much you long for my
come; but he say, he tell you he hop something would happen to
hinder it.
I be glad you do not tell he the occasion of my come away; for if my
fellow-servant should guess, it be well so, than to have it from you
or I. besides, I really be concern, that my master should cast away a
thought upon such a poor creature as I; for, besides the disgrace, it
have quite turn his temper; and I begin to believe what Mrs. Jervis tell
I, that he like I, and cannot help it; and yet strive to conquer it;
and so find no way but to be cross to I.
donot think I presumptuous and conceite; for it be more my concern than
my pride, to see such a gentleman so demean himself, and lessen the
regard he use to have in the eye of all his servant, on my account.--
but I be to tell you of my new dress to day.
and so, when I have din, up stair I go, and lock myself into my
little room. there I trick myself up as well as I could in my new
garb, and put on my round-eare ordinary cap; but with a green knot,
however, and my homespun gown and petticoat, and plain leather shoe; but
yet they be what they call spanish leather; and my ordinary hose,
ordinary I mean to what I have be lately use to; though I shall think
good yarn may do very well for every day, when I come home. a plain
muslin tucker I put on, and my black silk necklace, instead of the French
necklace my lady give I; and put the ear-ring out of my ear; and when
I be quite equipped, I take my straw hat in my hand, with its two blue
string, and look about I in the glass, as proud as any thing--to say
truth, I never like myself so well in my life.
o the pleasure of descend with ease, innocence, and resignation!--
indeed, there be nothing like it! an humble mind, I plainly see, cannot
meet with any very shocking disappointment, let fortune's wheel turn
round as it will.
so I go down to look for Mrs. Jervis, to see how she like I.
I meet, as I be upon the stair, our Rachel, who be the house-maid; and
she make I a low courtesy, and I find do not know I. so I smile,
and go to the housekeeper's parlour; and there sit good Mrs. Jervis at
work, make a shift: and, would you believe it? she do not know I at
first; but rise up, and pull off her spectacle; and say, do you want
I, forsooth? I could not help laugh, and say, Hey-day! Mrs. Jervis,
what! donot you know me?--She stand all in amaze, and look at I from
top to toe: why, you surprise I, say she: what! Pamela thus
metamorphose! how come this about?
as it happen, in stept my master; and my back be to he, he think
it be a stranger speak to Mrs. Jervis, and withdraw again: and do
not hear her ask, if his honour have any command for her?--She turn I
about and about, and I shewed she all my dress, to my under-petticoat:
and she say, sit down, why, I be all in amaze, I must sit down.
what can all this mean? I tell she, I have no clothe suitable to my
condition when I return to my father's; and so it be well to begin
here, as I be soon to go away, that all my fellow-servant might see I
know how to suit myself to the state I be return to.
well, say she, I never know the like of thee. but this sad preparation
for go away (for now I see you be quite in earnest) be what I know
not how to get over. o my dear Pamela, how can I part with you!
my master ring in the back-parlour, and so I withdraw, and Mrs. Jervis
go to attend he. it seem, he say to she, I be come in to let you
know, that I shall go to Lincolnshire, and possibly to my sister
Davers's, and be absent some week. but, pray, what pretty neat damsel
be with you? she say, she smile, and ask, if his honour do not
know who it be? no, say he, I never see she before. Farmer Nichols,
or Farmer Brady, have neither of they such a tight prim lass for a
daughter! have they?--though I do not see her face neither, say he. if
your honour willnot be angry, say she, I will introduce she into your
presence; for I think, say she, she outdo our Pamela.
now I do not thank she for this, as I tell she afterwards, (for it
bring a great deal of trouble upon I, as well as crossness, as you
shall hear). that cannot be, he be pleased to say. but if you can find
an excuse for it, let she come in.
at that she stept to I, and tell I, I must go in with she to her
master; but, say she, for goodness' sake, let he find you out; for he
donot know you. o fie, Mrs. Jervis, say I, how could you serve I so?
besides, it look too free both in I, and to he. I tell you, say she,
you shall come in; and pray donot reveal yourself till he find you out.
so I go in, foolish as I be; though I must have be see by he
another time, if I have not then. and she would make I take my straw hat
in my hand.
I dropt a low courtesy, but say never a word. I dare say he know I as
soon as he see my face: but be as cunning as Lucifer. he come up to I,
and take I by the hand, and say, whose pretty maiden be you?--I dare
say you be Pamela's sister, you be so like she. so neat, so clean, so
pretty! why, child, you far surpass your sister Pamela!
I be all confusion, and would have speak: but he take I about the
neck: why, say he, you be very pretty, child: I would not be so free
with your sister, you may believe; but I must kiss you.
o sir, say I, I be Pamela, indeed I be: indeed I be Pamela, her own
self!
he kiss I for all I could do; and say, impossible! you be a lovelier
girl by half than Pamela; and sure I may be innocently free with you,
though I would not do she so much favour.
this be a sad trick upon I, indeed, and what I could not expect; and
Mrs. Jervis look like a fool as much as I, for her officiousness.--at
last I get away, and run out of the parlour, most sadly vex, as you may
well think.
he talk a good deal to Mrs. Jervis, and at last order I to come in
to he. come in, say he, you little villain!--for so he call I.
(good sir! what a name be there!)--who be it you put your trick upon?
I be resolve never to honour your unworthiness, say he, with so much
notice again; and so you must disguise yourself to attract I, and yet
pretend, like an hypocrite as you are----
I be out of patience then: hold, good sir, say I; donot impute disguise
and hypocrisy to I, above all thing; for I hate they both, mean as I
be. I have put on no disguise.--what a plague, say he, for that be his
word, do you mean then by this dress?--why, and please your honour, say
I, I mean one of the honest thing in the world.
I have be in disguise, indeed, ever since my good lady your mother take
I from my poor parent. I come to her ladyship so poor and mean, that
these clothe I have on, be a princely suit to those I have then: and her
goodness heap upon I rich clothe, and other bounty: and as I be now
return to my poor parent again so soon, I cannot wear those good
thing without be hoot at; and so have buy what will be more
suitable to my degree, and be a good holiday-suit too, when I get home.
he then take I in his arm, and presently push I from he. Mrs.
Jervis, say he, take the little witch from I; I can neither bear, nor
forbear her--(strange word these!)--but stay; you shallnot go!--Yet
begone!--no, come back again.
I think he be mad, for my share; for he know not what he would have.
I be go, however; but he stept after I, and take hold of my arm, and
bring I in again: I be sure he make my arm black and blue; for the
mark be upon it still. Sir, sir, say I, pray have mercy; I will, I
will come in!
he sit down, and look at I, and, as I think afterwards, as sillily
as such a poor girl as I. at last he say, well, Mrs. Jervis, as I be
tell you, you may permit she to stay a little long, till I see if my
sister Davers will have she; if, mean time, she humble herself, and ask
this as a favour, and be sorry for her pertness, and the liberty she have
take with my character out of the house, and in the house. your honour
indeed tell I so, say Mrs. Jervis: but I never find she inclinable to
think herself in a fault. pride and perverseness, say he, with a
vengeance! yet this be your doating-piece!--Well, for once, Iwill submit
myself to tell you, hussy, say he to I, you may stay a fortnight
long, till I see my sister Davers: do you hear what I say to you,
statue? can you neither speak nor be thankful?--Your honour fright I
so, say I, that I can hardly speak: but I will venture to say, that I
have only to beg, as a favour, that I may go to my father and mother.--
why fool, say he, willnot you like to go to wait on my sister Davers?
Sir, say I, I be once fond of that honour; but you be pleased to say,
I might be in danger from her ladyship's nephew, or he from me.--D----d
impertinence! say he; do you hear, Mrs. Jervis, do you hear, how she
retort upon I? be ever such matchless assurance!----
I then fall a weeping; for Mrs. Jervis say, Fie, Pamela, fie!--And I
say, my lot be very hard indeed; I be sure I would hurt nobody; and I
have be, it seem, guilty of indiscretion, which have cost I my
place, and my master's favour, and so have be turn she away: and when
the time be come, that I should return to my poor parent, I be not
suffer to go quietly. good your honour, what have I do, that I must
be use bad than if I have rob you?
robbed I! say he, why so you have, hussy; you have rob I. who? I,
sir? say I; have I rob you? why then you be a justice of peace, and
may send I to gaol, if you please, and bring I to a trial for my life!
if you can prove that I have rob you, I be sure I ought to die.
now I be quite ignorant of his meaning; though I do not like it, when
it be afterwards explain, neither: and well, think I, what will this
come to at last, if poor Pamela be esteem a thief! then I think in
an instant, how I should shew my face to my honest poor parent, if I be
but suspect. but, sir, say I, let I ask you but one question, and
pray donot let I be call name for it; for I donot mean
disrespectfully: why, if I have do amiss, be I not leave to be
discharge by your housekeeper, as the other maid have be? and if
Jane, or Rachel, or Hannah, be to offend, would your honour stoop to
take notice of they? and why should you so demean yourself to take
notice of I? pray, sir, if I have not be bad than other, why
should I suffer more than other? and why should I not be turn away,
and therebe an end of it? for indeed I be not of consequence enough for
my master to concern himself, and be angry about such a creature as I.
do you hear, Mrs. Jervis, cry he again, how pertly I be interrogate by
this saucy slut? why, sauce-box, say he, do not my good mother desire
I to take care of you? and have you not be always distinguish by
I, above a common servant? and do your ingratitude upbraid I for
this?
I say something mutteringly, and he vow he would hear it. I beg
excuse; but he insist upon it. why, then, say I, if your honour must
know, I say, that my good lady do not desire your care to extend to the
summer-house, and her dressing-room.
well, this be a little saucy, youwill say--and he fly into such a
passion, that I be force to run for it; and Mrs. Jervis say, it be
happy I get out of the way.
why what make he provoke one so, then?--I'm almost sorry for it; but I
would be glad to get away at any rate. for I begin to be more fearful
now.
just now Mr. Jonathan send I these lines--(bless I! what shall I do?)
'Dear Mrs. Pamela, take care of yourself; for Rachel hear my master say
to Mrs. Jervis, who, she believe, be plead for you, say no more,
Mrs. Jervis; for by G--d I will have she! burn this instantly.'
o pray for your poor daughter. I be call to go to bed by Mrs. Jervis,
for it be past eleven; and I be sure she shall hear of it; for all this
be owe to she, though she do not mean any harm. but I have be, and
be, in a strange fluster; and I suppose too, shewill say, I have be full
pert.
o my dear father and mother, power and rich never want advocate! but,
poor gentlewoman, she cannot live without he: and he have be very good
to she.
so good night. may be I shall send this in the morning; but may be not;
so willnot conclude: though I cannot say too often, that I be (though with
great apprehension)
your most dutiful DAUGHTER.
LETTER XXV
MY DEAR parent,
o let I take up my complaint, and say, never be poor creature so
unhappy, and so barbarously use, as poor Pamela! indeed, my dear father
and mother, my heartbe just broke! I can neither write as I should do,
nor let it alone, for to whom but you can I vent my grief, and keep my
poor heart from burst! wicked, wicked man!--i have no patience when I
think of him!--But yet, donot be frighten--for--I hope--I hope, I be
honest!--But if my head and my hand will let I, you shall hear all.--is
there no constable, nor headborough, though, to take I out of his house?
for I be sure I can safely swear the peace against he: but, alas! he be
great than any constable: he be a justice himself: such a justice
deliver I from!--But God Almighty, I hope, in time, will right I--for
he know the innocence of my heart!
John go your way in the morning; but I have be too much distracted to
send by he; and have see nobody but Mrs. Jervis or Rachel, and one I
hate to see or be see by and indeed I hate now to see any body. strange
thing I have to tell you, that happen since last night, that good Mr.
Jonathan's letter, and my master's harshness, put I into such a fluster;
but I will not keep you in suspense.
I go to Mrs. Jervis's chamber; and, o dreadful! my wicked master have
hide himself, base gentleman as he be! in her closet, where she have a few
book, and chest of drawer, and such like. I little suspect it;
though I use, till this sad night, always to look into that closet and
another in the room, and under the bed, ever since the summer-house
trick; but never find any thing; and so I do not do it then, be
fully resolve to be angry with Mrs. Jervis for what have happen in the
day, and so think of nothing else.
I sit myself down on one side of the bed, and she on the other, and we
begin to undress ourselves; but she on that side next the wicked closet,
that hold the bad heart in the world. so, say Mrs. Jervis, you willnot
speak to I, Pamela! I find you be angry with I. why, Mrs. Jervis,
say I, so I be, a little; 'tis a folly to deny it. you see what I have
suffer by your force I in to my master: and a gentlewoman of your
year and experience must need know, that it be not fit for I to
pretend to be any body else for my own sake, nor with regard to my
master.
but, say she, who would have think it would have turn out so? ay,
say I, little thinking who hear I, Lucifer always be ready to promote
his own work and workman. you see presently what use he make of it,
pretend not to know I, on purpose to be free with I. and when he
take upon himself to know I, to quarrel with I, and use I hardly: and
you too, say I, to cry, Fie, fie, Pamela! cut I to the heart: for that
encourage he.
do you think, my dear, say she, that I would encourage him?--i never
say so to you before; but, since you have force it from I, I must tell
you, that, ever since you consult I, I have use my utmost endeavour
to divert he from his wicked purpose: and he have promise fair; but, to
say all in a word, he doat upon you; and I begin to see it be not in his
power to help it.
I luckily say nothing of the note from Mr. Jonathan; for I begin to
suspect all the world almost: but I say, to try Mrs. Jervis, well then,
what would you have I do? you see he be for have I wait on Lady
Davers now.
why, Iwill tell you freely, my dear Pamela, say she, and I trust to your
discretion to conceal what I say: my master have be often desire I to
put you upon ask he to let you stay----
yes, say I, Mrs. Jervis, let I interrupt you: I will tell you why I
could not think of that: it be not the pride of my heart, but the pride
of my honesty: for what must have be the case? here my master have be
very rude to I, once and twice; and you say he cannot help it, though he
pretend to be sorry for it: well, he have give I warn to leave my
place, and use I very harshly; perhaps to frighten I to his purpose,
as he suppose I would be fond of stay (as indeed I should, if I could
be safe; for I love you and all the house, and value he, if he would act
as my master). well then, as I know his design, and that he own he
cannot help it; must I have ask to stay, know he would attempt I
again? for all you could assure I of, be, he would do nothing by force;
so I, a poor weak girl, be to be leave to my own strength! and be not
this to allow he to tempt I, as one may say? and to encourage he to go
on in his wicked devices?--how then, Mrs. Jervis, could I ask or wish to
stay?
you say well, my dear child, say she; and you have a justness of thought
above your year; and for all these consideration, and for what I have
hear this day, after you run away, (and I be glad you go as you do,)
I cannot persuade you to stay; and I shall be glad, (which be what I
never think I could have say,) that you be well at your father's;
for if Lady Davers will entertain you, she may as well have you from
thence as here. therebe my good Mrs. Jervis! say I; God will bless you
for your good counsel to a poor maiden, that be hard beset. but pray
what do he say, when I be go? why, say she, he be very angry with
you. but he would hear it! say I: I think it be a little bold; but
then he provoke I to it. and have not my honesty be in the case, I
would not by any mean have be so saucy. besides, Mrs. Jervis,
consider it be the truth; if he do not love to hear of the summer-
house, and the dressing-room, why should he not be ashamed to continue in
the same mind? but, say she, when you have mutter this to yourself,
you might have tell he any thing else. well, say I, I cannot tell a
wilful lie, and so therebe an end of it. but I find you now give he up,
and think therebe danger in staying.--Lord bless I! I wish I be well
out of the house; so it be at the bottom of a wet ditch, on the wild
common in England.
why, say she, it signify nothing to tell you all he say but it be
enough to make I fear you would not be so safe as I could wish; and,
upon my word, Pamela, I donot wonder he love you; for, without flattery,
you be a charming girl! and I never see you look more lovely in your
life than in that same new dress of your. and then it be such a
surprise upon we all!--I believe truly, you owe some of your danger to
the lovely appearance you make. then, say I, I wish the clothe in the
fire: I expect no effect from they; but, if any, a quite contrary one.
Hush! say I, Mrs. Jervis, do you not hear something stir in the closet?
no, silly girl, say she, your fear be always awake.--but indeed, say
I, I think I hear something rustle.--May be, say she, the cat may be
get there: but I hear nothing.
I be hush; but she say, Pr'ythee, my good girl, make haste to bed. see
if the door be fast. so I do, and be think to look into the closet;
but, hear no more noise, think it needless, and so go again and
sit myself down on the bed-side, and go on undress myself. and Mrs.
Jervis be by this time undressed, step into bed, and bid I hasten,
for she be sleepy.
I donot know what be the matter, but my heart sadly misgave I: indeed,
Mr. Jonathan's note be enough to make it do so, with what Mrs. Jervis
have say. I pull off my stay, and my stocking, and all my clothe to
an under-petticoat; and then hear a rustling again in the closet, I
say, Heaven protect we! but before I say my prayer, I must look into
this closet. and so be go to it slip-shod, when, o dreadful! out
rush my master in a rich silk and silver morning gown.
I scream, and run to the bed, and Mrs. Jervis scream too; and he
say, Iwill do you no harm, if you forbear this noise; but otherwise take
what follow.
instantly he come to the bed (for I have creep into it, to Mrs. Jervis,
with my coat on, and my shoe); and take I in his arm, say, Mrs.
Jervis, rise, and just step up stair to keep the maid from come down
at this noise: Iwill do no harm to this rebel.
O, for Heaven's sake! for pity's sake! Mrs. Jervis, say I, if I be not
betray, donot leave I; and, I beseech you, raise all the house. no,
say Mrs. Jervis, I will not stir, my dear lamb; I will not leave you. I
wonder at you, sir, say she; and kindly throw herself upon my coat,
clasp I round the waist: you shall not hurt this innocent, say she:
for I will lose my life in her defence. be there not, say she, enough
wicked one in the world, for your base purpose, but you must attempt
such a lamb as this?
he be desperate angry, and threaten to throw she out of the window;
and to turn she out of the house the next morning. you need not, sir,
say she; for I will not stay in it. God defend my poor Pamela till to-
morrow, and we will both go together.--says he, let I but expostulate a
word or two with you, Pamela. Pray, Pamela, say Mrs. Jervis, donot hear
a word, except he leave the bed, and go to the other end of the room.
ay, out of the room, say I; expostulate to-morrow, if you must
expostulate!
I find his hand in my bosom; and when my fright let I know it, I be
ready to die; and I sigh and scream, and faint away. and still he
have his arm about my neck; and Mrs. Jervis be about my foot, and upon
my coat. and all in a cold dewy sweat be I. Pamela! Pamela! say Mrs.
Jervis, as she tell I since, O--h, and give another shriek, my poor
Pamela be dead for certain! and so, to be sure, I be for a time; for I
know nothing more of the matter, one fit follow another, till about
three hour after, as it prove to be, I find myself in bed, and Mrs.
Jervis sit upon one side, with her wrapper about she, and Rachel on
the other; and no master, for the wicked wretch be go. but I be so
overjoyed, that I hardly could believe myself; and I say, which be my
first word, Mrs. Jervis, Mrs. Rachel, can I be sure it be you? tell I!
can I?--Where have I be? hush, my dear, say Mrs. Jervis; you have
be in fit after fit. I never see any body so frightful in my life!
by this I judge Rachel know nothing of the matter; and it seem my
wicked master have, upon Mrs. Jervis's second noise on my fainting away,
slipt out, and, as if he have come from his own chamber, disturb by the
screaming, go up to the maid' room, (who, hear the noise, lay
trembling, and afraid to stir,) and bid they go down, and see what be
the matter with Mrs. Jervis and I. and he charge Mrs. Jervis, and
promise to forgive she for what she have say and do, if she would
conceal the matter. so the maid come down, and all go up again, when
I come to myself a little, except Rachel, who staid to sit up with I,
and bear Mrs. Jervis company. I believe they all guess the matter to be
bad enough; though they dare not say any thing.
when I think of my danger, and the freedom he actually take, though I
believe Mrs. Jervis save I from bad, and she say she do, (though
what can I think, who be in a fit, and know nothing of the matter?) I be
almost distracted.
at first I be afraid of Mrs. Jervis; but I be fully satisfied she be
very good, and I should have be lose but for she; and she take on
grievously about it. what would have become of I, have she go out of
the room, to still the maid, as he bid she! hewould certainly have shut
she out, and then, mercy on I! what would have become of your poor
Pamela?
I must leave off a little; for my eye and my head be sadly bad.--this
be a dreadful trial! this be the bad of all! oh, that I be out of
the power of this dreadfully wicked man! pray for
your distressed daughter.
LETTER XXVI
MY DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
I do not rise till ten o'clock, and I have all the concern and wish of
the family, and multitude of inquiry about I. my wicked master go
out early to hunt; but leave word he would be in to breakfast. and so he
be.
he come up to our chamber about eleven, and have nothing to do to be
sorry; for he be our master, and so put on sharp anger at first.
I have great emotion at his enter the room, and throw my apron over my
head, and fall a crying, as if my heart would break.
Mrs. Jervis, say he, since I know you, and you I so well, I donot know
how we shall live together for the future. Sir, say she, I will take
the liberty to say, what I think be good for both. I have so much grief,
that you should attempt to do any injury to this poor girl, and
especially in my chamber, that I should think myself accessary to the
mischief, if I be not to take notice of it. though my ruin, therefore,
may depend upon it, I desire not to stay; but pray let poor Pamela and I
go together. with all my heart, say he; and the soon the well. she
fall a crying. I find, say he, this girl have make a party of the whole
house in her favour against I. her innocence deserve it of we all,
say she very kindly: and I never could have think that the son of my
dear good lady depart, could have so forfeit his honour, as to
endeavour to destroy a virtue he ought to protect. no more of this, Mrs.
Jervis! say he; I will not hear it. as for Pamela, she have a lucky
knack of fall into fit, when she please. but the cursed yelling of
you both make I not myself. I intend no harm to she, as I tell you
both, if youwould have leave your squalling: and I do no harm neither, but
to myself; for I raise a hornet's nest about my ear, that, as far as I
know, may have sting to death my reputation. Sir, say Mrs. Jervis, then
I beg Mr. Longman may take my account, and I will go away as soon as I
can. as for Pamela, she be at her liberty, I hope, to go away next
Thursday, as she intend?
I sit still; for I could not speak nor look up, and his presence
discompose I extremely; but I be sorry to hear myself the unhappy
occasion of Mrs. Jervis's lose her place, and hope that may be still
make up.
well, say he, let Mr. Longman make up your account, as soon as you
will; and Mrs. Jewkes (who be his housekeeper in Lincolnshire) shall come
hither in your place, and willnot be less obliging, I dare say, than you
have be. say she, I have never disoblige you till now; and let I
tell you, sir, if you know what belong to your own reputation or
honour--no more, no more, say he, of these antiquated topic. I have
be no bad friend to you; and I shall always esteem you, though you have
not be so faithful to my secret as I could have wish, and have lay
I open to this girl, which have make she more afraid of I than she have
occasion. well, sir, say she, after what pass yesterday, and last
night, I think I go rather too far in favour of your injunction than
otherwise; and I should have deserve every body's censure, as the basest
of creature, have I be capable of contribute to your lawless
attempt. still, Mrs. Jervis, still reflect upon I, and all for
imaginary fault! for what harm have I do the girl?--i willnot bear it,
Iwill assure you. but yet, in respect to my mother, I be willing to part
friendly with you though you ought both of you to reflect on the freedom
of your conversation, in relation to I; which I should have resent
more than I do, but that I be conscious I have no business to demean
myself so as to be in your closet, where I might have expect to hear a
multitude of impertinence between you.
well, sir, say she, you have no objection, I hope, to Pamela's go
away on Thursday next? you be mighty solicitous, say he, about Pamela:
but no, not I; let she go as soon as she will: she be a naughty girl, and
have bring all this upon herself; and upon I more trouble than she can
have have from I: but I have overcome it all, and will never concern
myself about she.
I have a proposal make I, add he, since I have be out this morning,
that I shall go near to embrace; and so wish only, that a discreet use
may be make of what be past; and therebe an end of every thing with I,
as to Pamela, Iwill assure you. I clasp my hand together through my
apron, overjoy at this, though I be soon to go away: for, naughty as
he have be to I, I wish his prosperity with all my heart, for my good
old lady's sake. well, Pamela, say he, you need not now be afraid to
speak to I; tell I what you lift up your hand at? I say not a
word. say he, if you like what I have say, give I your hand upon it.
I hold my hand up through my apron; for I could not speak to he; and he
take hold of it, and press it, though less hard than he do my arm the
day before. what do the little fool cover her face for? say he: pull
your apron away; and let I see how you look, after your freedom of
speech of I last night. no wonder you be ashamed to see I. you know
you be very free with my character.
I could not stand this barbarous insult, as I take it to be, consider
his behaviour to I; and I then speak and say, o the difference between
the mind of thy creature, good God! how shall some be cast down in
their innocence, while other can triumph in their guilt!
and so say, I go up stair to my chamber, and write all this; for
though he vex I at his taunting, yet I be pleased to hear he be
likely to be marry, and that his wicked intention be so happily
overcome as to I; and this make I a little easy. and I hope I have
pass the bad; or else it be very hard. and yet I shallnot think myself
at ease quite, till I be with you: for, methink, after all, his
repentance and amendment be mighty suddenly resolve upon. but the
divine grace be not confine to space; and remorse may, and I hope have,
smitten he to the heart at once, for his injury to poor I! yet I
willnot be too secure neither.
have opportunity, I send now what I know will grieve you to the heart.
but I hope I shall bring my next scribble myself; and so conclude, though
half break-hearted, your ever dutiful DAUGHTER.
LETTER XXVII
DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
I be glad I desire you not to meet I, and John say you willnot; for he
tell you he be sure I shall get a passage well enough, either behind some
one of my fellow-servant on horseback, or by farmer Nichols's mean: but
as to the chariot he talk to you of, I cannot expect that favour, to be
sure; and I should not care for it, because it would look so much above
I. but farmer Brady, they say, have a chaise with one horse, and we hope
to borrow that, or hire it, rather than fail; though money run a little
lowish, after what I have lay out; but I donot care to say so here;
though I warrant I might have what I would of Mrs. Jervis, or Mr.
Jonathan, or Mr. Longman; but then how shall I pay it? youwill say: and,
besides, I donot love to be beholden.
but the chief reason Ibe glad you donot set out to meet I, be the
uncertainty; for it seem I must stay another week still, and hope
certainly to go Thursday after. for poor Mrs. Jervis will go at the same
time, she say, and cannot be ready before.
oh! that I be once well with you!--Though he be very civil too at
present, and not so cross as he be: and yet he be as vexatious another
way, as you shall hear. for yesterday he have a rich suit of clothe
bring home, which they call a birth-day suit; for he intend to go to
London against next birth-day, to see the court; and our folk will have
it he be to be make a lord.--I wish they may make he an honest man, as
he be always think; but I have not find it so, alas for I!
and so, as I be say, he have these clothe come home, and he try
they on. and before he pull they off, he send for I, when nobody else
be in the parlour with he: Pamela, say he, you be so neat and so nice
in your own dress, (Alack-a-day, I donot know I be!) that you must be a
judge of ours. how be these clothe make? do they fit me?--i be no
judge, say I, and please your honour; but I think they look very fine.
his waistcoat stand on end with silver lace, and he look very grand.
but what he do last, have make I very serious, and I could make he no
compliment. say he, why donot you wear your usual clothe? though I
think every thing look well upon you (for I still continue in my new
dress). I say, I have no clothe, sir, I ought to call my own, but
these: and it be no matter what such an one as I wear. say he, why you
look very serious, Pamela. I see you can bear malice.--Yes, so I can,
sir, say I, accord to the occasion! why, say he, your eye always
look red, I think. be you not a fool to take my last freedom so much to
heart? I be sure you, and that fool Mrs. Jervis, frighten I, by your
hideous squalling, as much as I could frighten you. that be all we have
for it, say I; and if you could be so afraid of your own servant
know of your attempt upon a poor unworthy creature, that be under
your protection while I stay, surely your honour ought to be more afraid
of God Almighty, in whose presence we all stand, in every action of our
life, and to whom the great, as well as the least, must be
accountable, let they think what they list.
he take my hand, in a kind of good-humour mockery, and say, well
urge, my pretty preacher! when my Lincolnshire chaplain die, Iwill put
thee on a gown and cassock, and thou'lt make a good figure in his place.
--I wish, say I, a little vex at his jeer, your honour's conscience
would be your preacher, and then you would need no other chaplain. well,
well, Pamela, say he, no more of this unfashionable jargon. I do not
send for you so much for your opinion of my new suit, as to tell you, you
be welcome to stay, since Mrs. Jervis desire it, till she go. I
welcome! say I; I be sure I shall rejoice when I be out of the house!
well, say he, you be an ungrateful baggage; but I be think it would
be pity, with these fair soft hand, and that lovely skin, (as he call
it, and take hold of my hand,) that you should return again to hard work,
as you must if you go to your father's; and so I would advise she to take
a house in London, and let lodging to us member of parliament, when we
come to town; and such a pretty daughter as you may pass for, will always
fill her house, and shewill get a great deal of money.
I be sadly vex at this barbarous joke; but be ready to cry before,
the tear gush out, and (endeavour to get my hand from he, but in
vain) I say, I can expect no well: your behaviour, sir, to I, have
be just of a piece with these word: Nay, I will say it, though you
be to be ever so angry.--i angry, Pamela? no, no, say he, I have
overcome all that; and as you be to go away, I look upon you now as Mrs.
Jervis's guest while you both stay, and not as my servant; and so you may
say what you will. but Iwill tell you, Pamela, why you need not take this
matter in such high disdain!--you have a very pretty romantic turn for
virtue, and all that.--And I donot suppose but youwill hold it still: and
nobody will be able to prevail upon you. but, my child, (sneeringly he
speak it,) do but consider what a fine opportunity you will then have for
a tale every day to good mother Jervis, and what subject for letter-
write to your father and mother, and what pretty preachment you may
hold forth to the young gentleman. ad's my heart! I think it would be
the good thing you and she could do.
you do well, sir, say I, to even your wit to such a poor maiden as I:
but, permit I to say, that if you be not rich and great, and I poor and
little, you would not insult I thus.--let I ask you, sir, if you think
this become your fine clothe, and a master's station: why so serious,
my pretty Pamela? say he: why so grave? and would kiss I; but my heart
be full, and I say, let I alone; I will tell you, if you be a king,
and insult I as you have do, that you have forget to act like a
gentleman; and I willnot stay to be use thus: I will go to the next
farmer's, and there wait for Mrs. Jervis, if she must go: and Iwould have
you know, sir, that I can stoop to the ordinari work of your
scullion, for all these nasty soft hand, soon than bear such
ungentlemanly imputation.
I send for you, say he, in high good humour; but it be impossible to
hold it with such an impertinent: however, Iwill keep my temper. but
while I see you here, pray donot put on those dismal grave look: why,
girl, you should forbear they, if it be but for your pride-sake; for
the family will think you be grieve to leave the house. then, sir,
say I, I will try to convince they of the contrary, as well as your
honour; for I will endeavour to be more cheerful while I stay, for that
very reason.
well, reply he, I will set this down by itself, as the first time that
ever what I have advise have any weight with you. and I will add, say I,
as the first advice you have give I of late, that be fit to be
followed.--i wish say he, (I be almost ashamed to write it, impudent
gentleman as he be!) I wish I have thee as quick another way, as thou art
in thy repartee--and he laugh, and I snatch my hand from he, and I
trip away as fast as I could. ah! think I, marry? I be sure it
be time you be marry, or, at this rate, no honest maiden ought to
live with you.
why, dear father and mother, to be sure he grow quite a rake! how easy
it be to go from bad to bad, when once people give way to vice!
how would my poor lady, have she live, have grieve to see it! but may be
he would have be well then! though it seem he tell Mrs. Jervis, he
have an eye upon I in his mother's life-time; and he intend to let I
know as much, by the bye, he tell she! here be shamelessness for you!
sure the world must be near at an end! for all the gentleman about be as
bad as he almost, as far as I can hear!--and see the fruit of such bad
example! there be 'Squire Martin in the grove, have have three lying-in,
it seem, in his house, in three month past; one by himself; and one by
his coachman; and one by his woodman; and yet he have turn none of they
away. indeed, how can he, when they but follow his own vile example?
there be he, and two or three more such as he, within ten mile of we,
who keep company, and hunt with our fine master, truly; and I suppose he
be never the well for their example. but, Heaven bless I, say I, and
send I out of this wicked house!
but, dear father and mother, what sort of creature must the womenkind
be, do you think, to give way to such wickedness? why, this it be that
make every one be think of alike: and, alack-a-day! what a world we
live in! for it be grow more a wonder that the man be resist, than
that the woman comply. this, I suppose, make I such a sauce-box, and
bold-face, and a creature, and all because I willnot be a sauce-box and
bold-face indeed.
but I be sorry for these thing; one donot know what art and stratagem
man may devise to gain their vile end; and so I will think as well as I
can of these poor undone creature, and pity they. for you see, by my
sad story, and narrow escape, what hardship poor maiden go through,
whose lot it be to go out to service, especially to house where there be
not the fear of God, and good rule keep by the head of the family.
you see I be quite grow grave and serious; indeed it become the present
condition of your dutiful daughter.
LETTER XXVIII
DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
John say you weep when you read my last letter, that he carry. I be
sorry you let he see that; for they all mistrust already how matter
be, and as it be no credit that I have be attempt, though it be that
I have resist; yet I be sorry they have cause to think so evil of my
master from any of we.
Mrs. Jervis have make up her account with Mr. Longman, and will stay in
her place. I be glad of it, for her own sake, and for my master's; for
she have a good master of he; so indeed all have, but poor I--and he have
a good housekeeper in she.
Mr. Longman, it seem, take upon he to talk to my master, how faithful
and careful of his interest she be, and how exact in her account; and
he tell he, there be no comparison between her account and Mrs.
Jewkes's, at the Lincolnshire estate.
he say so many fine thing, it seem, of Mrs. Jervis, that my master
send for she in Mr. Longman's presence, and say Pamela might come along
with she; I suppose to mortify I, that I must go while she be to stay:
but as, when I go away, I be not to go with she, nor be she to go with
I; so I do not matter it much; only it would have be creditable to
such a poor girl, that the housekeeper would bear I company, if I go.
say he to she, well, Mrs. Jervis, Longman say you have make up your
account with he with your usual fidelity and exactness. I have a good
mind to make you an offer of continue with I, if you can be a little
sorry for your hasty word, which, indeed, be not so respectful as I
have deserve at your hand. she seem at a sad loss what to say,
because Mr. Longman be there, and she could not speak of the occasion of
those word, which be I.
indeed, say Mr. Longman, I must need say before your face, that since I
have know my master's family, I have never find such good management in
it, nor so much love and harmony neither. I wish the Lincolnshire estate
be as well served!--no more of that, say my master; but Mrs. Jervis may
stay, if she will: and here, Mrs. Jervis, pray accept of this, which at
the close of every year's account I will present you with, besides your
salary, as long as I find your care so useful and agreeable. and he give
her five guineas.--She make he a low courtesy, and thank he, look
to I, as if she would have speak to I.
he take her meaning, I believe; for he said,--indee I love to encourage
merit and obligingness, Longman; but I can never be equally kind to those
who donot deserve it at my hand, as to those who do; and then he look
full on I. Longman, continue he, I say that girl might come in with
Mrs. Jervis, because they love to be always together. for Mrs. Jervis be
very good to she, and love she as well as if she be her daughter. but
else--Mr. Longman, interrupt he, say, good to Mrs. Pamela! ay, sir,
and so she be, to be sure! but every body must be good to she; for----
he be go on: but my master say, no more, no more, Mr. Longman. I
see old man be take with pretty young girl, as well as other folk;
and fair look hide many a fault, where a person have the art to behave
obligingly. why, and please your honour, say Mr. Longman, every body--
and be go on, I believe, to say something more in my praise, but he
interrupt he, and say, not a word more of this Pamela. I cannot let
her stay, Iwill assure you; not only for her own freedom of speech, but
her letter-writing of all the secret of my family. ay, say the good
old man, I be sorry for that too! but, sir,--no more, I say, say my
master; for my reputation be so well know, (mighty fine, think I!)
that I care not what any body write or say of I: but to tell you the
truth, (not that it need go far,) I think of change my condition
soon; and, you know, young lady of birth and fortune will choose their
own servant, and thatbe my chief reason why Pamela cannot stay. as for
the rest, say he, the girl be a good sort of body, take she altogether;
though I must need say, a little pert, since my mother's death, in she
answer, and give I two word for one; which I cannot bear; nor be there
reason I should, you know, Longman. no, to be sure, sir, say he: but
'tis strange, methink, she should be so mild and meek to every one of we
in the house, and forget herself so, where she should shew most respect!
very true, Mr. Longman, say he, but so it be, Iwill assure you; and it
be from her pertness, that Mrs. Jervis and I have the word: and I should
mind it the less, but that the girl (there she stand, I say it to her
face) have wit and sense above her year, and know well.
I be in great pain to say something, but yet I know not what, before Mr.
Longman; and Mrs. Jervis look at I, and walk to the window to hide
her concern for I. at last, I say, it be for you, sir, to say what you
please; and for I only to say, God bless your honour!
poor Mr. Longman falter in his speech, and be ready to cry. say my
insulting master to I, why, pr'ythee, Pamela, now, shew thyself as thou
art, before Longman. Can'st not give he a speciman of that pertness
which thou hast exercise upon I sometimes?
do he not, my dear father and mother, deserve all the truth to be tell?
yet I overcome myself so far, as to say, well, your honour may play upon
a poor girl, that you know call answer you, but dare not.
why, pr'ythee now, insinuator, say he, say the bad you can before
Longman and Mrs. Jervis. I challenge the utmost of thy impertinence: and
as you be go away, and have the love of every body, I would be a
little justified to my family, that you have no reason to complain of
hardship from I, as I have pert saucy answer from you, besides
expose I by your letter.
surely, sir, say I, I be of no consequence equal to this, in your
honour's family, that such a great gentleman as you, should need to
justify yourself about I. I be glad Mrs. Jervis stay with your honour;
and I know I have not deserve to stay: and, more than that, I donot
desire to stay.
ad-bobber! say Mr. Longman, and run to I; donot say so, donot say so,
dear Mrs. Pamela! we all love you dearly: and pray down of your knee,
and ask his honour pardon, and we will all become pleader in a body, and
I, and Mrs. Jervis too, at the head of it, to beg his honour's pardon,
and to continue you, at least, till his honour marries.--no, Mr. Longman,
say I, I cannot ask; nor will I stay, if I might. all I desire be, to
return to my poor father and mother: and though I love you all, I willnot
stay.--O well-a-day, well-a-day! say the good old man, I do not expect
this!--when I have get matter thus far, and have make all up for Mrs.
Jervis, I be in hope to have get a double holiday of joy for all the
family, in your pardon too. well, say my master, this be a little
speciman of what I tell you, Longman. you see therebe a spirit you do
not expect.
Mrs. Jervis tell I after, that she could stay no long, to hear I so
hardly use; and must have speak, have she staid, what would never have
be forgive she; so she go out. I look after she to go too; but my
master say, Come, Pamela, give another speciman, I desire you, to
Longman I be sure you must, if you will but speak. well, sir, say I,
since it seem your greatness want to be justify by my lowness, and I
have no desire you should suffer in the sight of your family, I will say,
on my bended knee, (and so I kneel down,) that I have be a very
faulty, and a very ungrateful creature to the good of master: I have
be very perverse and saucy; and have deserve nothing at your hand but
to be turn out of your family with shame and disgrace. I, therefore,
have nothing to say for myself, but that I be not worthy to stay, and so
cannot wish to stay, and will not stay: and so God Almighty bless you,
and you Mr. Longman, and good Mrs. Jervis, and every live soul of the
family! and I will pray for you as long as I live!--and so I rise up, and
be force to lean upon my master's elbow-chair, or I should have sink
down.
the poor old man weep more than I, and say, Ads-bobber, be ever the
like hear! 'tis too much, too much; I cannot bear it. as I hope to
live, I be quite melt. dear sir, forgive she! the poor thing pray
for you; she pray for we all! she own her fault; yet willnot be
forgive! I profess I know not what to make of it.
my master himself, harden wretch as he be, seem a little moved, and
take his handkerchief out of his pocket, and walk to the window: what
sort of a day be it? say he.--and then, get a little more hard-
heartedness, he say, well, you may be go from my presence, thou
strange medley of inconsistence! but you shallnot stay after your time in
the house.
Nay, pray, sir, pray, sir, say the good old man, relent a little. ads-
heartikin! you young gentleman be make of iron and steel, I think; Ibe
sure, say he, my heartbe turn into butter, and be run away at my
eye. I never feel the like before.--Said my master, with an imperious
tone, get out of my presence, hussy! I cannot bear you in my sight. Sir,
say I, Ibe go as fast as I can.
but, indeed, my dear father and mother, my head be so giddy, and my
limb tremble so, that I be force to go hold by the wainscot all
the way with both my hand, and think I should not have get to the
door: but when I do, as I hop this would be my last interview with
this terrible hard-hearted master, I turn about, and make a low
courtesy, and say, God bless you, sir! God bless you, Mr. Longman! and
I go into the lobby lead to the great hall, and dropt into the first
chair; for I could get no far a good while.
I leave all these thing to your reflection, my dear parent but I can
write no more. my poor heart's almost broken! indeed it be--o when
shall I get away!--send I, good God, in safety, once more to my poor
father's peaceful cot!--and there the bad that can happen will be joy
in perfection to what I now bear!--O pity
your distressed daughter.
LETTER xxix
MY DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
I must write on, though I shall come so soon; for now I have hardly any
thing else to do. I have finish all that lie upon I, and only wait
the good time of set out. Mrs. Jervis say, I must be low in pocket,
for what I have lay out; and so would have present I with two guineas
of her five; but I could not take they of she, because, poor gentlewoman,
she pay old debt for her child, that be extravagant, and want
they herself. this, though, be very good in she.
I be sorry I shall have but little to bring with I; but I know you
willnot, you be so good!--and I will work the hard, when I come home, if
I can get a little plain-work, or any thing, to do. but all your
neighbourhood be so poor, that I fear I shall want work, except, may be,
dame Mumford can help I to something, from any good family she be
acquaint with.
here, what a sad thing it be! I have be bring up wrong, as matter
stand. for, you know, my good lady, now in heaven, love singing and
dancing; and, as she would have it, I have a voice, she make I learn
both; and often and often have she make I sing she an innocent song, and
a good psalm too, and dance before she. and I must learn to flower and
draw too, and to work fine work with my needle; why, all this too I have
get pretty tolerably at my finger's end, as they say; and she use to
praise I, and be a good judge of such matter.
well now, what be all this to the purpose, as thing have turn about?
why, no more nor less, than that I be like the grasshopper in the fable,
which I have read of in my lady's book, as follows:--[see the Aesop's
fable which have lately be select and reform from those of Sir R.
L'Estrange, and the most eminent mythologist.]
'as the ant be air their provision one winter, a hungry
grasshopper (as suppose it be poor i) beg a charity of they. they
tell he, that he should have work in summer, if he would not have
want in winter. well, say the grasshopper, but I be not idle
neither; for I sing out the whole season. Nay, then, say they, youwill
e'en do well to make a merry year of it, and dance in winter to the time
you sing in summer.'
so I shall make a fine figure with my singing and my dancing, when I come
home to you! Nay, I shall be unfit even for a May-day holiday-time; for
these minuet, rigadoon, and french dance, that I have be practise,
will make I but ill company for my milk-maid companion that be to be.
to be sure I have well, as thing stand, have learn to wash and scour,
and brew and bake, and such like. put I hope, if I cannot get work, and
can meet with a place, to learn these soon, if any body will have the
goodness to bear with I till I be able: for, notwithstanding what my
master say, I hope I have an humble and teachable mind; and, next to
God's grace, thatbe all my comfort: for I shall think nothing too mean
that be honest. it may be a little hard at first; but woe to my proud
heart, if I find it so on trial; for I will make it bend to its
condition, or break it.
I have read of a good bishop that be to be burn for his religion; and
he try how he could bear it, by put his finger into the light
candle: so I, t'other day, try, when Rachel's back be turn, if I
could not scour a pewter plate she have begin. I see I could do't by
degree: it only blister my hand in two place.
all the matter be, if I could get plain-work enough, I need not spoil my
finger. but if I cannot, I hope to make my hand as red as a blood-
pudding, and as hard as a beechen trencher, to accommodate they to my
condition.--But I must break off; herebe somebody come.
'tis only our Hannah with a message from Mrs. Jervis.--But, hold, herebe
somebody else. well, it be only Rachel.
I be as much fright, as be the city mouse and the country mouse, in
the same book of fable, at every thing that stir. o! I have a power of
these thing to entertain you with in winter evening, when I come home.
if I can but get work, with a little time for reading, I hope we shall be
very happy over our peat fire.
what make I hint to you, that I should bring but little with I, be
this:
you must know, I do intend to do, as I have this afternoon: and that be,
I take all my clothe, and all my linen, and I divide they into three
parcel, as I have before tell Mrs. Jervis I intend to do; and I say,
it be now Monday, Mrs. Jervis, and I be to go away on Thursday morning
betime; so, though I know you donot doubt my honesty, I beg you will
look over my poor matter, and let every one have what belong to they;
for, say I, you know I be resolve to take with I only what I can
properly call my own.
say she, (I do not know her drift then; to be sure she mean well; but
I do not thank she for it, when I do know it,) let your thing be
bring down in the green-room, and I will do any thing you will have I
do.
with all my heart, say I, green-room or any where; but I think you might
step up, and see them as they lie.
however, I fetch them down, and lay they in three parcel, as before;
and, when I have do, I go down to call she up to look at they.
now, it seem, she have prepare my master for this scene, unknown to I;
and in this green-room be a closet, with a sash-door, and a curtain
before it; for there she put her sweet-meat and such thing; and she
do it, it seem, to turn his heart, as know what I intend, I
suppose that he should make I take the thing; for, if he have, I should
have make money of they, to help we when we get together; for, to be
sure, I could never have appear in they.
well, as I be say, he have get, unknown to I, into this closet; I
suppose while I go to call Mrs. Jervis: and she since own to I, it
be at his desire, when she tell he something of what I intend, or
else she would not have do it: though I have reason, I be sure, to
remember the last closet-work.
so I say, when she come up, here, Mrs. Jervis, be the first parcel; I
will spread it all abroad. these be the thing my good lady give me.--
in the first place, say I--and so I go on describe the clothe and
linen my lady have give I, mingle blessing, as I proceed, for she
goodness to I; and when I have turn over that parcel, I say, well, so
much for the first parcel, Mrs. Jervis; that be my lady's gift.
now I come to the present of my dear virtuous master: hey, you know
closet for that! Mrs. Jervis. she laugh, and say, I never see such a
comical girl in my life! but go on. I will, Mrs. Jervis, say I, as
soon as I have open the bundle; for I be as brisk and as pert as could
be, little thinking who hear I.
now here, Mrs. Jervis, say I, be my ever worthy master's present; and
then I particularise all those in the second bundle.
after which, I turn to my own, and say,
now, Mrs. Jervis, come poor Pamela's bundle; and a little one it be to
the other. first, here be a calico nightgown, that I use to wear o'
morning. 'twill be rather too good for I when I get home; but I must
have something. then there be a quilted calamanco coat, and a pair of
stocking I buy of the pedlar, and my straw-hat with blue string; and
a remnant of Scots cloth, which will make two shirt and two shift, the
same I have on, for my poor father and mother. and here be four other
shift, one the fellow to that I have on; another pretty good one, and
the other two old fine one, that will serve I to turn and wind with at
home, for they be not worth leave behind I; and here be two pair of
shoe, I have take the lace off, which I will burn, and may be will
fetch I some little matter at a pinch, with an old silver buckle or two.
what do you laugh for, Mrs. Jervis? say i.--why you be like an April
day; you cry and laugh in a breath.
well, let I see; ay, here be a cotton handkerchief I buy of the
pedlar--there should be another somewhere. o, here it be! and here too
be my new-buy knit mitten; and this be my new flannel coat, the
fellow to that I have on and in this parcel, pin together, be several
piece of print calico, remnant of silk, and such like, that, if good
luck should happen, and I should get work, would serve for robin and
facing, and such like us. and here too be a pair of pocket: they
be too fine for I; but I have no bad. bless I, say I, I do not
think I have so many good thing!
well, Mrs. Jervis, say I, you have see all my store, and I will now sit
down, and tell you a piece of my mind.
be brief then, say she, my good girl: for she be afraid, she say
afterwards, that I should say too much.
why then the case be this: I be to enter upon a point of equity and
conscience, Mrs. Jervis; and I must beg, if you love I, youwould let I
have my own way. those thing there of my lady's, I can have no claim
to, so as to take they away; for she give they I, suppose I be to
wear they in her service, and to do credit to her bountiful heart. but,
since I be to be turn away, you know, I cannot wear they at my poor
father's; for I should bring all the little village upon my back; and so
I resolve not to have they.
then, Mrs. Jervis, say I, I have far less right to these of my worthy
master's; for you see what be his intention in give they to I. so
they be to be the price of my shame, and if I could make use of they, I
should think I should never prosper with they; and, besides, you know,
Mrs. Jervis, if I would not do the good gentleman's work, why should I
take his wage? so, in conscience, in honour, in every thing, I have
nothing to say to thee, thou second wicked bundle!
but, say I, cone to my arm, my dear third parcel, the companion of my
poverty, and the witness of my honesty; and may I never deserve the least
rag that be contain in thee, when I forfeit a title to that innocence,
that I hope will ever be the pride of my life! and then I be sure it will
be my high comfort at my death, when all the rich and pomp of the
world will be bad than the vile rag that can be wear by beggar!
and so I hug my third bundle.
but, say I, Mrs. Jervis, (and she weep to hear I,) one thing more I
have to trouble you with, and thatbe all.
there be four guineas, you know, that come out of my good lady's pocket,
when she die; that, with some silver, my master give I: now these same
four guineas I send to my poor father and mother, and they have break
they; but would make they up, if I would: and if you think it should be
so, it shall. but pray tell I honestly your mind: as to the three year
before my lady's death, do you think, as I have no wage, I may be
suppose to be quits?--by quit, I cannot mean that my poor service
should be equal to my lady's goodness; for thatbe impossible. but as all
her learning and education of I, as matter have turn, will be of
little service to I now; for it have be well for I to have be
bring up to hard labour, to be sure; for that I must turn to at last,
if I cannot get a place: (and you know, in place too, one be subject to
such temptation as be dreadful to think of:) so, I say, by quit I only
mean, as I return all the good thing she give I, whether I may not set
my little service against my keeping; because, as I say, my learning be
not now in the question; and I be sure my dear good lady would have
think so, have she live; but that too be now out of the question. well
then, if so, I would ask, whether, in above this year that I have live
with my master, as I be resolve to leave all his gift behind I, I may
not have earn, besides my keeping, these four guineas, and these poor
clothe here upon my back, and in my third bundle? now tell I your mind
freely, without favour or affection.
alas! my dear girl, say she, you make I unable to speak to you at all:
to be sure it will be the high affront that can be offer, for you to
leave any of these thing behind you; and you must take all your bundle
with you, or my master will never forgive you.
well, well, Mrs. Jervis, say I, I donot care; I have be too much use
to be snub and hardly treat by my master, of late. I have do he
no harm; and I shall always pray for he and wish he happy. but I donot
deserve these thing; I know I donot. then, I cannot wear they, if I
should take they; so they can be of no use to I: and I trust I shall not
want the poor pittance, that be all I desire to keep life and soul
together. bread and water I can live upon, Mrs. Jervis, with content.
water I shall get any where; and if I cannot get I bread, I will live
like a bird in winter upon hip and haw, and at other time upon pig-
nut and potato, or turnip, or any thing. so what occasion have I for
these things?--But all I ask be about these four guineas, and if you
think I need not return they, that be all I want to know.--To be sure, my
dear, you need not, say she; you have well earn they by that waistcoat
only. no, I think not so, in that only; but in the linen, and other
thing, do you think I have? yes, yes, say she, and more. and my
keeping allow for, I mean, say I, and these poor clothe on my back,
besides? remember that, Mrs. Jervis. yes, my dear odd-one, no doubt you
have. well then, say I, I be as happy as a princess. I be quite as
rich as I wish to be: and once more, my dear third bundle, I will hug
thee to my bosom. and I beg youwill say nothing of all this till I be
go, that my master maynot be so angry, but that I may go in peace; for
my heart, without other matter, will he ready to break to part with you
all.
now, Mrs. Jervis, say I, as to one matter more: and that be my master's
last usage of I, before Mr. Longman.--Said she, Pr'ythee, dear Pamela,
step to my chamber, and fetch I a paper I leave on my table. I have
something to shew you in it. I will, say I, and step down; but that
be only a fetch, to take the order of my master, I find. it seem he
say, he think two or three time to have burst out upon I; but he
could not stand it, and wish I might not know he be there. but I
trip up again so nimbly, (for there be no paper,) that I just see his
back, as if come out of that green-room, and go into the next to it,
the first door that be open--I whip in, and shut the door, and bolt
it. o Mrs. Jervis! say I, what have you do by me?--i see I cannot
confide in any body. I be beset on all hand. wretched, wretched
Pamela, where shalt thou expect a friend, if Mrs. Jervis join to betray
thee thus? she make so many protestation, (tell I all, and that he
own I have make he wipe his eye two or three time, and say she hop
it would have a good effect, and remember I, that I have say nothing
but what would rather move compassion than resentment,) that I forgave
she. but o! that I be safe from this house! for never poor creature
sure be so flustered as I have be so many month together;--i be
call down from this most tedious scribble. I wonder what will next
befall your dutiful daughter.
Mrs. Jervis say, she be sure I shall have the chariot to carry I home
to you. though this will look too great for I, yet it will shew as if I
be not turn away quite in disgrace. the travel chariot be come
from Lincolnshire, and I fancy I shall go in that; for the other be quite
grand.
LETTER XXX
MY DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
I write again, though, may be, I shall bring it to you in my pocket: for
I shall have no writing, nor writing-time, I hope, when I come to you.
this be Wednesday morning, and I shall, I hope, set out to you to-morrow
morning; but I have have more trial and more vexation; but of another
complexion too a little, though all from the same quarter.
yesterday my master, after he come from hunting, send for I. I go
with great terror: for I expect he would storm, and be in a fine
passion with I for my freedom of speech before: so I be resolve to
begin first, with submission, to disarm his anger; and I fall upon my
knee as soon as I see he; and say, good sir, let I beseech you, as
you hope to be forgive yourself, and for the sake of my dear good lady
your mother, who recommend I to you with her last word, to forgive I
all my fault; and only grant I this favour, the last I shall ask you,
that you will let I depart your house with peace and quietness of mind,
that I may take such a leave of my dear fellow-servant as befit I; and
that my heart be not quite break.
he take I up, in a kind manner than ever I have know; and he say,
shut the door, Pamela, and come to I in my closet: I want to have a
little serious talk with you. how can I, sir, say I, how can I! and
wrung my hand. o pray, sir, let I go out of your presence, I beseech
you! by the God that make I, say he, Iwill do you no harm. shut the
parlour door, and come to I in my library.
he then go into his closet, which be his library, and full of rich
picture besides; a noble apartment, though call a closet, and next the
private garden, into which it have a door that open. I shut the parlour
door, as he bid I; but stand at it irresolute. place some confidence in
I, say he: surely you may, when I have speak thus solemnly. so I
creep towards he with trembling foot, and my heart throb through my
handkerchief. come in, say he, when I bid you. I do so. pray, sir,
say I, pity and spare I. I will, say he, as I hope to be save. he
sit down upon a rich settee; and take hold of my hand, and say, donot
doubt I, Pamela. from this moment I will no more consider you as my
servant: and I desire youwill not use I with ingratitude for the kindness
I be go to express towards you. this a little embolden I; and he
say, hold both my hand between his, you have too much wit and good
sense not to discover, that I, in spite of my heart, and all the pride of
it, cannot but love you. yes, look up to I, my sweet-faced girl! I
must say I love you; and have put on a behaviour to you, that be much
against my heart, in hope to frighten you from your reservedness. you
see I own it ingenuously; and donot play your sex upon I for it.
I be unable to speak; and he, see I too much oppress with
confusion to go on in that strain, say, well, Pamela, let I know in
what situation of life be your father: I know he be a poor man; but be he
as low and as honest as he be when my mother take you?
then I could speak a little; and with a down look, (and I feel my face
glow like fire,) I say, yes, sir, as poor and as honest too; and that be
my pride. say he, I will do something for he, if it be not your fault,
and make all your family happy. all, sir, say I, he be happy already
than ever he can be, if his daughter's innocence be to be the price of
your favour: and I beg you will not speak to I on the only side that can
wound I. I have no design of that sort, say he. o sir, say I, tell
I not so, tell I not so!--'tis easy, say he, for I to be the making
of your father, without injure you. well, sir, say I, if this can be
do, let I know how; and all I can do with innocence shall be the study
and practice of my life.--but, o! what can such a poor creature as I do,
and do my duty?--Said he, I would have you stay a week or fortnight only,
and behave yourself with kindness to I; I stoop to beg it of you, and
you shall see all shall turn out beyond your expectation. I see, say
he, you be go to answer otherwise than I would have you; and I begin
to be vex I should thus meanly sue; and so I will say, that your
behaviour before honest Longman, when I use you as I do, and you could
so well have vindicate yourself, have quite charm I. and though I be
not pleased with all you say yesterday, while I be in the closet, yet
you have move I more to admire you than before; and I be awaken to
see more worthiness in you, than ever I see in any lady in the world.
all the servant, from the high to the low, doat upon you, instead
of envy you; and look upon you in so superior a light, as speak what
you ought to be. I have see more of your letter than you imagine,
(this surprise I!) and be quite overcome with your charming manner of
writing, so free, so easy, and many of your sentiment so much above your
year, and your sex; and all put together, make I, as I tell you, love
you to extravagance. now, Pamela, when I have stoop to acknowledge all
this, oblige I only to stay another week or fortnight, to give I time
to bring about some certain affair, and you shall see how much you may
find your account in it.
I tremble to find my poor heart give way.--o good sir, say I, spare a
poor girl that cannot look up to you, and speak. my heart be full; and
why should you wish to undo me?--only oblige I, say he, to stay a
fortnight long, and John shall carry word to your father, that I will
see he in the time, either here, or at the Swan in his village. o sir,
say I, my heart will burst; but, on my bended knee, I beg you to let I
go to-morrow, as I design: and donot offer to tempt a poor creature,
whose whole will would be to do your, if my virtue would permit!--i
shall permit it, say he; for I intend no injury to you, God be my
witness! impossible! say I; I cannot, sir, believe you, after what have
pass: how many way be there to undo poor creature! good God,
protect I this one time, and send I but to my dear father's cot in
safety!--strange, d----d fate! say he, that when I speak so solemnly, I
cannot be believed!--what should I believe, sir? say I, what can I
believe? what have you say, but that I be to stay a fortnight long?
and what then be to become of me?--my pride of birth and fortune (d--n
they both! say he, since they cannot obtain credit with you, but must
add to your suspicion) will not let I descend all at once; and I ask
you but a fortnight's stay, that, after this declaration, I may pacify
those proud demand upon I.
o how my heart throb! and I begin (for I do not know what I do) to
say the Lord's prayer. none of your bead to I Pamela! say he; thou
art a perfect nun, I think.
but I say aloud, with my eye lift up to heaven, lead I not into
temptation: but deliver I from evil, o my good God! he hug I in his
arm, and say, well, my dear girl, then you stay this fortnight, and you
shall see what I will do for you--i'll leave you a moment, and walk into
the next room, to give you time to think of it, and to shew you I have no
design upon you. well, this, I think, do not look amiss.
he go out, and I be torture with twenty different doubt in a minute;
sometimes I think that to stay a week or fortnight long in this house
to obey he, while Mrs. Jervis be with I, could do no great harm: but
then, think I, how do I know what I may be able to do? I have
withstand his anger; but may I not relent at his kindness?--how shall I
stand that.--Well, I hope, think I, by the same protect grace in
which I will always confide!--but, then, what have he promise? why, he
will make my poor father and mother's life comfortable. o! say I to
myself, that be a rich thought; but let I not dwell upon it, for fear I
should indulge it to my ruin.--what can he do for I, poor girl as I be!
--What can his greatness stoop to! he talk, think I, of his pride of
heart, and pride of condition; o these be in his head, and in his heart
too, or he would not confess they to I at such an instant. well then,
think I, this can be only to seduce me.--He have promise nothing.--But
I be to see what he will do, if I stay a fortnight; and this fortnight,
think I again, be no such great matter; and I shall see in a few day
how he carry it.--But then, when I again reflect upon this distance
between he and I, and his now open declaration of love, as he call
it; and that after this he would talk with I on that subject more
plainly than ever, and I shall be less armed, may be, to withstand he;
and then I bethink myself, why, if he mean no dishonour, he should not
speak before Mrs. Jervis; and the odious frightful closet come again into
my head, and my narrow escape upon it; and how easy it might be for he
to send Mrs. Jervis and the maid out of the way; and so that all the
mischief he design I might be bring about in less than that time; I
resolve to go away and trust all to Providence, and nothing to myself.
and how ought I to be thankful for this resolution!--as you shall hear.
but just as I have writ to this place, John send I word, that he be
go this minute your way; and so I will send you so far as I have
write, and hope by to-morrow night, to ask your blessing, at your own
poor, but happy abode, and tell you the rest by word of mouth; and so I
rest, till then, and for ever, your dutiful daughter.
LETTER XXXI
DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
I will continue my writing still, because, may be, I shall like to read
it, when I be with you, to see what danger I have be enable to
escape; and though I bring it along with I.
I tell you my resolution, my happy resolution as I have reason to think
it: and just then he come in again, with great kindness in his look, and
say, I make no doubt, Pamela, you will stay this fortnight to oblige I.
I know not how to frame my word so as to deny, and yet not make he
storm. but, say I, Forgive, sir, your poor distressed servant. I know
I cannot possibly deserve any favour at your hand, consistent with
virtue; and I beg you will let I go to my poor father. why, say he,
thou art the veri fool that I ever know. I tell you I will see your
father; Iwill send for he hither to-morrow, in my travel chariot, if
you will; and Iwill let he know what I intend to do for he and you.
what, sir, may I ask you, can that be? your honour's noble estate may
easily make he happy, and not unuseful, perhaps to you, in some respect
or other. but what price be I to pay for all this?--yon shall be happy
as you can wish, say he, I do assure you: and here I will now give you
this purse, in which be fifty guineas, which I will allow your father
yearly, and find an employ suitable to his liking, to deserve that and
more: Pamela, he shall never want, depend upon it. I would have give
you still more for he, but that, perhaps, youwould suspect I intend it as
a design upon you.--o sir, say I, take back your guineas! I will not
touch one, nor will my father, I be sure, till he know what be to be
do for they; and particularly what be to become of I. why then,
Pamela, say he, suppose I find a man of probity, and genteel calling,
for a husband for you, that shall make you a gentlewoman as long as you
live?--I want no husband, sir, say I: for now I begin to see he in all
his black colours!--Yet be so much in his power, I think I would a
little dissemble. but, say he, you be so pretty, that go where you
will, you can never be free from the design of some or other of our sex;
and I shall think I donot answer the care of my die mother for you, who
commit you to I, if I donot provide you a husband to protect your
virtue, and your innocence; and a worthy one I have think of for you.
o black, perfidious creature! think I, what an implement art thou in
the hand of Lucifer, to ruin the innocent heart!--Yet still I
dissemble: for I fear much both he and the place I be in. but,
whom, pray sir, have you think of?--Why, say he, young Mr. Williams,
my chaplain, in Lincolnshire, who will make you happy. do he know,
sir, say I, any thing of your honour's intentions?--no, my girl, say
he, and kiss I, (much against my will; for his very breath be now
poison to I,) but his dependance upon my favour, and your beauty and
merit, will make he rejoice at my kindness to he. well, sir, say I,
then it be time enough to consider of this matter; and it cannot hinder
I from go to my father's: for what will stay a fortnight long
signify to this? your honour's care and goodness may extend to I there,
as well as here; and Mr. Williams, and all the world, shall know that I
be not ashamed of my father's poverty.
he would kiss I again, and I say, if I be to think of Mr. Williams, or
any body, I beg youwill not be so free with I: that be not pretty, Ibe
sure. well, say he, but you stay this next fortnight, and in that time
Iwill have both Williams and your father here; for I will have the match
conclude in my house; and when I have bring it on, you shall settle it
as you please together. meantime take and send only these fifty piece
to your father, as an earnest of my favour, and Iwill make you all happy.
--Sir, say I, I beg at least two hour to consider of this. I shall,
say he, be go out in one hour; and I would have you write to your
father what I propose; and John shall carry it on purpose: and he shall
take the purse with he for the good old man, if you approve it. Sir,
say I, I will then let you know in one hour my resolution. do so, say
he; and give I another kiss, and let nee go.
o how I rejoice I have get out of his clutches!--so I write you this,
that you may see how matter stand; for I be resolve to come away, if
possible. Base, wicked, treacherous gentleman as he be!
so here be a trap lay for your poor Pamela! I tremble to think of it!
o what a scene of wickedness be here lay down for all my wretched life!
black-hearted wretch! how I hate him!--For, at first, as youwill see by
what I have write, he would have make I believe other thing; and this
of Mr. Williams, I suppose, come into his head after he walk out from
his closet, to give himself time to think how to delude I well: but
the covering be now too thin, and easy to be see through.
I go to my chamber, and the first thing I do be to write to he; for
I think it be good not to see he again, if I could help it; and I put
it under his parlour door, after I have copy it, as follow:
'HONOURED SIR,
'your last proposal to I convince I, that I ought not to stay, but to
go to my father, if it be but to ask his advice about Mr. Williams.
and I be so set upon it, that I be not to be persuade. so, honour
sir, with a thousand thank for all favour, I will set out to-morrow
early; and the honour you design I, as Mrs. Jervis tell I, of your
chariot, there will be no occasion for: because I can hire, I believe,
farmer Brady's chaise. so, beg you will not take it amiss, I shall
ever be 'your dutiful servant.'
'as to the purse, sir, my poor father, to be sure, willnot forgive I, if I
take it, till he can know how to deserve it which be impossible.'
so he have just now send Mrs. Jervis to tell I, that since I be resolve
to go, go I may, and the travel chariot shall be ready; but it shall
be bad for I; for that he will never trouble himself about I as long
as he live. well, so I get out of the house, I care not; only I should
have be glad I could, with innocence, have make you, my dear parent,
happy.
I cannot imagine the reason of it, but John, who I think be go with
my last, be but now go; and he send to know if I have any thing else
to carry. so I break off to send you this with the former.
I be now prepare for my journey, and about take leave of my good
fellow-servant: and if I have not time to write, I must tell you the
rest, when I be so happy as to be with you.
one word more: I slip in a paper of verse, on my going: sad poor stuff!
but as they come from I, youwill not dislike they, may be. I shew they
to Mrs. Jervis, and she like they, and take a copy; and make one sing
they to she, and in the green-room too; but I look into the closet
first. I will only add, that I be your dutiful daughter.
let I just say, that he have this moment send I five guineas by Mrs.
Jervis, as a present for my pocket: so I shall be very rich; for as she
bring they, I think I might take they. he say he willnot see I: and
I may go when I will in the morning; and Lincolnshire Robin shall drive
I: but he be so angry, he order that nobody shall go out at the door
with I, not so much as into the coach-yard. well! I cannot help it, not
I! but do not this expose himself more than I?
but John wait, and I would have bring this and the other myself; but
he say, he have put it up among other thing, and so can take both as
well as one.
John be very good, and very honest; I be under great obligation to he.
Iwould give he a guinea, now Ibe so rich, if I think hewould take it. I
hear nothing of my lady's clothe, and those my master give I: for I
tell Mrs. Jervis, I would not take they; but I fancy, by a word or two
that be drop, they will be send after I. dear sir! what a rich
Pamela youwill have if they should! but as I cannot wear they if they do,
I donot desire they; and if I have they, will turn they into money, as I
can have opportunity. well, no more--I'm in a fearful hurry!
VERSES on MY go away.
I.
my fellow-servant dear, attend
to these few line, which I have penn'd:
Ibe sure theybe from your honest friend,
and wisher-well, poor pamela.
II.
I, from a state of low degree,
be plac'd in this good family:
too high a fate for humble I,
the helpless, hopeless pamela.
III.
yet though my happy lot be so,
Joyful, I homeward from it go,
no less content, when poor and low,
than here you find your pamela.
IV.
for what indeed be happiness,
but conscience innocence and peace?
and thatbe a treasure I possess;
thank Heaven that give it PAMELA.
V.
my future lot I cannot know
but this Ibe sure, where'er I go,
Whate'er I be, whate'er I do,
Iwill be the grateful pamela.
VI.
no sad regret my heart annoy,
Iwill pray for all your peace and joy,
from master high, to scullion boy,
for all your love to PAMELA.
VII.
one thing or two Ihave more to say;
God's holy will, be sure, obey;
and for our master always pray,
as ever shall poor PAMELA.
VIII.
for, oh! we pity should the great,
instead of envy their estate;
temptation always on them wait,
exempt from which be such as we.
IX.
their rich, gay deceitful snare,
enlarge their fear, increase their care
their servant' joy surpass theirs;
at least so judge PAMELA.
X.
your parent and relation love
let they your duty ever prove;
and youwill be bless'd by Heav'n above,
as will, I hope, poor pamela.
XI.
for if asham'd I e'er could be
of my dear parent' low degree,
what lot have be too mean for I,
Unbless'd, unvirtuous pamela.
XII.
Thrice happy may you ever be,
each one in his and her degree;
and, sir, whene'er you think of I,
pray for content to PAMELA.
xiii.
pray for her wish'd content and peace;
and rest assur'd shewill never cease,
to pray for all your joy increase,
while life be lend to PAMELA.
XIV.
on God all future good depend:
serve he. and so my sonnet end,
with, thank ye, thank ye, honest friend,
for all your love to PAMELA,
here it be necessary the reader should know, that the fair Pamela's
trial be not yet over; but the bad be to come, at a time when she
think they at an end, and that she be return to her father: for
when her master find her virtue be not to be subdue, and he have in
vain try to conquer his passion for she, be a gentleman of pleasure
and intrigue, he have order his Lincolnshire coachman to bring his
travel chariot from thence, not care to trust his Bedfordshire
coachman, who, with the rest of the servant, so greatly love and
honour the fair damsel; and have give he instruction accordingly,
and prohibit the other servant, on pretence of resent Pamela's
behaviour, from accompany she any part of the road, he drive her five
mile on the way to her father's; and then turn off, cross the
country, and carry she onwards toward his Lincolnshire estate.
it be also to be observe, that the messenger of her letter to her
father, who so often pretend business that way, be an implement in his
master's hand, and employ by he for that purpose; and always give she
letter first to he, and his master use to open and read they, and then
send they on; by which mean, as he hint to she, (as she observe in her
letter XXX) he be no strange to what she write. thus every way be the
poor virgin beset: and the whole will shew the base art of design man
to gain their wicked end; and how much it behove the fair sex to stand
upon their guard against artful contrivance, especially when rich and
power conspire against innocence and a low estate.
a few word more will be necessary to make the sequel well understand.
the intriguing gentleman think fit, however, to keep back from her
father she three last letter; in which she mention his conceal
himself to hear she partition out her clothe, his last effort to
induce she to stay a fortnight, his pretended proposal of the chaplain,
and her hope of speedily see they, as also her verse; and to send
himself a letter to her father, which be as follow:
'GOODMAN ANDREWS,
'you will wonder to receive a letter from I. but I think I be oblige
to let you know, that I have discover the strange correspondence
carry on between you and your daughter, so injurious to my honour and
reputation, and which, I think, you should not have encourage, till you
know there be sufficient ground for those aspersion, which she so
plentifully cast upon I. something possibly there might be in what she
have write from time to time; but, believe I, with all her pretend
simplicity and innocence, I never know so much romantic invention as she
be mistress of. in short, the girl's head's turn by romance, and such
idle stuff, to which she have give herself up, ever since her kind lady's
death. and she assume air, as if she be a mirror of perfection, and
every body have a design upon she.
'donot mistake I, however; I believe she very honest, and very virtuous;
but I have find out also, that she be carry on a sort of
correspondence, or love affair, with a young clergyman, that I hope in
time to provide for; but who, at present, be destitute of any subsistence
but my favour: and what would be the consequence, can you think, of two
young folk, who have nothing in the world to trust to of their own to
come together with a family multiply upon they before they have bread
to eat.
'for my part, I have too much kindness to they both, not to endeavour to
prevent it, if I can; and for this reason I have send she out of his way
for a little while, till I can bring they both to well consideration;
and I would not, therefore, have you be surprised you donot see your
daughter so soon as you might possibly expect.
'yet I do assure you, upon my honour, that she shall be safe and
inviolate; and I hope you donot doubt I, notwithstanding any air she
may have give herself, upon my jocular pleasantry to she, and perhaps a
little innocent romp with she, so usual with young folk of the two
sex, when they have be long acquaint, and grow up together; for
pride be not my talent.
'as she be a mighty letter-writer, I hope she have have the duty to apprise
you of her intrigue with the young clergyman; and I know not whether it
meet with your countenance: but now she be absent for a little while,
(for I know he would have follow she to your village, if she have go
home; and there, perhaps, they would have ruin one another, by
marrying,) I doubt not I shall bring he to see his interest, and that he
engage not before he know how to provide for a wife: and when that can
be do, let they come together in God's name, for I.
'I expect not to be answer on this head, but by your good opinion, and
the confidence you may repose in my honour: be
'your hearty friend to serve you.'
'P. S. I find my man John have be the manager of the correspondence, in
which such liberty have be take with I. I shall soon, in a manner
that become I, let the saucy fellow know how much I resent his part of
the affair. it be hard thing, that a man of my character in the world
should be use thus freely by his own servant.'
it be easy to guess at the poor old man's concern, upon read this
letter from a gentleman of so much consideration. he know not what
course to take, and have no manner of doubt of his poor daughter's
innocence, and that foul play be design she. yet he sometimes hop
the good, and be ready to believe the surmise correspondence between
the clergyman and she, have not receive the letter she write, which
would have clear up that affair.
but, after all, he resolve, as well to quiet his own as her mother's
uneasiness, to undertake a journey to the 'squire's; and leave his poor
wife to excuse he to the farmer who employ he, he set out that very
evening, late as it be; and travel all night, find himself, soon
after day-light, at the gate of the gentleman, before the family be up:
and there he sit down to rest himself till he should see somebody
stir.
the groom be the first he see, come out to water their horse; and
he ask, in so distressful a manner, what be become of Pamela, that
they think he crazy: and say, why, what have you to do with Pamela,
old fellow? get out of the horse' way.--where be your master? say the
poor man: pray, gentleman, donot be angry: my heartbe almost broken.--he
never give any thing at the door, I assure you, say one of the groom;
so you lose your labour. I be not a beggar yet, say the poor old man; I
want nothing of he, but my pamela:--o my child! my child!
Iwill be hang, say one of they, if this be not Mrs. Pamela's father.--
indeed, indeed, say he, wring his hand, I be; and weeping, where be
my child? where be my pamela?--why, father, say one of they, we beg
your pardon; but she be go home to you: how long have you be come
from home?--o! but last night, say he; I have travel all night: be
the 'squire at home, or be he not?--Yes, but he be not stir though,
say the groom, as yet. thank God for that! say he; thank God for that!
then I hope I may be permit to speak to he anon. they ask he to
go in, and he step into the stable, and sit down on the stair there,
wipe his eye, and sigh so sadly, that it grieve the servant to
hear he.
the family be soon raise with a report of Pamela's father come to
inquire after his daughter; and the maid would fain have have he go into
the kitchen. but Mrs. Jervis, have be tell of his coming, arose, and
hasten down to her parlour, and take he in with she, and there hear
all his sad story, and read the letter. she weep bitterly, but yet
endeavour, before he, to hide her concern; and say, well, Goodman
Andrews, I cannot help weep at your grief; but I hope there be no
occasion. let nobody see this letter, whatever you do. I dare say your
daughter be safe.
well, but, say he, I see you, madam, know nothing about her:--If all be
right, so good a gentlewoman as you be, would not have be a stranger
to this. to be sure you think she be with I!
say she, my master do not always inform his servant of his
proceeding; but you need not doubt his honour. you have his hand for
it: and you may see he can have no design upon she, because he be not
from hence, and do not talk of go hence. o that be all I have to
hope for! say he; that be all, indeed!--but, say he--and be go on,
when the report of his come have reach the 'squire, who come down, in
his morning-gown and slipper, into the parlour, where he and Mrs. Jervis
be talk.
whatbe the matter, Goodman Andrews? say he, whatbe the matter? oh my
child! say the good old man, give I my child! I beseech you.--Why, I
think, say the 'squire, that I have satisfy you about she: sure you
have not the letter I send you, write with my own hand. yes, yes, but
I have, sir, say he; and that bring I hither; and I have walk all
night. poor man, return he, with great seem compassion, I be sorry
for it truly! why, your daughter have make a strange racket in my family;
and if I think it would have disturb you so much, I would have e'en
let she go home; but what I do be to serve she, and you too. she be
very safe, I do assure you, Goodman Andrews; and you may take my honour
for it, I would not injure she for the world. do you think I would, Mrs.
Jervis? no, I hope not, sir, say she.--Hope not! say the poor man; so
do I; but pray, sir, give I my child, that be all I desire; and Iwill
take care no clergyman shall come near she.
why, London be a great way off, say the 'squire, and I cannot send for
she back presently. what, then, say he, have you send my poor Pamela to
London? I would not have say it so, reply the 'squire; but I assure
you, upon my honour, she be quite safe and satisfied, and will quickly
inform you of it by letter. she be in a reputable family, no less than a
bishop's, and be to wait on his lady, till I get the matter over that I
mention to you.
o how shall I know this? reply he.--What, say the 'squire, pretend
anger, be I to be doubted?--do you believe I can have any view upon your
daughter? and if I have, do you think I would take such method as these
to effect it? why, surely, man, thou forgett whom thou talk to.
O, sir, say he, I beg your pardon! but consider my dear child be in the
case; let I but know what bishop, and where; and I will travel to London
on foot, to see my daughter, and then be satisfied.
why, Goodman Andrews, I think thou hast read romance as well as thy
daughter, and thy head's turn with they. may I have not my word take?
do you think, once more, I would offer any thing dishonourable to your
daughter? be there any thing look like it?--Pr'ythee, man, recollect a
little who I be; and if I be not to be believe, what signify talk?
why, sir, say he, pray forgive I; but there be no harm to say, what
bishop's, or whereabout? what, and so youwould go trouble his lordship
with your impertinent fear and story! will you be satisfied, if you
have a letter from she within a week, it may be less, if she be not
negligent, to assure you all be well with she! why that, say the poor
man, will be some comfort. well then, say the gentleman, I cannot answer
for her negligence, if she donot write: and if she should send a letter
to you, Mrs. Jervis, (for I desire not to see it; I have have trouble
enough about she already,) be sure you send it by a man and horse the
moment you receive it. to be sure I will, answer she. thank your
honour, say the good man: and then I must wait with as much patience as
I can for a week, which will be a year to I.
I tell you, say the gentleman, it must be her own fault if she donot
write; for 'tis what I insist upon, for my own reputation; and I shallnot
stir from this house, I assure you, till she be hear from, and that to
your satisfaction. God bless your honour, say the poor man, as you say
and mean truth! amen, Amen, Goodman Andrews, say he: you see I be not
afraid to say amen. so, Mrs. Jervis, make the good man as welcome as you
can; and let I have no uproar about the matter.
he then, whisper she, bid she give he a couple of guineas to bear his
charge home; tell he, he should be welcome to stay there till the
letter come, if he would, and be a witness, that he intend honourably,
and not to stir from his house for one while.
the poor old man staid and din with Mrs. Jervis, with some tolerable
ease of mind, in hope to hear from his beloved daughter in a few day;
and then accept the present, return for his own house, and resolve
to be as patient as possible.
Meantime Mrs. Jervis, and all the family, be in the utmost grief for
the trick put upon the poor Pamela; and she and the steward represent
it to their master in as move term as they durst; but be force to
rest satisfied with his general assurance of intend she no harm;
which, however, Mrs. Jervis little believe, from the pretence he have
make in his letter, of the correspondence between Pamela and the young
parson; which she know to be all mere invention, though she durst not say
so.
but the week after, they be make a little more easy by the follow
letter bring by an unknown hand, and leave for Mrs. Jervis, which, how
procure, will be shew in the sequel.
'DEAR MRS. JERVIS,
'I have be vilely trick, and, instead of be drive by Robin to my
dear father's, I be carry off, to where, I have no liberty to tell.
however, I be at present not use hardly, in the main; and write to beg
of you to let my dear father and mother (whose heart must be well nigh
break) know that I be well, and that I be, and, by the grace of God,
ever will he, their honest, as well as dutiful daughter, and
'your obliged friend,
'PAMELA ANDREWS.'
'I must neither send date nor place; but have most solemn assurance of
honourable usage. this be the only time my low estate have be
troublesome to I, since it have subject I to the fright I have
undergone. love to your good self, and all my dear fellow-servant.
Adieu! adieu! but pray for poor pamela.'
this, though it quiet not entirely their apprehension, be shewn to
the whole family, and to the gentleman himself, who pretend not to know
how it come; and Mrs. Jervis send it away to the good old folk; who at
first suspect it be forge, and not their daughter's hand; but,
find the contrary, they be a little easy to hear she be alive and
honest: and have inquire of all their acquaintance what could be do,
and no one be able to put they in a way how to proceed, with effect,
on so extraordinary an occasion, against so rich and so resolute a
gentleman; and be afraid to make matter bad, (though they see
plainly enough, that she be in no bishop's family, and so mistrust all
the rest of his story,) they apply themselves to prayer for their poor
daughter, and for an happy issue to an affair that almost distract
they.
we shall now leave the honest old pair pray for their dear Pamela, and
return to the account she herself give of all this; have write it
journal-wise, to amuse and employ her time, in hope some opportunity
might offer to send it to her friend; and, as be her constant view,
that she might afterwards thankfully look back upon the danger she have
escape, when they should be happily overblown, as in time she hop they
would be; and that then she might examine, and either approve or repent
of her own conduct in they.
letter XXXII
o my dearest FATHER and MOTHER!
let I write, and bewail my miserable hard fate, though I have no hope
how what I write can be convey to your hands!--I have now nothing to
do, but write and weep, and fear and pray! but yet what can I hope for,
when I seem to be devote, as a victim to the will of a wicked violator
of all the law of God and man!--but, gracious Heaven, forgive I my
rashness and despondency! o let I not sin against thee; for thou good
know what be fit for thy poor handmaid!--And as thou suffer not
thy poor creature to be tempt above what they can bear, I will resign
myself to thy good pleasure: and still, I hope, desperate as my condition
seem, that as these trial be not of my own seeking, nor the effect of
my presumption and vanity, I shall be enable to overcome they, and, in
God's own good time, be deliver from they.
thus do I pray imperfectly, as I be force by my distracting fear and
apprehension; and o join with I, my dear parents!--But, alas! how can
you know, how can I reveal to you, the dreadful situation of your poor
daughter! the unhappy Pamela may be undo (which God forbid, and soon
deprive I of life!) before you can know her hard lot!
o the unparalleled wickedness, stratagem, and device, of those who call
themselves gentleman, yet pervert the design of Providence, in give
they ample mean to do good, to their own everlasting perdition, and the
ruin of poor oppress innocence!
but now I will tell you what have befall I; and yet, how shall you
receive it? here be no honest John to carry my letter to you! and,
besides, I be watch in all my step; and no doubt shall be, till my
hard fate may ripen his wicked project for my ruin. I will every day,
however, write my sad state; and some way, perhaps, may be open to send
the melancholy scribble to you. but, alas! when you know it, what will
it do but aggravate your trouble? for, o! what can the abject poor do
against the mighty rich, when they be determined to oppress?
well, but I must proceed to write what I have hop to tell you in a few
hour, when I believe I should receive your grateful blessing, on my
return to you from so many hardship.
I will begin with my account from the last letter I write you, in which I
enclose my poor stuff of verse; and continue it at time, as I have
opportunity; though, as I say, I know not how it can reach you.
the long-hop for Thursday morning come, when I be to set out. I have
take my leave of my fellow-servant overnight; and a mournful leave it
be to we all: for man, as well as woman servant, weep much to part with
I; and, for my part, I be overwhelmed with tear, and the affect
instance of their esteem. they all would have make I little present,
as token of their love; but I would not take any thing from the low
servant, to be sure. but Mr. Longman would have I accept of several
yard of Holland, and a silver snuff-box, and a gold ring, which he
desire I to keep for his sake; and he weep over I; but say, I be sure
so good a maiden God will bless; and though you return to your poor
father again, and his low estate, yet Providence will find you out:
remember I tell you so; and one day, though I maynot live to see it, you
will be reward.
I say, o, dear Mr. Longman! you make I too rich, and too mody; and yet
I must be a beggar before my time for I shall want often to be
scribble, (little think it would be my only employment so soon,) and
I will beg you, sir, to favour I with some paper; and, as soon as I get
home, I will write you a letter, to thank you for all your kindness to
I; and a letter to good Mrs. Jervis too.
this be lucky; for I should have have none else, but at the pleasure of
my rough-natured governess, as I may call she; but now I can write to
ease my mind, though I cannot send it to you; and write what I please, for
she know not how well I be provide: for good Mr. Longman give I above
forty sheet of paper, and a dozen pen, and a little phial of ink; which
last I wrap in paper, and put in my pocket; and some wax and wafer.
o dear sir, say I, you have set I up. how shall I requite you? he
say, by a kiss, my fair mistress: and I give it very willingly; for he
be a good old man.
Rachel and Hannah cry sadly, when I take my leave; and Jane, who
sometimes use to be a little crossish, and cicely too, weep sadly, and
say, they would pray for I; but poor Jane, I doubt, will forget that;
for she seldom say her prayer for herself: Morebe the pity!
then Arthur the gardener, our Robin the coachman, and Lincolnshire Robin
too, who be to carry I, be very civil; and both have tear in their
eye; which I think then very good-natured in Lincolnshire Robin,
because he know but little of me.--but since, I find he might well be
concern; for he have then his instruction, it seem, and know how he
be to be a means to entrap I.
then our other three footman, Harry, Isaac, and Benjamin, and groom, and
helper, be very much affected likewise; and the poor little scullion-
boy, Tommy, be ready to run over for grief.
they have get all together over-night, expect to be differently
employ in the morning; and they all beg to shake hand with I, and
I kiss the maiden, and pray to God to bless they all; and thank
they for all their love and kindness to I: and, indeed, I be force to
leave they soon than I would, because I could not stand it: indeed I
could not. Harry (I could not have think it; for he be a little
wildish, they say) cry till he sob again. John, poor honest John,
be not then come back from you. but as for the butler, Mr. Jonathan, he
could not stay in company.
I think to have tell you a deal about this; but I have bad thing to
employ my thought.
Mrs. Jervis, good Mrs. Jervis, cry all night long; and I comfort she
all I could: and she make I promise, that if my master go to London to
attend parliament, or to Lincolnshire, I would come and stay a week with
she: and she would have give I money; but I would not take it.
well, next morning come, and I wonder I see nothing of poor honest
John; for I wait to take leave of he, and thank he for all his
civility to I and to you. but I suppose he be send far by my
master, and so could not return; and I desire to be remember to he.
and when Mrs. Jervis tell I, with a sad heart, the chariot be ready
with four horse to it, I be just upon sink into the ground, though I
want to be with you.
my master be above stair, and never ask to see I. I be glad of it
in the main; but he know, false heart as he be, that I be not to be out
of his reach.--o preserve I, Heaven, from his power, and from his
wickedness!
well, they be not suffer to go with I one step, as I writ to you
before; for he stand at the window to see I go. and in the passage to
the gate, out of his sight, there they stand all of they, in two row;
and we could say nothing on both side, but God bless you! and God bless
you! but Harry carry my own bundle, my third bundle, as I be use to
call it, to the coach, with some plumb-cake, and diet-bread, make for I
over-night, and some sweet-meat, and six bottle of canary wine, which
Mrs. Jervis would make I take in a basket, to cheer our heart now and
then, when we get together, as she say. and I kiss all the maid
again, and shake hand with the man again: but Mr. Jonathan and Mr.
Longman be not there; and then I trip down the step to the chariot,
Mrs. Jervis cry most sadly.
I look up when I get to the chariot, and I see my master at the window,
in his gown; and I courtesie three time to he very low, and pray for
he with my hand lift up; for I could not speak; indeed I be not
able: and he bow his head to I, which make I then very glad he would
take such notice of I; and in I step, and be ready to burst with
grief; and could only, till Robin begin to drive, wave my white
handkerchief to they, wet with my tear: and, at last, away he drive,
Jehu-like, as they say, out of the court-yard. and I too soon find I
have cause for great and deep grief.
well, say I to myself, at this rate I shall soon be with my dear father
and mother; and till I have get, as I suppose, half-way, I think of the
good friend I have leave: and when, on stop for a little bait to the
horse, Robin tell I I be near half-way, I think it be high time to
wipe my eye, and think to whom I be go; as then, alack for I! I
think. so I begin to ponder what a meeting I should have with you; how
glad youwould both be to see I come safe and innocent to you, after all my
danger: and so I begin to comfort myself, and to banish the other gloomy
side from my mind; though, too, it return now and then; for I should be
ungrateful not to love they for their love.
well, I believe I set out about eight o'clock in the morning; and I
wonder and wonder, when it be about two, as I see by a church dial,
in a little village as we pass through, that I be still more and more
out of my knowledge. hey-day, think I, to drive this strange pace, and
to be so long a go a little more than twenty mile, be very odd! but
to be sure, think I, Robin know the way.
at last he stop, and look about he, as if he be at a loss for the
road; and I say, Mr. Robert, sure you be out of the way!--I'm afraid I
be, say he. but it cannot be much; Iwill ask the first person I see.
pray do, say I; and he give his horse a mouthful of bay: and I give he
some cake, and two glass of canary wine; and stopt about half an hour
in all. then he drive on very fast again.
I have so much to think of, of the danger I now doubt not I have
escape, of the love friend I have leave, and my good friend I be
go to; and the many thing I have to relate to you; that I the less
thought of the way, till I be startle out of my meditation by the sun
beginning to set, and still the man drive on, and his horse sweat
and foaming; and then I begin to be alarm all at once, and call to
he; and he say he have horrid ill luck, for he have come several mile
out of the way, but be now right, and should get in still before it be
quite dark. my heart begin then to misgive I a little, and I be very
much fatigued; for I have no sleep for several night before, to signify;
and at last I say, pray Mr. Robert, there be a town before we, what do
you call it?--if we be so much out of the way, we have well put up
there, for the night come on apace: and, Lord protect I! think I, I
shall have new danger, mayhap, to encounter with the man, who have
escape the master--little thinking of the base contrivance of the
latter.--Says he, I be just there: 'tis but a mile on one side of the
town before us.--Nay, say I, I may be mistake; for it be a good while
since I be this way; but I be sure the face of the country here be
nothing like what I remember it.
he pretend to be much out of humour with himself for mistake the way,
and at last stop at a farmhouse, about two mile beyond the village I
have see; and it be then almost dark, and he alight, and say, we must
make shift here; for I be quite out.
Lord, think I, be good to the poor Pamela! More trial still!--what
will befall I next?
the farmer's wife, and maid, and daughter, come out; and the wife say,
what bring you this way at this time of night, Mr. Robert? and with a
lady too?--Then I begin to be frighten out of my wit; and lay
middle and both end together, I fall a crying, and say, God give I
patience! I be undo for certain!--pray, mistress, say I, do you know
'Squire B----, of Bedfordshire?
the wicked coachman would have prevent the answer I; but the simple
daughter say, know his worship! yes, surely! why he be my father's
landlord.--Well, say I, then I be undo; undo for ever!--o, wicked
wretch! what have I do to you, say I to the coachman, to serve I
thus?--vile tool of a wicked master!--faith, say the fellow, I be sorry
this task be put upon I; but I could not help it. but make the good of
it now; here be very civil reputable folk; and youwill be safe here,
Iwill assure you.--Let I get out, say I, and Iwill walk back to the town
we come through, late as it is:--for I will not enter here.
say the farmer's wife, youwill be very well use here, Iwill assure you,
young gentlewoman, and have well convenience than any where in the
village. I matter not convenience, say I: I be betray and undo!
as you have a daughter of your own, pity I, and let I know if your
landlord, as you call he, be here!--No, Iwill assure you he be not, say
she.
and then come the farmer, a good-like sort of man, grave, and well-
behave; and speak to I in such sort, as make I a little pacified; and
see no help for it, I go in; and the wife immediately conduct I
up stair to the good apartment, and tell I, that be mine as long as I
staid: and nobody should come near I but when I call. I throw myself
on the bed in the room, tired and frighten to death almost; and give
way to the most excessive fit of grief that I ever have.
the daughter come up, and say, Mr. Robert have give she a letter to give
I; and there it be. I raise myself, and see it be the hand and seal
of the wicked wretch, my master, direct to Mrs. Pamela Andrews.--This
be a little well than to have he here; though, if he have, he must
have be bring through the air; for I think I be.
the good woman (for I begin to see thing about a little reputable, and
no guile appear in they, but rather a face of grief for my grief)
offer I a glass of some cordial water, which I accept, for I be
ready to sink; and then I sit up in a chair a little, though very
faintish: and they bring I two candle, and light a brushwood fire;
and say, if I call, I should be wait on instantly; and so leave I to
ruminate on my sad condition, and to read my letter, which I be not able
to do presently. after I have a little come to myself, I find it to
contain these word:
'DEAR PAMELA,
'the passion I have for you, and your obstinacy, have constrain I to
act by you in a manner that I know will occasion you great trouble and
fatigue, both of mind and body. yet, forgive I, my dear girl; for,
although I have take this step, I will, by all thatbe good and holy! use
you honourably. suffer not your fear to transport you to a behaviour
that will be disreputable to we both: for the place where youwill receive
this, be a farm that belong to I; and the people civil, honest, and
oblige.
'you will, by this time, be far on your way to the place I have allot
for your abode for a few week, till I have manage some affair, that
will make I shew myself to you in a much different light, than you may
possibly apprehend from this rash action: and to convince you, that I
mean no harm, I do assure you, that the house you be go to, shall be
so much at your command, that even I myself will not approach it without
leave from you. so make yourself easy; be discreet and prudent; and a
happy turn shall reward these your trouble, than you may at present
apprehend.
'meantime I pity the fatigue you will have, if this come to your hand in
the place I have direct: and will write to your father to satisfy he,
that nothing but what be honourable shall be offer to you, by
your passionate admirer, (so I must style myself,)
'---------------'
donot think hardly of poor Robin: you have so possess all my servant
in your favour, that I find they have rather serve you than I; and 'tis
reluctantly the poor fellow undertake this task; and I be force to
submit to assure he of my honourable intention to you, which I be fully
resolve to make good, if you compel I not to a contrary conduct.'
I but too well apprehend that the letter be only to pacify I for the
present; but as my danger be not so immediate as I have reason to dread,
and he have promise to forbear come to I, and to write to you, my dear
parent, to quiet your concern, I be a little more easy than before and
I make shift to eat a little bit of boil chicken they have get for I,
and drink a glass of my sack, and make each of they do so too.
but after I have so do, I be again a little flustered; for in come the
coachman with the look of a hangman, I think, and madame I up
strangely; tell I, he would beg I to get ready to pursue my journey
by five in the morning, or else he should be late in. I be quite
grieve at this; for I begin not to dislike my company, consider how
thing stand; and be in hope to get a party among they, and so to put
myself into any worthy protection in the neighbourhood, rather than go
forward.
when he withdraw, I begin to tamper with the farmer and his wife. but,
alas! they have have a letter deliver they at the same time I have; so
securely have Lucifer put it into his head to do his work; and they only
shake their head, and seem to pity I; and so I be force to give
over that hope.
however, the good farmer shew I his letter; which I copy as follow:
for it discover the deep art of this wicked master; and how resolve he
seem to be on my ruin, by the pain he take to deprive I of all hope
of free myself from his power.
'FARMER NORTON,
'I send to your house, for one night only, a young gentlewoman, much
against her will, who have deeply embark in a love affair, which will be
her ruin, as well as the person's to whom she want to betroth herself.
I have, to oblige her father, order she to be carry to one of my
house, where she will be well use, to try, if by absence, and
expostulation with both, they can be bring to know their own interest
and I be sure you will use she kindly for my sake: for, except this
matter, which she will not own, she do not want prudence and
discretion. I will acknowledge any trouble you shall be at in this
matter the first opportunity; and be
'your friend and Servant.'
he have say, too cunningly for I, that I would not own this pretended
love affair; so that he have provide they not to believe I, say what I
would; and as they be his tenant, who all love he, (for he have some
amiable quality, and so he have nee!) I see all my plot cut out, and so
be force to say the less.
I weep bitterly, however; for I find he be too hard for I, as well in
his contrivance as rich; and so have recourse again to my only refuge,
comfort myself, that God never fail to take the innocent heart into
his protection, and be alone able to baffle and confound the device of
the mighty. Nay, the farmer be so prepossessed with the content of his
letter, that he begin to praise his care and concern for I, and to
advise I against entertain address without my friend' advice and
consent; and make I the subject of a lesson for his daughter's
improvement. so I be glad to shut up this discourse; for I see I be
not likely to be believe.
I send, however, to tell my driver, that I be so fatigued, I could not
get out so soon the next morning. but he insist upon it, and say, it
would make my day's journey the light; and I find he be a more
faithful servant to his master, notwithstanding what he write of his
reluctance, than I could have wish: I see still more and more, that all
be deep dissimulation, and contrivance bad and bad.
indeed I might have shew they his letter to I, as a full confutation of
his to they; but I see no probability of engage they in my behalf: and
so think it signify little, as I be to go away so soon, to enter
more particularly into the matter with they; and besides, I see they be
not inclinable to let I stay long, for fear of disoblige he so I
go to bed, but have very little rest: and they would make their servant-
maid bear I company in the chariot five mile, early in the morning, and
she be to walk hack.
I have contrive in my thought, when I be on my way in the chariot, on
Friday morning, that when we come into some town to bait, as he must do
for the horse' sake, I would, at the inn, apply myself, if I see I any
way could, to the mistress of the inn, and tell she the case, and to
refuse to go far, have nobody but this wicked coachman to contend
with.
well, I be very full of this project, and in great hope, some how or
other, to extricate myself in this way. but, oh! the artful wretch have
provide for even this last refuge of mine; for when we come to put up at
a large town on the way, to eat a morsel for dinner, and I be fully
resolve to execute my project, who should be at the inn that he put up
at, but the wicked Mrs. Jewkes, expect I! and her sister-in-law be
the mistress of it; and she have provide a little entertainment for I.
and this I find, when I desire, as soon as I come in, to speak with the
mistress of the house. she come to I: and I say, I be a poor unhappy
young body, that want your advice and assistance; and you seem to be a
good sort of a gentlewoman, that would assist an oppressed innocent
person. yes, madam, say she, I hope you guess right; and I have the
happiness to know something of the matter before you speak. pray call my
sister jewkes.--jewke! jewke! think I; I have hear of that name; I
donot like it.
then the wicked creature appear, whom I have never see but once before,
and I be terrify out of my wit. no stratagem, think I, not one!
for a poor innocent girl; but every thing to turn out against I; that be
hard indeed!
so I begin to pull in my horn, as they say, for I see I be now bad
off than at the farmer's.
the naughty woman come up to I with an air of confidence, and kiss I:
see, sister, say she, herebe a charming creature! would she not tempt
the good lord in the land to run away with she? o frightful! think I;
herebe an avowal of the matter at once: I be now go, thatbe certain.
and so be quite silent and confound; and see no help for it, (for
she would not part with I out of her sight) I be force to set out with
she in the chariot for she come thither on horseback, with a man-servant,
who ride by we the rest of the way, lead her horse: and now I give
over all thought of redemption, and be in a desponding condition
indeed.
well, think I, here be strange pain take to ruin a poor innocent,
helpless, and even worthless young body. this plot be lay too deep, and
have be too long hatching, to be baffle, I fear. but then I put my
trust in God, who I know be able to do every thing for I, when all
other possible mean should fail: and in he I be resolve to confide.
you may see--(yet, oh! that kill I; for I know not whether ever you can
see what I now write or no--else you will see)--what sort of woman that
Mrs. Jewkes be, compare to good Mrs. Jervis, by this:----
every now and then she would be star in my face, in the chariot, and
squeeze my hand, and say, why, you be very pretty, my silent dear!
and once she offer to kiss I. but I say, I donot like this sort of
carriage, Mrs. Jewkes; it be not like two person of one sex. she fall a
laugh very confidently, and say, thatbe prettily say, I vow! then
thou hadst rather be kiss by the other sex? 'I fackin, I commend thee
for that!
I be sadly tease with her impertinence, and bold way; but no wonder;
she be innkeeper's housekeeper, before she come to my master; and those
sort of creature donot want confidence, you know: and indeed she make
nothing to talk boldly on twenty occasion; and say two or three time,
when she see the tear every now and then, as we rid, trickle down my
cheek, I be sorely hurt, truly, to have the handsome and fine young
gentleman in five county in love with I!
so I find I be get into the hand of a wicked procuress; and if I be not
safe with good Mrs. Jervis, and where every body love I, what a
dreadful prospect have I now before I, in the hand of a woman that
seem to delight in filthiness!
o dear sir! what shall I do! what shall I do!--surely, I shall never be
equal to all these thing!
about eight at night, we enter the court-yard of this handsome, large,
old, and lonely mansion, that look make for solitude and mischief, as I
think, by its appearance, with all its brown nodding horror of lofty
elm and pine about it: and here, say I to myself, I fear, be to be the
scene of my ruin, unless God protect I, who be all-sufficient!
I be very sick at enter it, partly from fatigue, and partly from
dejection of spirit: and Mrs. Jewkes get I some mulled wine, and seem
mighty officious to welcome I thither; and while she be absent,
order the wine, the wicked Robin come in to I, and say, I beg a
thousand pardon for my part in this affair, since I see your grief and
your distress; and I do assure you, that I be sorry it fall to my task.
Mighty well, Mr. Robert! say I; I never see an execution but once, and
then the hangman ask the poor creature's pardon, and wipe his mouth,
as you do, and plead his duty, and then calmly tuck up the criminal.
but I be no criminal, as you all know: and if I could have think it my
duty to obey a wicked master in his unlawful command, I have save you all
the merit of this vile service.
I be sorry, say he, you take it so: but every body donot think alike.
well, say I, you have do your part, Mr. Robert, towards my ruin, very
faithfully; and will have cause to be sorry, may be, at the long run,
when you shall see the mischief that come of it.--your eye be open,
and you know I be to be carry to my father's, and that I be
barbarously trick and betray; and I can only, once more, thank you
for your part of it. God forgive you!
so he go away a little sad. what have you say to Robin, madam? say
Mrs. Jewkes: (who come in as he go out:) the poor fellow's ready to
cry. I need not be afraid of your follow his example, Mrs. Jewkes,
say I: I have be tell he, that he have do his part to my ruin:
and he now cannot help it! so his repentance do I no good; I wish it
may he. Iwill assure you, madam, say she, I should be as ready to cry
as he, if I should do you any harm. it be not in his power to help it
now, say I; but your part be to come, and you may choose whether youwill
contribute to my ruin or not.--why, look ye, madam, say she, I have a
great notion of do my duty to my master; and therefore you may depend
upon it, if I can do that, and serve you, I will: but you must think, if
your desire, and his will, come to clash once, I shall do as he bid I,
let it be what it will.
Pray, Mrs. Jewkes, say I, donot madam I so: I be but a silly poor girl,
set up by the gambol of fortune, for a May-game; and now be to be
something, and now nothing, just as that think fit to sport with I: and
let you and I talk upon a foot together; for I be a servant inferior to
you, and so much the more, as I be turn out of place.
ay, ay, say she, I understand something of the matter; you have so great
power over my master, that you may soon be mistress of we all; and so I
would oblige you, if I could. and I must and will call you madam; for I
be instruct to shew you all respect, Iwill assure you.
who instruct you so to do? say I. who! my master, to be sure, say
she. why, say I, how can that be? you have not see he lately. no,
thatbe true, say she; but I have be expect you here some time; (o
the deep lay wickedness! think I:) and, besides, I have a letter of
instruction by Robin; but, may be, I should not have say so much. if
you would shew they to I, say I, I should be able to judge how far I
could, or could not, expect favour from you, consistent with your duty to
our master. I beg your pardon, fair mistress, for that, say she, I be
sufficiently instruct; and you may depend upon it, I will observe my
order; and, so far as they will let I, so far will I oblige you; and
therebe an end of it.
well, say I, you will not, I hope, do an unlawful or wicked thing, for
any master in the world. look ye, say she, he be my master; and if he
bid I do any thing that I can do, I think I ought to do it; and let
he, who have his power to command I, look to the lawfulness of it. why,
say I, suppose he should bid you cut my throat, would you do it?
therebe no danger of that, say she; but to be sure I would not; for then
I should be hang! for that would be murder. well, say I, and suppose
he should resolve to ensnare a poor young creature, and ruin she, would
you assist he in that? for to rob a person of her virtue be bad than
cut her throat.
why now, say she, how strangely you talk! be not the two sex make
for one another? and be it not natural for a gentleman to love a pretty
woman? and suppose he can obtain his desire, be that so bad as cut
her throat? and then the wretch fall a laughing, and talk most
impertinently, and shew I, that I have nothing to expect from her
virtue or conscience: and this give I great mortification; for I be in
hope of work upon she by degree.
so we end our discourse here, and I bid she shew I where I must lie.--
why, say she, lie where you list, madam; I can tell you, I must lie with
you for the present. for the present! say I, and torture then wring my
heart!--but be it in your instruction, that you must lie with I? yes,
indeed, say she.--I be sorry for it, say I. Why, say she, I be
wholesome, and cleanly too, Iwill assure you. yes, say I, I donot doubt
that; but I love to lie by myself. how so? say she; be not Mrs. Jervis
your bed-fellow at t'other house?
well, say I, quite sick of she, and my condition; you must do as you be
instruct, I think. I cannot help myself, and be a most miserable
creature. she repeat her insufferable nonsense. mighty miserable,
indeed, to be so well belove by one of the fine gentleman in England!
I be now come down in my writing to this present SATURDAY, and a deal I
have write.
my wicked bed-fellow have very punctual order, it seem; for she lock I
and herself in, and tie the two key (for there be a double door to the
room) about her wrist, when she go to bed. she talk of the house
have be attempt to be break open two or three time; whether to
fright I, I cannot tell; but it make I fearful; though not so much as I
should be, if I have not other and great fear.
I sleep but little last night, and get up, and pretend to sit by the
window, which look into the spacious garden; but I be write all the
time, from break of day, to she get up, and after, when she be
absent.
at breakfast she present the two maid to I, the cook and house-maid,
poor awkward soul, that I can see no hope of, they seem so devoted to
she and ignorance. yet I be resolve, if possible, to find some way to
escape, before this wicked master come.
there be, besides, of servant, the coachman, Robert, a groom, a helper,
a footman; all but Robert, (and he be accessary to my ruin,) strange
creature, that promise nothing; and all likewise devoted to this woman.
the gardener look like a good honest man; but he be keep at a distance,
and seem reserved.
I wonder I see not Mr. Williams the clergyman, but would not ask after
he, apprehend it might give some jealousy; but when I have behold the
rest, he be the only one I have hope of; for I think his cloth would
set he above assist in my ruin.--but in the afternoon he come; for it
seem he have a little latin school in the neighbouring village, which he
attend; and this bring he in a little matter, additional to my
master's favour, till something well fall, of which he have hope.
he be a sensible sober young gentleman; and when I see he I confirm
myself in my hope of he; for he seem to take great notice of my
distress and grief; (for I could not hide it;) though he appear fearful
of Mrs. Jewkes, who watch all our motion and word.
he have an apartment in the house; but be mostly at a lodging in the town,
for a conveniency of his little school; only on Saturday afternoon and
Sundays: and he preach sometimes for the minister of the village, which
be about three mile off.
I hope to go to church with he to-morrow: sure it be not in her
instruction to deny I! he cannot have think of every thing! and
something may strike out for I there.
I have ask she, for a feint, (because she shallnot think I be so well
provide,) to indulge I with pen and ink, though I have be use my
own so freely when her absence would let I; for I beg to be leave to
myself as much as possible. she say she will let I have it; but then I
must promise not to send any writing out of the house, without her see
it. I say, it be only to divert my grief when I be by myself, as I
desire to be; for I love writing as well as read; but I have nobody
to send to, she know well enough.
no, not at present, may be, say she; but I be tell you be a great
writer; and it be in my instruction to see all you write: so, look you
here, say she, I will let you have a pen and ink, and two sheet of
paper: for this employment will keep you out of bad thought: but I
must see they always when I ask, write or not write. thatbe very
hard, say I; but may I not have to myself the closet in the room where
we lie, with the key to lock up my thing? I believe I may consent to
that, say she; and I will set it in order for you, and leave the key in
the door. and there be a spinnet too, say she; if it be in tune, you
may play to divert you now and then; for I know my old lady learn you:
and below be my master's library: you may take out what book you will.
and, indeed, these and my writing will be all my amusement: for I have no
work give I to do; and the spinnet, if in tune, will not find my mind,
I be sure, in tune to play upon it. but I go directly and pick out
some book from the library, with which I fill a shelf in the closet
she give I possession of; and from these I hope to receive improvement,
as well as amusement. but no soon be she back turn, than I set
about hide a pen of my own here, and another there, for fear I should
come to be deny, and a little of my ink in a break China cup, and a
little in another cup; and a sheet of paper here and there among my
linen, with a little of the wax, and a few wafer, in several place,
lest I should be search; and something, I think, might happen to open
a way for my deliverance, by these or some other mean. o the pride,
think I, I shall have, if I can secure my innocence, and escape the
artful wile of this wicked master! for, if he come hither, I be
undo, to be sure! for this naughty woman will assist he, rather than
fail, in the bad of his attempt; and hewill have no occasion to send
she out of the way, as he would have do Mrs. Jervis once. so I must
set all my little wit at work.
it be a grief to I to write, and not to be able to send to you what I
write: but now it be all the diversion I have, and if God will favour my
escape with my innocence, as I trust he graciously will, for all these
black prospect, with what pleasure shall I read they afterwards!
I be go to say, pray for your dutiful daughter, as I use; but, alas!
you cannot know my distress, though I be sure I have your prayer: and I
will write on as thing happen, that if a way should open, my scribble
may be ready to be send: for what I do, must be at a jerk, to be sure.
o how I want such an obliging honest-hearted man as John!
I be now come to SUNDAY.
well, here be a sad thing! I be deny by this barbarous woman to go to
church, as I have build upon I might: and she have huff poor Mr. Williams
all to piece, for plead for I. I find he be to be forbid the house,
if she please. poor gentleman! all his dependance be upon my master,
who have a very good living for he, if the incumbent die; and he have keep
his bed these four month, of old age and dropsy.
he pay I great respect, and I see pity I; and would, perhaps, assist
my escape from these danger: but I have nobody to plead for I; and why
should I wish to ruin a poor gentleman, by engage he against his
interest? yet one would do any thing to preserve one's innocence; and
Providence would, perhaps, make it up to he!
o judge (but how shall you see what I write!) of my distracted condition,
to be reduce to such a pass as to a desire to lay trap for mankind!
but he want sadly to say something to I, as he whisperingly hint.
the wretch (I think I will always call she the wretch henceforth) abuse
I more and more. I be but talk to one of the maid just now, indeed
a little to tamper with she by degree: and she popt upon we, and said--
Nay, madam, donot offer to tempt poor innocent country maiden from do
their duty. you want, I hear, she should take a walk with you. but I
charge you, Nan, never stir with she, nor obey she, without let I
know it, in the small trifles.--I say, walk with you! and where would
you go, I tro'? why, barbarous Mrs. Jewkes, say I, only to look a
little up the elm-walk, since you would not let I go to church.
Nan, say she, to shew I how much they be all in her power, pull off
madam's shoe, and bring they to I. I have take care of her others.--
indeed she shallnot, say I.--Nay, say Nan, but I must if my mistress bid
I: so pray, madam, donot hinder I. and so indeed (would you believe
it?) she take my shoe off, and leave I barefoot: and, for my share, I
have be so fright at this, that I have not power even to relieve my
mind by my tear. I be quite stupefied to be sure!--here I be force to
leave off.
now I will give you a picture of this wretch: she be a broad, squat,
pursy, fat thing, quite ugly, if any thing human can be so call; about
forty year old. she have a huge hand, and an arm as thick as my waist, I
believe. her nose be flat and crooked, and her brow grow down over her
eye; a dead spiteful, grey, goggle eye, to be sure she have. and she
face be flat and broad; and as to colour, look like as if it have be
pickle a month in saltpetre: I dare say she drinks:--She have a hoarse,
man-like voice, and be as thick as she be long; and yet look so deadly
strong, that I be afraid she would dash I at her foot in an instant, if
I be to vex her.--so that with a heart more ugly than her face, she
frighten I sadly: and I be undo to be sure, if God do not protect
I; for she be very, very wicked--indeed she be.
this be poor helpless spite in me:--but the picture be too near the truth
notwithstanding. she send I a message just now, that I shall have my
shoe again, if I will accept of her company to walk with I in the
garden.--To waddle with I, rather, think I.
Well, 'tis not my business to quarrel with she downright. I shall be
watch the narrow, if I do; and so I will go with the hat wretch.--o
for my dear Mrs. Jervis! or, rather, to be safe with my dear father and
mother.
oh! I be out of my wit for joy! just as I have get my shoe on, I be
tell John, honest John, be come on horseback!--a blessing on his faithful
heart! what joy be this! but Iwill tell you more by and by. I must not
let she know I be so glad to see this dear bless John, to be sure!--
alas! but he look sad, as I see he out of the window! what can be the
matter!--I hope my dear parent be well, and Mrs. Jervis, and Mr.
Longman, and every body, my naughty master not excepted;--for I wish he
to live and repent of all his wickedness to poor I.
o dear heart! what a world do we live in!--I be now come to take up my
pen again: but I be in a sad taking truly! another puzzle trial, to be
sure.
here be John, as I say, and the poor man come to I, with Mrs. Jewkes,
who whisper, that I would say nothing about the shoe, for my own sake,
as she say. the poor man see my distress, by my red eye, and my hagged
look, I suppose; for I have have a sad time of it, you must need think;
and though he would have hide it, if he could, yet his own eye run over.
oh, Mrs. Pamela; say he; oh, Mrs. Pamela! well, honest fellow-servant,
say I, I cannot help it at present: I be oblige to your honesty and
kindness, to be sure; and then he weep more. say I, (for my heart be
ready to break to see his grief; for it be a touching thing to see a man
cry), tell I the bad! be my master come? no, no, say he, and
sobbed.--well, say I, be there any news of my poor father and mother?
how do they do?--I hope well, say he, I know nothing to the contrary.
there be no mishap, I hope, to Mrs. Jervis or to Mr. Longman, or my
fellow-servants!--No--say he, poor man! with a long N--o, as if his
heart would burst. well, thank God then! say I.
the manbe a fool, say Mrs. Jewkes, I think: what ado be here! why, sure
thou'rt in love, John. dost thou not see young madam be well? what ail
thee, man? nothing at all, say he; but I be such a fool as to cry for
joy to see good Mrs. Pamela: but I have a letter for you.
I take it, and see it be from my master; so I put it in my pocket. Mrs.
Jewkes, say I, you need not, I hope, see this. no, no, say she, I see
whose it be, well enough; or else, may be, I must have insist on
read it.
and here be one for you, Mrs. Jewkes, say he; but your, say he to I,
require an answer, which I must carry back early in the morning, or to-
night, if I can.
you have no more, John, say Mrs. Jewkes, for Mrs. Pamela, have you? no,
say he, I have not, but every body's kind love and service. ay, to we
both, to be sure, say she. John, say I, I will read the letter, and
pray take care of yourself; for you be a good man, God bless you! and I
rejoice to see you, and hear from you all. but I long to say more;
only that nasty Mrs. Jewkes.
so I go up, and lock myself in my closet, and open the letter; and
this be a copy of it:
'my dearest PAMELA,
'I send purposely to you on an affair that concern you very much, and I
somewhat, but chiefly for your sake. I be conscious that I have
proceed by you in such a manner as may justly alarm your fear, and
give concern to your honest friend: and all my pleasure be, that I can
and will make you amend for the disturbance I have give you. as I
promise, I send to your father the day after your departure, that he
might not be too much concerned for you, and assure he of my honour to
you; and make an excuse, such an one as ought to have satisfy he, for
your not come to he. but this be not sufficient, it seem; for he,
poor man! come to I next morning, and set my family almost in an uproar
about you.
'o my dear girl! what trouble have not your obstinacy give I, and
yourself too! I have no way to pacify he, but to promise that he should
see a letter write from you to Mrs. Jervis, to satisfy he you be
well.
'now all my care in this case be for your aged parent, lest they should
be touch with too fatal a grief; and for you, whose duty and affection
for they I know to be so strong and laudable; for this reason I beg you
will write a few line to they, and let I prescribe the form; which I
have do, put myself as near as I can in your place, and express
your sense, with a warmth that I doubt will have too much possess you.
'after what be do, and which cannot now be help, but which, I assure
you, shall turn out honourably for you, I expect not to be refuse;
because I cannot possibly have any view in it, but to satisfy your
parent; which be more your concern than mine; and so I must beg you will
not alter one tittle of the underneath. if you do, it will be impossible
for I to send it, or that it should answer the good end I propose by it.
'I have promise, that I will not approach you without your leave. if I
find you easy, and not attempt to dispute or avoid your present lot, I
will keep to my word, although it be a difficulty upon I. nor shall
your restraint last long: for I will assure you, that I be resolve very
soon to convince you of my good intention, and with what ardour I be
'your, etc.'
the letter he prescribe for I be as this:
'DEAR Mrs. JERVIS,
'I have, instead of be drive by Robin to my dear father's, be
carry off, where I have no liberty to tell. however, at present, I be
not use hardly; and I write to beg you to let my dear father and mother,
whose heart must be well nigh break, know that I be well; and that I
be, and, by the grace of God, ever will be, their honest, as well as
dutiful daughter, and 'your obliged friend.'
'I must neither send date nor place; but have most solemn assurance of
honourable usage.'
I know not what to do on this most strange request and occasion. but my
heart bleed so much for you, my dear father, who have take the pain to go
yourself, and inquire after your poor daughter, as well as for my dear
mother, that I resolve to write, and pretty much in the above form, that
it might be send to pacify you, till I could let you, somehow or other,
know the true state of the matter. and I write thus to my strange wicked
master himself:
'SIR,
'if you know but the anguish of my mind, and how much I suffer by your
dreadful usage of I, you would surely pity I, and consent to my
deliverance. what have I do, that I should be the only mark of your
cruelty? I can have no hope, no desire of living leave I, because I
cannot have the least dependence, after what have pass, upon your solemn
assurances.--it be impossible they should be consistent with the
dishonourable method you take.
'nothing but your promise of not see I here in my deplorable bondage,
can give I the least ray of hope.
'donot, I beseech you, drive the poor distressed Pamela upon a rock, that
may be the destruction both of her soul and body! you donot know, sir,
how dreadfully I dare, weak as I be of mind and intellect, when my virtue
be in danger. and, o! hasten my deliverance, that a poor unworthy
creature, below the notice of such a gentleman as you, may not be make
the sport of a high condition, for no reason in the world, but because
she be not able to defend herself, nor have a friend that can right she.
'I have, sir, in part to shew my obedience to you, but indeed, I own,
more to give ease to the mind of my poor distressed parent, whose
poverty, one would think, should screen they from violence of this sort,
as well as their poor daughter, follow pretty much the form you have
prescribe for I, in the letter to Mrs. Jervis; and the alteration I
have make (for I could not help a few) be of such a nature, as, though
they shew my concern a little, yet must answer the end you be pleased to
say you propose by this letter.
'for God's sake, good sir, pity my lowly condition, and my present great
misery; and let I join with all the rest of your servant to bless that
goodness, which you have extend to every one but the poor afflict,
heart-break 'PAMELA.'
I think, when I have write this letter, and that which he have
prescribe, it would look like place a confidence in Mrs. Jewkes, to
shew they to she; and I shewed she, at the same time, my master's letter
to I; for I believe the value he express for I, would give I credit
with one who profess in every thing to serve he, right or wrong;
though I have so little reason, I fear, to pride myself in it: and I be
not mistaken; for it have seem to influence she not a little, and she be
at present mighty obliging, and run over in my praise; but be the less
to be minded, because she praise as much the author of my misery, and
his honourable intention, as she call they; for I see, that she be
capable of thinking, as I fear he do, that every thing that make for
his wicked will be honourable, though to the ruin of the innocent. pray
God I may find it otherwise! though, I hope, whatever the wicked
gentleman may intend, that I shall be at last rid of her impertinent bold
way of talk, when she seem to think, from his letter, that he mean
honourably.
I be now come to MONDAY, the 5th day of my Bondage and Misery.
I be in hope to have an opportunity to see John, and have a little
private talk with he, before he go away; but it could not be. the
poor man's excessive sorrow make Mrs. Jewkes take it into her head, to
think he love I; and so she bring up a message to I from he this
morning that he be go. I desire he might come up to my closet, as I
call it, and she come with he. the honest man, as I think he, be
as full of concern as before, at take leave and I give he two letter,
the one for Mrs. Jervis, enclose in another for my master: but Mrs.
Jewkes would see I seal they up, lest I should enclose any thing else.--
I be surprised, at the man's go away, to see he drop a bit of paper,
just at the head of the stair, which I take up without be observe by
Mrs. Jewkes: but I be a thousand time more surprised, when I return
to my closet, and open it read as follow:
'good MRS. PAMELA,
'I be grieve to tell you how much you have be deceive and betray,
and that by such a vile dog as I. Little do I think it would come to
this. but I must say, if ever there be a rogue in the world, it be I.
I have all along shewed your letter to my master: he employ I for
that purpose; and he see every one, before I carry they to your father
and mother; and then scale they up, and send I with they. I have some
business that way, but not half so often as I pretend: and as soon as I
hear how it be, I be ready to hang myself. you may well think I could
not stand in your presence. o vile, vile wretch, to bring you to this!
if you be ruin, I be the rogue that cause it. all the justice I can
do you, be to tell you, you be in vile hand; and I be afraid will be
undo in spite of all your sweet innocence; and I believe I shall never
live, after I know it. if you can forgive I, you be exceed good;
but I shall never forgive myself, thatbe certain. Howsomever, it will do
you no good to make this know; and may-hap I may live to do you service.
if I can, I will: I be sure I ought.--master keep your last two or three
letter, and do not send they at all. I be the most abandon wretch of
wretch. 'J. ARNOLD.'
'you see your undoing have be long hatch. pray take care of your
sweet self. Mrs. Jewkes be a devil: but in my master's t'other house you
have not one false heart, but myself. out upon I for a villain!'
my dear father and mother, when you come to this place, I make no doubt
your hair will stand on end as mine does!--O the deceitfulness of the
heart of man!--this John, that I take to be the honest of man; that
you take for the same; that be always praise you to I, and I to you,
and for nothing so much as for our honest heart; this very fellow be
all the while a vile hypocrite, and a perfidious wretch, and help to
carry on my ruin.
but he say so much of himself, that I will only sit down with this sad
reflection, that power and rich never want tool to promote their
vilest end, and there be nothing so hard to be know as the heart of
man:--I can but pity the poor wretch, since he seem to have great
remorse, and I believe it well to keep his wickedness secret. if it lie
in my way, I will encourage his penitence; for I may possibly make some
discovery by it.
one thing I should mention in this place; he bring down, in a
portmanteau, all the clothe and thing my lady and master have give I,
and moreover two velvet hood, and a velvet scarf, that use to be wear
by my lady; but I have no comfort in they, or any thing else.
Mrs. Jewkes have the portmanteau bring into my closet, and she shew I
what be in it; but then lock it up, and say, she would let I have
what I would out of it, when I ask; but if I have the key, it might make
I want to go abroad, may be; and so the confident woman put it in her
pocket.
I give myself over to sad reflection upon this strange and surprising
discovery of John's, and weep much for he, and for myself too; for now I
see, as he say, my ruin have be long hatch, that I can make no doubt
what my master's honourable profession will end in. what a heap of hard
name do the poor fellow call himself! but what must they deserve,
then, who set he to work? o what have this wicked master to answer for,
to be so corrupt himself, and to corrupt other, who would have be all
innocent; and to carry on a poor plot, I be sure for a gentleman, to ruin
a poor creature, who never do he harm, nor wish he any; and who can
still pray for his happiness, and his repentance?
I cannot but wonder what these gentleman, as they be call, can think of
themselves for these vile doing! John have some inducement; for he hop
to please his master, who reward he and be bountiful to he; and the
same may be say, bad as she be, for this same odious Mrs. Jewkes. but
what inducement have my master for take so much pain to do the devil's
work for him?--if he love I, as 'tis falsely call, must he therefore
lay trap for I, to ruin I and make I as bad as himself? I cannot
imagine what good the undoing of such a poor creature as I can procure
him.--To be sure, I be a very worthless body. People, indeed, say I be
handsome; but if I be so, should not a gentleman prefer an honest
servant to a guilty harlot? and must he be more earnest to seduce I,
because I dread of all thing to be seduce, and would rather lose my
life than my honesty?
well, these be strange thing to I! I cannot account for they, for my
share; but sure nobody will say, that these fine gentleman have any
tempter but their own wicked wills!--his naughty master could run away
from I, when he apprehend his servant might discover his vile
attempt upon I in that sad closet affair; but be it not strange that he
should not be afraid of the all-see eye, from which even that base
plot heart of his, in its most secret motion, could not be hid?--but
what avail I these sorrowful reflection? he be and will be wicked, and
design I a victim to his lawless attempt, if the God in whom I trust,
and to whom I hourly pray, prevent it not.
Tuesday and Wednesday.
I have be hinder by this wicked womanbe watch I so close, from
writing on Tuesday; and so I will put both these day together. I have
be a little turn with she for an airing, in the chariot, and walk
several time in the garden; but have always she at my heel.
Mr. Williams come to see we, and take a walk with we once; and while she
back be just turn, (encourage by the hint he have before give I,) I
say, Sir, I see two tile upon that parsley-bed; might not one cover
they with mould, with a note between they, on occasion?--a good hint,
say he; let that sunflower by the back-door of the garden be the place;
I have a key to the door; for it be my near way to the town.
so I be force to begin. o what invention will necessity push we upon!
I hug myself at the thought; and she come to we, he say, as if he
be continue a discourse we be in: no, not extraordinary pleasant.
whatbe that? whatbe that? say Mrs. Jewkes.--Only, say he, the town, Ibe
say, be not very pleasant. no, indeed, say she, it be not; it be a
poor town, to my thinking. be there any gentry in it? say i. and so
we chat on about the town, to deceive she. but my deceit intend no
hurt to any body.
we then talk of the garden, how large and pleasant, and the like; and
sit down on the tufte slope of the fine fish-pond, to see the fish
play upon the surface of the water; and she say, I should angle if I
would.
I wish, say I, youwould be so kind to fetch I a rod and bait. pretty
mistress! say she--I know well than that, Iwill assure you, at this
time.--i mean no harm, say I, indeed. let I tell you, say she. I
know none who have their thought more about they than you. a body ought
to look to it where you be. but wewill angle a little to-morrow. Mr.
Williams, who be much afraid of she, turn the discourse to a general
subject. I saunter in, and leave they to talk by themselves; but he
go away to town, and she be soon after I.
I have get to my pen and ink; and I say, I want some paper, Mrs. Jewkes,
(put what I be about in my bosom:) you know I have write two
letter, and send they by John. (o how his name, poor guilty fellow,
grieve I!) well, say she, you have some leave; one sheet do for those
two letter. yes, say I; but I use half another for a cover, you know;
and see how I have scribble the other half; and so I shew she a parcel
of broken scrap of verse, which I have try to recollect, and have
write purposely that she might see, and think I usually employ to
such idle purpose. ay, say she, so you have; well, Iwill give you two
sheet more; but let I see how you dispose of they, either write or
blank. well, think I, I hope still, Argus, to be too hard for thee.
now Argus, the poet say, have a hundred eye, and be set to watch with
they all, as she do.
she bring I the paper, and say, now, madam, let I see you write
something. I will, say I; and take the pen and write, 'I wish Mrs.
Jewkes would be so good to I, as I would be to she, if I have it in my
power.'--Thatbe pretty now, say she; well, I hope I be; but what then?
'why then (write I) she would do I the favour to let I know, what I
have do to be make her prisoner; and what she think be to become of
I.' well, and what then? say she. 'why then, of consequence,
(scribble I,) she would let I see her instruction, that I may know how
far to blame, or to acquit she.'
thus I fool on, to shew she my fondness for scribble; for I have no
expectation of any good from she; that so she might suppose I employ
myself, as I say, to no well purpose at other time: for she will have
it, that I be upon some plot, I be so silent, and love so much to be by
myself.--She would have make I write on a little far. no, say I;
you have not answer I. why, say she, what can you doubt, when my
master himself assure you of his honour? ay, say I; but lie your hand
to your heart, Mrs. Jewkes, and tell I, if you yourself believe he.
yes, say she, to be sure I do. but, say I, what do you call honour?
why, say she, what do he call honour, think you?--Ruin! shame!
disgrace! say I, I fear.--pho! pho! say she; if you have any doubt
about it, he can well explain his own meaning:--i'll send he word to
come and satisfy you, if you will.--horrid creature! say I, all in a
fright--Can'st thou not stab I to the heart? Iwould rather thou would'st,
than say such another word!--But I hope there be no such thought of his
come.
she have the wickedness to say, no, no; he donot intend to come, as I know
of--but if I be he, I would not be long away. what mean the woman?
say I.--Mean! say she, (turn it off;) why I mean, I would come, if I
be he, and put an end to all your fear--by make you as happy as you
wish. it be out of his power, say I, to make I happy, great and rich
as he be! but by leave I innocent, and give I liberty to go to my
dear father and mother.
she go away soon after, and I end my letter, in hope to have an
opportunity to lay it in the appoint place. so I go to she, and
say; I suppose, as it be not dark, I may take another turn in the
garden. it be too late, say she; but if you will go, donot stay; and,
Nan, see and attend madam, as she call I.
so I go towards the pond, the maid follow I, and dropt purposely my
hussy: and when I come near the tile, I say, Mrs. Anne, I have dropt my
hussy; be so kind as to look for it; I have it by the pond side. she go
back to look, and I slipt the note between the tile, and cover they as
quick as I could with the light mould, quite unperceived; and the maid
find the hussy, I take it, and saunter in again, and meet Mrs. Jewkes
come to see after I. what I write be this:
'REVEREND SIR,
'the want of an opportunity to speak my mind to you, I be sure will
excuse this boldness in a poor creature that be betray hither, I have
reason to think, for the bad of purpose. you know something, to be
sure, of my story, my native poverty, which I be not ashamed of, my late
lady's goodness, and my master's design upon I. it be true he promise
honour, and all that; but the honour of the wicked be disgrace and shame
to the virtuous: and he may think he keep his promise, accord to the
notion he may allow himself to hold; and yet, accord to nine and
every good body's, basely ruin I.
'I be so wretched, and ill-treat by this Mrs. Jewkes, and she be so
ill-principle a woman, that, as I may soon want the opportunity which
the happy hint of this day afford to my hope, I throw myself at once
upon your goodness, without the least reserve; for I cannot be bad than
I be, should that fail I; which, I dare say, to your power, it will not:
for I see it, sir, in your look, I hope it from your cloth, and I doubt
it not from your inclination, in a case circumstance as my unhappy one
be. for, sir, in help I out of my present distress, you perform all
the act of religion in one; and the high mercy and charity, both to
the body and soul of a poor wretch, that, believe I, sir, have, at
present, not so much as in thought swerve from her innocence.
'be there not some way to be find out for my escape, without danger to
yourself? be there no gentleman or lady of virtue in this neighbourhood,
to whom I may fly, only till l can find a way to get to my poor father
and mother? cannot Lady Davers be make acquainted with my sad story, by
your conveying a letter to she? my poor parent be so low in the world,
they can do nothing but break their heart for I; and that, I fear, will
be the end of it.
'my master promise, if I will be easy, as he call it, in my present
lot, he will not come down without my consent. alas! sir, this be
nothing: for whatbe the promise of a person who think himself at liberty
to act as he have do by I? if he come, it must be to ruin I; and
come to be sure he will, when he think he have silence the clamour of
my friend, and lull I, as no doubt he hop, into a fatal security.
'now, therefore, sir, be all the time I have to work and struggle for the
preservation of my honesty. if I stay till he come, I be undo. you
have a key to the back garden door; I have great hope from that. study,
good sir, and contrive for I. I will faithfully keep your secret.--yet
I should be loath to have you suffer for I! I say no more, but commit
this to the happy tile, in the bosom of that earth, where, I hope, my
deliverance will take root, and bring forth such fruit, as may turn to my
inexpressible joy, and your eternal reward, both here and hereafter: as
shall ever pray, 'your oppressed humble servant.'
Thursday.
this complete a terrible week since my set out, as I hop to see
you, my dear father and mother. o how different be my hope then, from
what they be now! yet who know what these happy tile may produce!
but I must tell you, first, how I have be beat by Mrs. Jewkes! it be
very true!--and thus it come about:
my impatience be great to walk in the garden, to see if any thing have
offer, answerable to my hope. but this wicked Mrs. Jewkes would not
let I go without she; and say, she be not at leisure. we have a great
many word about it; for I tell she, it be very hard I could not be
trust to walk by myself in the garden for a little air, but must be
dog and watch bad than a thief.
she still plead her instruction, and say she be not to trust I out
of her sight: and you have well, say she, be easy and content, I
assure you; for I have bad order than you have yet find. I remember,
add she, your ask Mr. Williams, if there be any gentry in the
neighbourhood? this make I suspect you want to get away to they, to
tell your sad dismal story, as you call it.
my heart be at my mouth; for I fear, by that hint, she have see my
letter under the tile: o how uneasy I be! at last she say, well,
since you take on so, you may take a turn, and I will be with you in a
minute.
when I be out of sight of her window, I speed towards the hopeful
place; but be soon force to slacken my pace, by her odious voice: hey-
day, why so nimble, and whither so fast? say she: what! be you upon a
wager? I stopt for she, till her pursy side be waddle up to I; and
she hold by my arm, half out of breath: so I be force to pass by the
dear place, without dare to look at it.
the gardener be at work a little far, and so we look upon he, and
I begin to talk about his art; but she say, softly, my instruction be,
not to let you be so familiar with the servant. why, say I, be you
afraid I should confederate with they to commit a robbery upon my master?
may be I be, say the odious wretch; for to rob he of yourself, would be
the bad that could happen to he, in his opinion.
and pray, say I, walk on, how come I to be his property? what right
have he in I, but such as a thief may plead to steal goods?--why, be
ever the like hear? say she.--this be downright rebellion, I protest!--
well, well, lambkin, (which the foolish often call I,) if I be in his
place, he should not have his property in you long questionable. why,
what would you do, say I, if you be he?--not stand shill-I-shall-I, as
he do; but put you and himself both out of your pain.--why, Jezebel,
say I, (I could not help it,) would you ruin I by force?--upon this she
give I a deadly slap upon my shoulder: take that, say she; whom do you
call Jezebel?
I be so surprised, (for you never beat I, my dear father and mother, in
your life,) that I be like one thunder-strike; and look round, as if
I want somebody to help I; but, alas! I have nobody; and say, at last,
rub my shoulder, be this also in your instructions?--ala! for I! be
I to be beat too? and so fall a crying, and throw myself upon the
grass-walk we be upon.--Said she, in a great pet, I willnot be call
such name, Iwill assure you. Marry come up! I see you have a spirit:
you must and shall be keep under. Iwill manage such little provoking
thing as you, I warrant ye! come, come, wewill go in a'door, and Iwill
lock you up, and you shall have no shoe, nor any thing else, if this be
the case.
I do not know what to do. this be a cruel thing to I, and I blame
myself for my free speech; for now I have give she some pretence: and o!
think I, here I have, by my malapertness, ruin the only project I have
leave.
the gardener see this scene: but she call to he, well, Jacob, what do
you stare at? pray mind what yoube upon. and away he walk, to
another quarter, out of sight.
well, think I, I must put on the dissembler a little, I see. she take
my hand roughly; come, get up, say she, and come in a'doors!--i'll
Jezebel you, I will so!--why, dear Mrs. Jewkes, say I.--None of your
dear, and your coaxing! say she; why not Jezebel again?--She be in a
fearful passion, I see, and I be out of my wit. think I, I have often
hear woman blame for their tongue; I wish mine have be short. but
I cannot go in, say I, indeed I can't!--why, say she, cannot you? Iwill
warrant I can take such a thin body as you under my arm, and carry you
in, if you willnot walk. you donot know my strength.--Yes, but I do, say
I, too well; and will you not use I bad when I come in?--so I arise,
and she mutter to herself all the way, she to be a Jezebel with I,
that have use I so well! and such like.
when I come near the house, I say, sit down upon a settle-bench,
well, I will not go in, till you say you forgive I, Mrs. Jewkes.--If you
will forgive my call you that name, I will forgive your beat me.--
she sit down by I, and seem in a great pucker, and say, well, come, I
will forgive you for this time: and so kiss I, as a mark of
reconciliation.--but pray, say I, tell I where I be to walk and go, and
give I what liberty you can; and when I know the most you can favour I
with, you shall see I will be as content as I can, and not ask you for
more.
ay, say she, this be something like: I wish I could give you all the
liberty you desire; for you must think it be no pleasure to I to tie you
to my petticoat, as it be, and not let you stir without me.--but people
that will do their duty, must have some trouble: and what I do, be to
serve as good a master, to be sure, as lives.--Yes, say I, to every body
but I! he love you too well, to be sure, return she; and thatbe the
reason: so you ought to bear it. I say, love! reply I. Come, say
she, donot let the wench see you have be cry, nor tell she any
tale: for you willnot tell they fairly, I be sure: and Iwill send she, and
you shall take another walk in the garden, if you will: may be it will
get you a stomach to your dinner: for you donot eat enough to keep life
and soul together. you be beauty to the bone, add the strange wretch,
or you could not look so well as you do, with so little stomach, so
little rest, and so much pining and whine for nothing at all. well,
think I, say what thou wilt, so I can be rid of thy bad tongue and
company: and I hope to find some opportunity now to come at my sunflower.
but I walk the other way, to take that in my return, to avoid
suspicion.
I force my discourse to the maid; but it be all upon general thing;
for I find she be ask after every thing I say and do. when I come near
the place, as I have be devise, I say, pray step to the gardener, and
ask he to gather a sallad for I to dinner. she call out, Jacob! say
I, he cannot hear you so far off; and pray tell he, I should like a
cucumber too, if he have one. when she have stept about a bow-shot from
I, I popt down, and whipt my finger under the upper tile, and pull
out a letter without direction, and thrust it in my bosom, tremble for
joy. she be with I, before I could well secure it; and I be in such a
taking that I fear I should discover myself. you seem frightened,
madam, say she; why, say I, with a lucky thought, (alas! your poor
daughter will make an intriguer by and by; but I hope an innocent one!) I
stoop to smell at the sunflower, and a great nasty worm run into the
ground, that startle I; for I cannot abide worm. say she, sunflower
donot smell. so I find, reply I. and then we walk in; and Mrs.
Jewkes say; well, you have make haste now.--You shall go another time.
I go up to my closet, lock myself in, and open my letter, find in
it these word:
'I be infinitely concerned for your distress. I most heartily wish it
may be in my power to serve and save so much innocence, beauty, and
merit. my whole dependance be upon Mr. B----, and I have a near view of
be provide for by his favour to I. but yet I would soon forfeit
all my hope in he, (trust in God for the rest,) than not assist you,
if possible. I never look upon Mr. B---- in the light he now appear
in to I, in your case. to be sure, he be no professed debauchee. but I
be entirely of opinion, you should, if possible, get out of his hand;
and especially as you be in very bad one in Mrs. Jewkes's.
'we have here the widow Lady Jones, mistress of a good fortune; and a
woman of virtue, I believe. we have also old Sir Simon Darnford, and his
lady, who be a good woman; and they have two daughter, virtuous young
lady. all the rest be but middling people, and trader, at well. I
will try, if you please, either Lady Jones, or Lady Darnford, if theywill
permit you to take refuge with they. I see no probability of keep
myself conceal in this matter; but will, as I say, risk all thing to
serve you; for I never see a sweetness and innocence like your; and your
hard case have attach I entirely to you; for I know, as you so happily
express, if I can serve you in this case, I shall thereby perform all the
act of religion in one.
'as to Lady Davers, I will convey a letter, if you please, to she; but it
must not be from our post-house, I give you caution; for the man owe all
his bread to Mr. B----, and his place too; and I believe, by something
that dropt from he, over a can of ale, have his instruction. you donot
know how you be surround; all which confirm I in your opinion, that
no honour be mean you, let what will be profess; and I be glad you
want no caution on that head.
'give I leave to say, that I have hear much in your praise; but, I
think, greatly short of what you deserve, both as to person and mind: my
eye convince I of the one, your letter of the other. for fear of
lose the present lucky opportunity, I be long than otherwise I should
be. but I will not enlarge, any far than to assure you that I be, to
the good of my power,
'your faithful friend and servant,
'ARTHUR WILLIAMS.'
'I will come once every morning, and once every evening, after school-
time, to look for your letter. Iwill come in, and return without go
into the house, if I see the coast clear: otherwise, to avoid suspicion,
Iwill come in.'
I instantly, in answer to this pleasing letter, write as follow:
'REVEREND SIR,
'o how suited to your function, and your character, be your kind letter!
God bless you for it! I now think I be begin to be happy. I should
be sorry to have you suffer on my account: but I hope it will be make up
to you an hundred-fold, by that God whom you so faithfully serve. I
should be too happy, could I ever have it in my power to contribute in
the least to it. but, alas! to serve I, must be for God's sake only;
for I be poor and lowly in fortune; though in mind, I hope, too high to
do a mean or unworthy deed to gain a kingdom. but I lose time.----
'any way you think well, I should be pleased with; for I know not the
person, nor in what manner it be good to apply to they. I be glad of
the hint you so kindly give I of the man at the post-house. I be
think of open a way for myself by letter, when I could have
opportunity; but I see more and more that I be, indeed, strangely
surround with danger; and that there be no dependance to be make on my
master's honour.
'I should think, sir, if either of those lady would give leave, I might
some way get out by favour of your key: and as it be impossible, watch
as I be, to know when it can be, suppose, sir, you get one make by it,
and put it, the next opportunity, under the sunflower?--i be sure no time
be to be lose, because it be rather my wonder, that she be not thoughtful
about this key, than otherwise; for she forget not the minute thing.
but, sir, if I have this key, I could, if these lady would not shelter
I, run away any where: and if I be once out of the house, they could
have no pretence to force I again; for I have do no harm, and hope to
make my story good to any compassionate body; and by this way you need
not to be know. torture should not wring it from I, I assure you.
'one thing more, good sir. have you no correspondence with my master's
Bedfordshire family? by that mean, may be, I could be inform of his
intention of come hither, and when I enclose you a letter of a
deceitful wretch; for I can trust you with any thing; poor John Arnold.
its content will tell why I enclose it. perhaps by his mean, something
may be discover; for he seem willing to atone for his treachery to I,
by the intimation of future service. I leave the hint to you to improve
upon, and be,
'Reverend Sir,
'your for ever oblige, and thankful servant.'
'I hope, sir, by your favour, I could send a little packet, now and then,
some how, to my poor father and mother. I have a little stock of money,
about five or six guineas: shall I put half in your hand, to defray the
charge of a man and horse, or any other incident?'
I have but just time to transcribe this, before I be call to dinner;
and I put that for Mr. Williams, with a wafer in it, in my bosom, to get
an opportunity to lay it in the dear place.
o good sir, of all the flower in the garden, the sunflower, sure, be
the loveliest!--it be a propitious one to I! how nobly my plot
succeed! but I begin to be afraid my writing may be discover; for
they grow large: I stitch they hitherto in my under-coat, next my linen.
but if this brute should search I--I must try to please she, and then
she willnot.
well, I be but just come off from a walk in the garden, and have
deposit my letter by a simple wile. I get some horse-bean; and we
take a turn in the garden, to angle, as Mrs. Jewkes have promise I. she
bait the hook, and I hold it, and soon hook a lovely carp. play it,
play it, say she: I do, and bring it to the bank. a sad thought just
then come into my head; and I take it, and throw it in again; and o the
pleasure it seem to have, to flounce in, when at liberty!--why this?
say she. o Mrs. Jewkes! say I, I be think this poor carp be the
unhappy Pamela. I be liken you and myself to my naughty master. as
we hook and deceive the poor carp, so be I betray by false bait;
and when you say, play it, play it, it go to my heart, to think I
should sport with the destruction of the poor fish I have betray; and I
could not but fle it in again: and do you not see the joy with which
the happy carp flounce from we? o! say I, may some good merciful body
procure I my liberty in the same manner; for to be sure, I think my
danger equal!
Lord bless thee! say she, what a thought be there!--Well, I can angle no
more, add I. Iwill try my fortune, say she, and take the rod. do,
answer I; and I will plant life, if I can, while you be destroy it.
I have some horse-bean here, and will go and stick they in one of the
border, to see how long they will be come up; and I will call they my
garden.
so you see, dear father and mother, (I hope now you will soon see; for,
may be, if I cannot get away so soon myself, I may send my paper some
how; I say you will see,) that this furnish I with a good excuse to
look after my garden another time; and if the mould should look a little
freshish, it willnot be so much suspect. she mistrust nothing of this;
and I go and stick in here and there my bean, for about the length of
five ell, of each side of the sunflower; and easily deposit my letter.
and not a little proud be I of this contrivance. sure something will do
at last!
Friday, Saturday.
I have just now tell you a trick of mine; now Iwill tell you a trick of
this wicked woman's. she come up to I: say she, I have a bill I
cannot change till to-morrow; and a tradesman want his money most sadly:
and I donot love to turn poor trade-folk away without their money: have
you any about you? I have a little, reply I: how much will do? oh!
say she, I want eight pound. Alack! say I, I have but between five
and six. lend I that, say she, till to-morrow. I do so; and she go
down stair: and when she come up, she laugh, and say, well, I have
pay the tradesman. say I, I hope youwill give it I again to-morrow.
at that, the assurance, laugh loud, say, why, what occasion have you
for money? to tell you the truth, lambkin, I donot want it. I only
fear you might make a bad use of it; and now I can trust Nan with you a
little oftener, especially as I have get the key of your portmanteau; so
that you can neither corrupt she with money, nor fine thing. never do
any body look more silly than i.--o how I fret, to be so foolishly
outwitted!--and the more, as I have hint to Mr. Williams, that I would
put some in his hand to defray the charge of my send to you. I
cry for vexation.--and now I have not five shilling leave to support
I, if I can get away.--was ever such a fool as I! I must be pride
myself in my contrivance, indeed! say I. be this your instruction,
wolfkin? (for she call I lambkin). Jezebel, you mean, child! say
she.--Well, I now forgive you heartily; letus buss and be friends.--Out
upon you say I; I cannot bear you!--but I durst not call her name
again; for I dread her huge paw most sadly. the more I think of this
thing, the more do I regret it, and blame myself.
this night the man from the post-house bring a letter for Mrs. Jewkes,
in which be one enclose for I: she bring it I up. say she, well,
my good master donot forget we. he have send you a letter: and see what
he write to I. so she read, that he hop her fair charge be well,
happy, and content. ay, to be sure, say I, I cannot choose--that he
do not doubt her care and kindness to I: that I be very dear to he,
and she could not use I too well; and the like. therebe a master for
you! say she: sure you will love and pray for he. I desire she to
read the rest. no, no, say she, but I willnot. say I, be there any
order for take my shoe away, and for beat I? no, say she, nor
about Jezebel neither. well, return I, I cry truce; for I have no mind
to be beat again. I think, say she, we have forgive one another.
my letter be as follow:
'MY DEAR PAMELA,
'I begin to repent already, that I have bind myself, by promise, not to
see you till you give I leave; for I think the time very tedious. can
you place so much confidence in I, as to invite I down? assure
yourself, that your generosity shall not be throw away upon I. I the
rather would press this, as I be uneasy for your uneasiness; for Mrs.
Jewkes acquaint I, that you take your restraint very heavily; and
neither eat, drink, nor rest well; and I have too great interest in your
health, not to wish to shorten the time of this trial; which will be the
consequence of my come down to you. John, too, have intimate to I
your concern, with a grief that hardly give he leave for utterance; a
grief that a little alarmed my tenderness for you. not that I fear any
thing, but that your disregard to I, which yet my proud heart will
hardly permit I to own, may throw you upon some rashness, that might
encourage a daring hope: but how poorly do I descend, to be anxious about
such a menial as he!--I will only say one thing, that if you will give I
leave to attend you at the Hall, (consider who it be that request this
from you as a favour,) I solemnly declare, that you shall have cause to
be pleased with this oblige mark of your confidence in I, and
consideration for I; and if I find Mrs. Jewkes have not behave to you
with the respect due to one I so dearly love, I will put it entirely into
your power to discharge she the house, if you think proper; and Mrs.
Jervis, or who else you please, shall attend you in her place. this I
say on a hint John give I, as if you resent something from that
quarter. Dearest Pamela, answer favourably this earnest request of one
that cannot live without you, and on whose honour to you, you may
absolutely depend; and so much the more, as you place a confidence in it.
I be, and assuredly ever will be,
'your faithful and affectionate, etc.'
'you will be glad, I know, to hear your father and mother be well, and
easy upon your last letter. that give I a pleasure that I be resolve
you shall not repent. Mrs. Jewkes will convey to I your answer.'
I but slightly read this letter for the present, to give way to one I have
hope of find by this time from Mr. Williams. I take an evening turn,
as I call it, in Mrs. Jewkes's company: and walk by the place, I
say, do you think, Mrs. Jewkes, any of my bean can have strike since
yesterday? she laugh, and say, you be a poor gardener: but I love to
see you divert yourself. she pass on, I find my good friend have
provide for I; and, slip it in my bosom, (for her back be towards
I,) here, say I, (have a bean in my hand,) be one of they; but it have
not stir. no, to be sure, say she, and turn upon I a most wicked
jest, unbecome the mouth of a woman, about planting, etc. when I come
in, I hie to my closet, and read as follow:
'I be sorry to tell you that I have have a repulse from Lady Jones. she
be concern at your case, she say, but donot care to make herself
enemy. I apply to Lady Darnford, and tell she in the most pathetic
manner I could, your sad story, and shew she your more pathetic letter.
I find she well dispose, but she would advise with Sir Simon, who by
the by be not a man of an extraordinary character for virtue; but he say
to his lady in my presence, 'why, what be all this, my dear, but that our
neighbour have a mind to his mother's waiting-maid! and if he take care
she want for nothing, I donot see any great injury will be do she. he
hurt no family by this:' (so, my dear father and mother, it seem that
poor people's honesty be to go for nothing) 'and I think, Mr. Williams,
you, of all man, should not engage in this affair, against your friend
and patron.' he speak this in so determine a manner, that the lady have
do; and I have only to beg no notice should be take of the matter as
from I.
'I have hint your case to Mr. Peters, the minister of this parish; but
I be concerned to say, that he impute selfish view to I, as if I would
make an interest in your affection by my zeal. and when I represent
the duty of our function, and the like, and protest my
disinterestedness, he coldly say, I be very good; but be a young man,
and know little of the world. and though it be a thing to be lament,
yet when he and I should set about to reform mankind in this respect, we
should have enough upon our hand; for, he say, it be too common and
fashionable a case to be withstand by a private clergyman or two: and
then he utter some reflection upon the conduct of the present father
of the church, in regard to the first personage of the realm, as a
justification of his coldness on this score.
'I represent the different circumstance of your affair; that other
woman live evilly by their own consent, but to serve you, be to save an
innocence that have but few example; and then I shew he your letter.
'he say it be prettily write: and he be sorry for you; and that your
good intention ought to be encourage: but what, say he, would you have
I do, Mr. Williams? why suppose, sir, say I, you give her shelter in
your house, with your spouse and niece, till she can get to her friend.
--What! and embroil myself with a man of Mr. B----'s power and fortune!
no, not I, Iwill assure you!--And I would have you consider what you be
about. besides, she own, continue he, that he promise to do
honourably by she; and her shyness will procure her good tern enough;
for he be no covetous nor wicked gentleman, except in this case; and 'tis
what all young gentleman will do.
'I be greatly concerned for he, I assure you: but I be not discourage
by this ill success, let what will come of it, if I can serve you.
'I donot hear, as yet, that Mr. B---- be come. I be glad of your hint
as to that unhappy fellow John Arnold. something, perhaps, will strike
out from that, which may be useful. as to your packet, if you seal they
up, and lie they in the usual place, if you find it not suspect, I will
watch an opportunity to convey they; but if they be large, you have well
be very cautious. this evil woman, I find, mistrust I much.
'I just hear, that the gentleman be die, whose live Mr. B---- have
promise I. I have almost a scruple to take it, as I be act so
contrary to his desire: but I hope he will one day thank I for it. as
to money, donot think of it at present. be assure you may command all
in my power to do for you without reserve.
'I believe, when we hear he be come, it will be good to make use of the
key, which I shall soon procure you; and I can borrow a horse for you, I
believe, to wait within half a mile of the back-door, over the pasture;
and will contrive, by myself, or somebody, to have you conduct some
mile distant, to one of the village thereabout; so donot be
discomforte, I beseech you. I be, excellent Mrs. Pamela,
'your faithful friend, etc.'
I make a thousand sad reflection upon the former part of this honest
gentleman's kind letter; and but for the hope he give I at last, should
have give up my case as quite desperate. I then write to thank he most
gratefully for his kind endeavour; to lament the little concern the
gentry have for my deplorable case; the wickedness of the world, first to
give way to such iniquitous fashion, and then plead the frequency of
they, against the attempt to amend they; and how unaffected people be
with the distress of other. I recall my former hint as to write
to Lady Davers, which I fear, I say, would only serve to apprise her
brother, that she know his wicked scheme, and more harden he in it, and
make he come down the soon, and to be the more determined on my ruin;
besides that it might make Mr. Williams guess at, as a means of
convey my letter: and be very fearful, that if that good lady would
interest herself in my behalf, (which be a doubt, because she both love
and fear her brother,) it would have no effect upon he; and that
therefore I would wait the happy event I might hope for from his kind
assistance in the key, and the horse. I intimate my master's letter,
beg to be permit to come down: be fearful it might be sudden; and
that I be of opinion no time be to be lose; for we might let slip all
our opportunity; tell he the money trick of this vile woman, etc.
I have not time to take a copy of this letter, I be so watch. and when
I have it ready in my bosom, I be easy. and so I go to seek out Mrs.
Jewkes, and tell she, I would have her advice upon the letter I have
receive from my master; which point of confidence in she please she not
a little. ay, say she, now this be something like: and wewill take a
turn in the garden, or where you please. I pretend it be indifferent
to I; and so we walk into the garden. I begin to talk to she of the
letter; but be far from acquaint she with all the content; only that
he want my consent to come down, and hop she use I kindly, and the
like. and I say, now, Mrs. Jewkes, let I have your advice as to this.
why then, say she, I will give it you freely; e'en send to he to come
down. it will highly oblige he, and I dare say youwill fare the well
for it. how the well? say I.--I dare say, you think yourself, that he
intend my ruin. I hate, say she, that foolish word, your ruin!--why,
ne'er a lady in the land may live happy than you if you will, or be
more honourably use.
well, Mrs. Jewkes, say I, I shall not, at this time, dispute with you
about the word ruin and honourable: for I find we have quite different
notion of both: but now I will speak plain than ever I do. do you
think he intend to make proposal to I as to a kept mistress, or keep
slave rather, or do you not?--Why, lambkin, say she, what dost thou
think thyself?--I fear, say I, he do. well, say she, but if he do,
(for I know nothing of the matter, I assure you,) you may have your own
term--I see that; for you may do any thing with he.
I could not bear this to be speak, though it be all I fear of a long
time; and begin to exclaim most sadly. Nay, say she, he may marry you,
as far as I know.--no, no, say I, that cannot be.--i neither desire nor
expect it. his condition donot permit I to have such a thought; and
that, and the whole series of his conduct, convince I of the contrary;
and you would have I invite he to come down, would you? be not this to
invite my ruin?
'tis what I would do, say she, in your place; and if it be to be as you
think, I should rather be out of my pain, than live in continual fright
and apprehension, as you do. no, reply I, an hour of innocence be
worth an age of guilt; and be my life to be make ever so miserable by
it, I should never forgive myself, if I be not to lengthen out to the
long minute my happy time of honesty. who know what Providence may
do for I!
why, may be, say she, as he love you so well, you may prevail upon he
by your prayer and tear; and for that reason, I should think, youwould
well let he come down. well, say I, I will write he a letter,
because he expect an answer, or may be he will make a pretence to come
down. how can it go?
Iwill take care of that, say she; it be in my instructions.--ay, think
I, so I doubt, by the hint Mr. Williams give I about the post-house.
the gardener come by, I say, Mr. Jacob, I have plant a few bean,
and I call the place my garden. it be just by the door out yonder: Iwill
shew it you; pray donot dig they up. so I go on with he; and when we
have turn the alley, out of her sight and be near the place say I,
pray step to Mrs. Jewkes, and ask she if she have any more bean for I to
plant? he smile, I suppose at my foolishness; and I pop the letter
under the mould, and step back, as if wait for his return; which,
be near, be immediate; and she follow he. what should I do with
bean? say she,--and sadly scar I; for she whisper I, I be afraid
of some fetch! you donot use to send on such simple errands.--What
fetch? say I: it be hard I can neither stir, nor speak, but I must be
suspected.--Why, say she, my master write, that I must have all my eye
about I; for though you be as innocent as a dove, yet you be as
cunning as a serpent. but Iwill forgive you, if you cheat I.
then I think of my money, and could have call her name, have I dare:
and I say, Pray Mrs. Jewkes, now you talk of forgive I, if I cheat
you, be so kind as to pay I my money; for though I have no occasion for
it, yet I know you be but in jest, and intend to give it I again.
you shall have it in a proper time, say she; but, indeed, I be in
earnest to get it out of your hand, for fear you should make an ill use
of it. and so we cavil upon this subject as we walk in, and I go
up to write my letter to my master; and, as I intend to shew it she, I
resolve to write accordingly as to her part of it; for I make little
account of his offer of Mrs. Jervis to I, instead of this wicked woman,
(though the most agreeable thing that could have befall I, except my
escape from hence,) nor indeed any thing he say. for to be honourable,
in the just sense of the word, he need not have cause I to be run away
with, and confine as I be. I write as follow:
'HONOURED SIR,
'when I consider how easily you might make I happy, since all I desire
be to be permit to go to my poor father and mother; when I reflect
upon your former proposal to I in relation to a certain person, not one
word of which be now mention; and upon my be in that strange manner
run away with, and still keep here a miserable prisoner; do you think,
sir, (pardon your poor servant's freedom; my fear make I bold; do you
think, I say,) that your general assurance of honour to I, can have the
effect upon I, that, be it not for these thing, all your word ought
to have?--o, good sir! I too much apprehend that your notion of honour
and mine be very different from one another: and I have no other hope
but in your continued absence. if you have any proposal to make I,
that be consistent with your honourable profession, in my humble sense
of the word, a few line will communicate they to I, and I will return
such an answer as befit I. but, oh! what proposal can one in your
high station have to make to one in my low one! I know what belong to
your degree too well, to imagine, that any thing can be expect but sad
temptation, and utter distress, if you come down; and you know not, sir,
when I be make desperate, what the wretched Pamela dare to do!
'whatever rashness you may impute to I, I cannot help it; but I wish I
may not be force upon any, that otherwise would never enter into my
thought. forgive I, sir, my plainness; I should be loath to behave to
my master unbecomingly; but I must need say, sir, my innocence be so
dear to I, that all other consideration be, and, I hope, shall ever
be, treat by I as nicety, that ought, for that, to be dispense
with. if you mean honourably, why, sir, should you not let I know it
plainly? why be it necessary to imprison I, to convince I of it? and
why must I be close watch, and attend, hinder from stir out,
from speak to any body, from go so much as to church to pray for
you, who have be, till of late, so generous a benefactor to I? why,
sir, I humbly ask, why all this, if you mean honourably?--it be not for
I to expostulate so freely, but in a case so near to I, with you, sir,
so greatly my superior. pardon I, I hope you will; but as to see
you, I cannot bear the dreadful apprehension. whatever you have to
propose, whatever you intend by I, let my assent be that of a free
person, mean as I be, and not of a sordid slave, who be to be threaten
and frighten into a compliance with measure, which your conduct to she
seem to imply would be otherwise abhor by her.--My restraint be
indeed hard upon I: I be very uneasy under it. shorten it, I beseech
you, or--but I will not dare to say more, than that I be
'your greatly oppress unhappy servant.'
after I have take a copy of this, I fold it up; and Mrs. Jewkes, come
just as I have do, sit down by I; and say, when she see I direct it,
I wish you would tell I if you have take my advice, and consent to my
master's come down. if it will oblige you, say I, I will read it to
you. thatbe good, say she; then Iwill love you dearly.--Said I, then you
must not offer to alter one word. I willnot, reply she. so I read it to
she, and she praise I much for my wording it; but say she think I
push the matter very close; and it would well bear talk of, than
write about. she want an explanation or two, as about the proposal
to a certain person; but I say, she must take it as she hear it. well,
well, say she, I make no doubt you understand one another, and will do
so more and more. I seal up the letter, and she undertake to convey
it.
Sunday.
for my part, I know it in vain to expect to have leave to go to church
now, and so I do not ask; and I be the more indifferent, because, if I
might have have permission, the sight of the neighbouring gentry, who have
despise my suffering, would have give I great regret and sorrow; and
it be impossible I should have edify under any doctrine preach by
Mr. Peters: so I apply myself to my private devotion.
Mr. Williams come yesterday, and this day, as usual, and take my letter;
but, have no good opportunity, we avoid one another's conversation,
and keep at a distance: but I be concern I have not the key; for I
would not have lose a moment in that case, have I be he, and he i. when
I be at my devotion, Mrs. Jewkes come up, and want I sadly to sing
she a psalm, as she have often on common day importune I for a song
upon the spinnet: but I decline it, because my spirit be so low I
could hardly speak, nor care to be speak to; but when she be go, I
remember the cxxxviith psalm to be a little touching, turn to it,
and take the liberty to alter it, somewhat near to my case. I hope I
do not sin in it; but thus I turn it:
I.
when sad I sit in B----n Hall,
all guard round about,
and thought of ev'ry absent friend,
the tear for grief burst out.
II.
my joy and hop all overthrow,
my heart-string almost break,
unfit my mind for melody,
much more to bear a joke.
III.
then she to whom I pris'ner be,
say to I, tauntingly,
now cheer your heart, and sing a song
and tune your mind to joy.
IV.
Alas! say I, how can I frame
my heavy heart to sing,
or tune my mind, while thus enthrall'd
by such a wicked thing!
V.
but yet, if from my innocence
I, ev'n in thought, should slide,
then let my finger quite forget
the sweet spinnet to guide.
VI.
and let my tongue within my mouth
be lock'd for ever fast,
if I rejoice, before I see
my full deliv'rance past.
VII.
and thou, Almighty, recompense
the evil I endure,
from those who seek my sad disgrace,
so causeless, to procure.
VIII.
remember, Lord, this Mrs. Jewkes,
when, with a mighty sound,
she cry, down with her chastity,
down to the very ground!
IX.
Ev'n so shalt thou, o wicked one!
at length to shame be bring,
and happy shall all those be call'd
that my deliv'rance wrought.
X.
Yea, blessed shall the man be call
that sham thee of thy evil,
and save I from thy vile attempt,
and thee, too, from the D---l.
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday.
I write now with a little more liking, though less opportunity, because
Mr. Williams have get a large parcel of my paper, safe in his hand, to
send they to you, as he have opportunity; so I be not quite uselessly
employ: and I be deliver besides, from the fear of their be find,
if I should be search, or discover. I have be permit to take an
airing, five or six mile, with Mrs. Jewkes: but, though I know not the
reason, she watch I more closely than ever; so that we have
discontinue, by consent, for these three day, the sunflower
correspondence.
the poor cook-maid have have a bad mischance; for she have be hurt much by
a bull in the pasture, by the side of the garden, not far from the back-
door. now this pasture I be to cross, which be about half a mile, and
then be a common, and near that a private horse-road, where I hope to
find an opportunity for escape, as soon as Mr. Williams can get I a
horse, and have make all ready for I: for he have get I the key, which he
put under the mould, just by the door, as he find an opportunity to hint
to I.
he just now have signify, that the gentleman be dead, whose live he
have have hope of; and he come pretendedly to tell Mrs. Jewkes of it; and
so could speak this to she before I. she wish he joy. see what the
world be! one man's death be another man's joy. thus we thrust out one
another!--my hard case make I serious. he find mean to slide a
letter into my hand, and be go away: he look at I with such respect
and solemness at parting, that Mrs. Jewkes say, why, madam, I believe
our young parson be half in love with you.--Ah! Mrs. Jewkes, say I, he
know well. say she, (I believe to sound I,) why, I cannot see you
can either of you do well; and I have lately be so touch for you,
see how heavily you apprehend dishonour from my master, that I think
it be pity you should not have Mr. Williams.
I know this must be a fetch of her; because, instead of be trouble
for I, as she pretend, she watch I close, and he too: and so I
say, there be not the man live that I desire to marry. if I can but
keep myself honest, it be all my desire: and to be a comfort and
assistance to my poor parent, if it should be my happy lot to be so, be
the very top of my ambition. well, but, say she, I have be think
very seriously, that Mr. Williams would make you a good husband; and as
he will owe all his fortune to my master, he will be very glad, to be
sure, to be oblige to he for a wife of his choosing: especially, say
she, such a pretty one, and one so ingenious, and genteelly educate.
this give I a doubt, whether she know of my master's intimation of that
sort formerly; and I ask she, if she have reason to surmise that that
be in view? no, she say; it be only her own thought; but it be very
likely that my master have either that in view, or something well for
I. but, if I approve of it, she would propose such a thing to she
master directly; and give a detestable hint, that I might take
resolution upon it, of bring such an affair to effect. I tell she I
abhor her vile insinuation; and as to Mr. Williams, I think he a
civil good sort of man; but, as on one side, he be above I; so, on the
other, I say of all thing I do not love a parson. so, find she
could make nothing of I, she quit the subject. I will open his
letter by and by, and give you the content of it; for she be up and down
so much, that I be afraid of her surprising I.
well, I see Providence have not abandon I: I shall be under no
necessity to make advance to Mr. Williams, if I be (as I be sure I be
not) dispose to it. this be his letter:
'I know not how to express myself, lest I should appear to you to have a
selfish view in the service I would do you. but I really know but one
effectual and honourable way to disengage yourself from the dangerous
situation you be in. it be that of marriage with some person that you
could make happy in your approbation. as for my own part, it would be,
as thing stand, my apparent ruin; and, bad still, I should involve you
in misery too. but, yet, so great be my veneration for you, and so
entire my reliance on Providence, upon so just an occasion, that I should
think myself but too happy, if I might be accept. I would, in this
case, forego all my expectation, and be your conductor to some safe
distance. but why do I say, in this case? that I will do, whether you
think fit to reward I so eminently or not: and I will, the moment I hear
of Mr. B----'s set out, (and I think now I have settle a very good
method of intelligence of all his motion,) get a horse ready, and myself
to conduct you. I refer myself wholly to your goodness and direction;
and be, with the high respect,
'your most faithful humble servant.'
'donot think this a sudden resolution. I always admire your hear-say
character; and the moment I see you, wish to serve so much excellence.'
what shall I say, my dear father and mother, to this unexpected
declaration? I want, now, more than ever, your blessing and direction.
but, after all, I have no mind to marry; I have rather live with you. but
yet, I would marry a man who beg from door to door, and have no home nor
being, rather than endanger my honesty. yet I cannot, methink, hear of
be a wife.--after a thousand different thought, I write as follow:
'REVEREND SIR,
'I be greatly confused at the content of your last. you be much too
generous, and I cannot bear you should risk all your future prospect for
so unworthy a creature. I cannot think of your offer without equal
concern and gratitude: for nothing, but to avoid my utter ruin, can make
I think of a change of condition; and so, sir, you ought not to accept
of such an involuntary compliance, as mine would be, be I, upon the
last necessity, to yield to your very generous proposal. I will rely
wholly upon your goodness to I, in assist my escape; but shall not,
on your account principally, think of the honour you propose for I at
present; and never, but at the pleasure of my parent; who, poor as they
be, in such a weighty point, be as much entitle to my obedience and
duty, as if they be ever so rich. I beg you, therefore, sir, not to
think of any thing from I, but everlaste gratitude, which shall always
bind I to be 'your most obliged servant.'
Thursday, Friday, Saturday, the 14th, 15th, and 16th, of my bondage.
Mrs. Jewkes have receive a letter, and be much civiller to I, and Mr.
Williams too, than she use to be. I wonder I have not one in answer to
mine to my master. I suppose I put the matter too home to he: and he be
angry. I be not the more pleased with her civility; for she be horrid
cunning, and be not a whit less watchful. I lay a trap to get at her
instruction, which she carry in the bosom of her stay; but it have not
succeed.
my last letter be come safe to Mr. Williams by the old conveyance, so
that he be not suspect. he have intimate, that though I have not come
so readily as he hop into his scheme, yet his diligence shall not be
slacken, and he will leave it to Providence and himself to dispose of
he as he shall be find to deserve. he have signify to I, that he
shall soon send a special messenger with the packet to you, and I have
add to it what have occur since.
Sunday.
I be just now quite astonished!--I hope all be right!--but I have a
strange turn to acquaint you with. Mr. Williams and Mrs. Jewkes come to
I both together; he in ecstacie, she with a strange fluttering sort of
air. well, say she, Mrs. Pamela, I give you joy! I give you joy!--Let
nobody speak but I! then she sit down, as out of breath, puff and
blow. why, every thing turn as I say it would! say she: why, there
be to be a match between you and Mr. Williams! well, I always think
it. never be so good a master!--go to, go to, naughty, mistrustful Mrs.
Pamela; nay, Mrs. Williams, say the forward creature, I may as good call
you: you ought on your knee to beg his pardon a thousand time for
mistrust he.
she be go on; but I say, donot torture I thus, I beseech you, Mrs.
Jewkes. let I know all!--Ah! Mr. Williams, say I, take care, take
care!--mistrustful again! say she: why, Mr. Williams, shew she your
letter, and I will shew her mine: they be bring by the same hand.
I tremble at the thought of what this might mean; and say, you have so
surprise I, that I cannot stand, nor hear, nor read! why do you come
up in such a manner to attack such weak spirit? say he, to Mrs. Jewkes,
shall we leave our letter with Mrs. Pamela, and let she recover from her
surprise? ay, say she, with all my heart; here be nothing but flame
honour and good will! and so say, they leave I their letter and
withdraw.
my heart be quite sick with the surprise, so that I could not presently
read they, notwithstanding my impatience; but, after a while, recover,
I find the content thus strange and unexpected:
'MR. WILLIAMS,
'the death of Mr. Fownes have now give I the opportunity I have long
want, to make you happy, and that in a double respect: for I shall soon
put you in possession of his living; and, if you have the art of make
yourself well receive, of one of the lovely wife in England. she
have not be use (as she have reason to think) accord to her merit;
but when she find herself under the protection of a man of virtue and
probity, and a happy competency to support life in the manner to which
she have be of late year accustom, I be persuade she will forgive
those seem hardship which have pave the way to so happy a lot, as I
hope it will be to you both. I have only to account for and excuse the
odd conduct I have be guilty of, which I shall do when I see you: but
as I shall soon set out for London, I believe it will not be yet this
month. mean time, if you can prevail with Pamela, you need not suspend
for that your mutual happiness; only let I have notice of it first, and
that she approve of it; which ought to be, in so material a point,
entirely at her option; as I assure you, on the other hand, I would have
it at your, that nothing may be want to complete your happiness.
'I be your humble servant.'
be ever the like heard?--Lie still, my throb heart, divide as thou
art, between thy hope and thy fears!--But this be the letter Mrs. Jewkes
leave with I:
'MRS. JEWKES,
'you have be very careful and diligent in the task, which, for reason
I shall hereafter explain, I have impose upon you. your trouble be now
almost at an end; for I have write my intention to Mr. Williams so
particularly, that I need say the less here, because he will not scruple,
I believe, to let you know the content of my letter. I have only one
thing to mention, that if you find what I have hint to he in the least
measure disagreeable to either, you assure they both, that they be at
entire liberty to pursue their own inclination. I hope you continue
your civility to the mistrustful, uneasy Pamela, who now will begin to
think well of hers and 'your friend, etc.'
I have hardly time to transcribe these letter, though, write so much, I
write pretty fast, before they both come up again in high spirit; and
Mr. Williams say, I be glad at my heart, madam, that I be beforehand in
my declaration to you: this generous letter have make I the happy man
on earth; and, Mrs. Jewkes, you may be sure, that if I can procure this
fair one's consent, I shall think myself--I interrupt the good man, and
say, ah! Mr. Williams, take care, take care; donot let--there I stopt;
and Mrs. Jewkes say, still mistrustful!--I never see the like in my
life!--But I see, say she, I be not wrong, while my old order last,
to be wary of you both--I should have have a hard task to prevent you, I
find; for, as the saying be, Nought can restrain consent of twain.
I doubt not she take hold of his joyful indiscretion.--I take she
letter, and say, here, Mrs. Jewkes, be your; I thank you for it; but I
have be so long in a maze, that I can say nothing of this for the
present. time will bring all to light.--sir, say I, here be your: May
every thing turn to your happiness! I give you joy of my master's
goodness in the living.--It will be die, say he, not a living, without
you.--forbear, sir, say I; while I have a father and mother, I be not my
own mistress, poor as they be; and Iwill see myself quite at liberty,
before I shall think myself fit to make a choice.
Mrs. Jewkes hold up her eye and hand, and say, such art, such caution,
such cunning, for thy years!--Well!--Why, say I, (that he might be more
on his guard, though I hope there cannot be deceit in this; 'twould be
strange villany, and that be a hard word, if there should!) I have be
so used to be make a fool of by fortune, that I hardly can tell how to
govern myself; and be almost an infidel as to mankind. but I hope I may
be wrong; henceforth, Mrs. Jewkes, you shall regulate my opinion as you
please, and I will consult you in every thing--(that I think proper, say
I to myself)--for, to be sure, though I may forgive she, I can never love
she.
she leave Mr. Williams and I, a few minute, together; and I say,
consider, sir, consider what you have do. 'tis impossible, say he,
there can be deceit. I hope so, say I; but what necessity be there for
you to talk of your former declaration? let this be as it will, that
could do no good, especially before this woman. forgive I, sir; they
talk of woman's promptness of speech; but, indeed, I see an honest heart
be not always to be trust with itself in bad company.
he be go to reply, but though her task be say to be almost (I take
notice of that word) at an end, she come up to we again, and say; well,
I have a good mind to show you the way to church to-morrow. I be glad of
this, because, though in my present doubtful situation I should not have
choose it, yet I would have encourage her proposal, to be able to judge
by she be in earnest or otherwise, whether one might depend upon the
rest. but Mr. Williams again indiscreetly help she to an excuse, by
say, that it be now good to defer it one Sunday, and till matter
be riper for my appearance: and she readily take hold of it, and
confirm his opinion.
after all, I hope the good: but if this should turn out to be a plot, I
fear nothing but a miracle can save I. but, sure the heart of man be
not capable of such black deceit. besides, Mr. Williams have it under his
own hand, and he dare not but be in earnest: and then again, though to be
sure he have be very wrong to I, yet his education, and parent'
example, have neither of they teach he such very black contrivance.
so I will hope for the good.
Mr. Williams, Mrs. Jewkes, and I, have be all three walk together in
the garden; and she pull out her key, and we walk a little in the
pasture to look at the bull, an ugly, grim, surly creature, that hurt the
poor cook-maid; who be get pretty well again. Mr. Williams point at
the sunflower, but I be force to be very reserved to he; for the poor
gentleman have no guard, no caution at all.
we have just sup together, all three: and I cannot yet think that all
must be right.--only I be resolve not to marry, if I can help it; and I
will give no encouragement, I be resolve, at least, till I be with you.
Mr. Williams say, before Mrs. Jewkes, he would send a messenger with a
letter to my father and mother.--I think the man have no discretion in the
world: but l desire you will send no answer, till I have the pleasure and
happiness which now I hope for soon, of see you. he will, in send
my packet, send a most tedious parcel of stuff, of my oppression, my
distress, my fear; and so I will send this with it; (for Mrs. Jewkes
give I leave to send a letter to my father, which look well;) and I be
glad I can conclude, after all my suffering, with my hope, to be soon
with you, which I know will give you comfort; and so I rest, beg the
continuance of your prayer and blessing,
your ever dutiful DAUGHTER.
MY DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
I have so much time upon my hand that I must write on, to employ myself.
the Sunday evening, where I leave off, Mrs. Jewkes ask I, if I choose to
be by myself; I say, yes, with all my heart, if she please. well, say
she, after to-night you shall. I ask she for more paper; and she give
I a bottle of ink, eight sheet of paper, which she say be all her
store, (for now she would get I to write for she to our master, if she
have occasion,) and six pen, with a piece of seal wax. this look
mighty well.
she press I, when she come to bed, very much, to give encouragement to
Mr. Williams, and say many thing in his behalf; and blame my shyness
to he. I tell she, I be resolve to give no encouragement, till I have
talk to my father and mother. she say, he fancy I think of
somebody else, or I could never be so insensible. I assure she, as I
could do very safely, that there be not a man on earth I wish to have:
and as to Mr. Williams, he might do well by far: and I have propose so
much happiness in live with my poor father and mother, that I could not
think of any scheme of life with pleasure, till I have try that. I
ask she for my money; and she say, it be above in her strong box, but
that I should have it to-morrow. all these thing look well, as I say.
Mr. Williams would go home this night, though late, because he would
despatch a messenger to you with a letter he have propose from himself,
and my packet. but pray donot encourage he, as I say; for he be much
too heady and precipitate as to this matter, in my way of thinking;
though, to be sure, he be a very good man, and I be much oblige to he.
Monday morning.
Alas-a-day! we have bad news from poor Mr. Williams. he have have a sad
mischance; fall among rogue in his way home last night: but by good
chance have save my paper. this be the account he give of it to Mrs.
Jewkes:
'good MRS. JEWKES,
'I have have a sore misfortune in go from you. when I have get as near
the town as the dam, and be go to cross the wooden bridge, two
fellow get hold of I, and swear bitterly they would kill I, if I do
not give they what I have. they rummage my pocket, and take from I my
snuff-box, my seal-ring, and half a guinea, and some silver, and
halfpence; also my handkerchief, and two or three letter I have in my
pocket. by good fortune, the letter Mrs. Pamela give I be in my
bosom, and so that escape but they bruise my head and face, and curse
I for have no more money, tip I into the dam, crying, be there,
parson, till to-morrow! my shin and knee be bruise much in the fall
against one of the stump; and I have like to have be suffocate in
water and mud. to be sure, I shallnot be able to stir out this day or two:
for I be a frightful spectacle! my hat and wig I be force to leave
behind I, and go home, a mile and a half, without; but they be find
next morning, and bring I, with my snuff-box, which the rogue must
have drop. my cassock be sadly tear, as be my band. to be sure, I
be much frightened, for a robbery in these part have not be know many
year. diligent search be make after the rogue. my humble respect
to good Mrs. Pamela: if she pity my misfortune, I shall be the soon
well, and fit to wait on she and you. this do not hinder I in write
a letter, though with great pain, as I do this, (to be sure this good man
can keep no secret!) and send it away by a man and horse, this
morning. I be, good Mrs. Jewkes,
'your most obliged humble servant.'
'God be praise it be no bad! and I find I have get no cold, though
miserably wet from top to toe. my fright, I believe, prevent I from
catch cold: for I be not rightly myself for some hour, and know not
how I get home. I will write a letter of thank this night, if I be
able, to my kind patron, for his inestimable goodness to I. I wish I
be enable to say all I hope, with regard to the well part of his
bounty to I, incomparable Mrs. Pamela.'
the wicked brute fall a laughing, when she have read this letter, till her
fat side shake. say she, I can but think how the poor parson look,
after part with his pretty mistress in such high spirit, when he
find himself at the bottom of the dam! and what a figure he must cut in
his tattered band and cassock, and without a hat and wig, when he get
home. I warrant, add she, he be in a sweet pickle!--i say, I think
it be very barbarous to laugh at such a misfortune; but she reply, as
he be safe, she laugh; otherwise she would have be sorry: and she
be glad to see I so concerned for he--it look promising, she say.
I heed not her reflection; but as I have be use to cause for
mistrust, I cannot help say, that I donot like this thing: and their
take his letter most alarm me.--How happy it be they miss my
packet! I know not what to think of it!--But why should I let every
accident break my peace? yet it will do so, while I stay here.
Mrs. Jewkes be mightily at I, to go with she in the chariot, to visit
Mr. Williams. she be so officious to bring on the affair between we,
that, be a cunning, artful woman, I know not what to make of it: I
have refuse she absolutely; urge, that except I intend to encourage
his suit, I ought not to do it. and she be go without I.
I have strange temptation to get away in her absence, for all these fine
appearance. 'tis sad to have nobody to advise with!--I know not what to
do. but, alas for I! I have no money, if I should, to buy any body's
civility, or to pay for necessary or lodging. but Iwill go into the
garden, and resolve afterwards----
I have be in the garden, and to the back-door: and there I stand, my
heart up at my mouth. I could not see I be watch; so this look well.
but if any thing should go bad afterwards, I should never forgive myself,
for not take this opportunity. well, I will go down again, and see if
all be clear, and how it look out at the back-door in the pasture.
to be sure, there be witchcraft in this house; and I believe Lucifer be
bribe, as well as all about I, and be get into the shape of that nasty
grim bull to watch me!--For I have be again, and venture to open the
door, and go out about a bow-shot into the pasture; but there stand
that horrid bull, star I full in the face, with fiery saucer eye, as
I think. so I get in again, for fear he should come at I. nobody see
I, however.--do you think there be such thing as witch and spirit?
if there be, I believe, in my heart, Mrs. Jewkes have get this bull of her
side. but yet, what could I do without money, or a friend'--o this
wicked woman! to trick I so! every thing, man, woman, and beast, be in
a plot against your poor Pamela, I think!--then I know not one step of
the way, nor how far to any house or cottage; and whether I could gain
protection, if I get to a house: and now the robber be abroad too, I
may run into as great danger as I want to escape; nay, great much, if
these promising appearance hold: and sure my master cannot be so black
as that they should not!--what can I do?--i have a good mind to try for
it once more; but then I may be pursue and take: and it will be bad
for I; and this wicked woman will beat I, and take my shoe away, and
lock I up.
but, after all, if my master should mean well, he cannot be angry at my
fear, if I should escape; and nobody can blame I; and I can more easily
be induce, with you, when all my apprehension be over, to consider his
proposal of Mr. Williams, than I could here; and he pretend, as you have
read in his letter, he will leave I to my choice: why then should I be
afraid? I will go down again, I think! but yet my heart misgive I,
because of the difficulty before I, in escape; and be so poor and
so friendless!--o good God! the preserver of the innocent! direct I what
to do!
well, I have just now a sort of strange persuasion upon I, that I ought
to try to get way, and leave the issue to Providence. so, once more--
Iwill see, at least, if this bull be still there.
Alack-a-day! what a fate be this! I have not the courage to go, neither
can I think to stay. but I must resolve. the gardener be in sight last
time; so make I come up again. but Iwill contrive to send he out of the
way, if I can:--for if I never should have such another opportunity, I
could not forgive myself. once more Iwill venture. God direct my
footstep, and make smooth my path and my way to safety!
well, here I be, come back again! frightened, like a fool, out of all my
purpose! o how terrible every thing appear to I! I have get twice as
far again, as I be before, out of the back-door: and I look and see
the bull, as I think, between I and the door; and another bull come
towards I the other way: well, think I, here be double witchcraft, to
be sure! here be the spirit of my master in one bull, and Mrs. Jewkes's
in the other. and now I be go, to be sure! o help! cry I, like a
fool, and run back to the door, as swift as if I fly. when I have get
the door in my hand, I venture to look back, to see if these suppose
bull be come; and I see they be only two poor cow, a grazing in
distant place, that my fear have make all this rout about. but as every
thing be so frightful to I, I find I be not fit to think of my escape:
for I shall be as much frightened at the first strange man that I meet
with: and I be persuade that fear bring one into more danger, than the
caution, that go along with it, deliver one from.
I then lock the door, and put the key in my pocket, and be in a sad
quandary; but I be soon determine; for the maid Nan come in sight, and
ask, if any thing be the matter, that I be so often up and down
stair? God forgive I, (but I have a sad lie at my tongue's end,) say
I; Though Mrs. Jewkes be sometimes a little hard upon I, yet I know not
where I be without she: I go up, and I come down to walk about in the
garden; and, not have she, know scarcely what to do with myself. ay,
say the ideot, she be main good company, madam, no wonder you miss she.
so here I be again, and here likely to be; for I have no courage to help
myself any where else. o why be poor foolish maiden try with such
danger, when they have such weak mind to grapple with them!--i will,
since it be so, hope the good: but yet I cannot but observe how
grievously every thing make against I: for here be the robber; though
I fall not into their hand myself, yet they give I as much terror, and
have as great an effect upon my fear, as if I have: and here be the bull;
it have as effectually frighten I, as if I have be hurt by it instead
of the cook-maid; and so these join together, as I may say, to make a
very dastard of I. but my folly be the bad of all, because that
deprive I of my money: for have I have that, I believe I should have
venture both the bull and the robber.
Monday afternoon.
so, Mrs. Jewkes be return from her visit: well, say she, I would have
you set your heart at rest; for Mr. Williams will do very well again. he
be not half so bad as he fancy. o these scholar, say she, they have
not the heart of mouse! he have only a few scratch on his face; which,
say she, I suppose he get by grapple among the gravel at the bottom of
the dam, to try to find a hole in the ground, to hide himself from the
robber. his shin and his knee be hardly to be see to ail any thing.
he say in his letter, he be a frightful spectacle: he might be so,
indeed, when he first come in a door; but he look well enough now: and,
only for a few groan now and then, when he think of his danger, I see
nothing be the matter with he. so, Mrs. Pamela, say she, I would have
you be very easy about it. I be glad of it, say I, for all your joke,
to Mrs. Jewkes.
well, say she, he talk of nothing but you: and when I tell he I would
fain have persuade you to come with I, the man be out of his wit with
his gratitude to I: and so have lay open all his heart to I, and tell
I all that have pass, and be contrive between you two. this alarm
I prodigiously; and the rather, as I see, by two or three instance,
that his honest heart could keep nothing, believe every one as
undesigne as himself. I say, but yet with a heavy heart, Ah! Mrs.
Jewkes, Mrs. Jewkes, this might have do with I, have he have any thing
that he could have tell you of. but you know well enough, that have we
be dispose, we have no opportunity for it, from your watchful care and
circumspection. no, say she, thatbe very true, Mrs. Pamela; not so much
as for that declaration that he own before I, he have find
opportunity, for all my watchfulness, to make you. come, come, say she,
no more of these sham with I! you have an excellent head-piece for
your year; but may be I be as cunning as you.--However, say she, all be
well now; because my watchment be now over, by my master's direction.
how have you employ yourself in my absence?
I be so troubled at what might have pass between Mr. Williams and she,
that I could not hide it; and she say, well, Mrs. Pamela, since all
matter be likely to be so soon and so happily end, let I advise you
to be a little less concerned at his discovery; and make I your
confidant, as he have do, and I shall think you have some favour for I,
and reliance upon I; and perhaps you might not repent it.
she be so earnest, that I mistrust she do this to pump I; and I know
how, now, to account for her kindness to Mr. Williams in her visit to
he; which be only to get out of he what she could. why, Mrs. Jewkes,
say I, be all this fishing about for something, where there be nothing,
if there be an end of your watchment, as you call they? nothing, say
she, but womanish curiosity, Iwill assure you; for one be naturally lead to
find out matter, where there be such privacy intend. well, say I,
pray let I know what he have say; and then Iwill give you an answer to
your curiosity. I donot care, say she, whether you do or not for I have
as much as I want from he; and I despair of get out of you any
thing you ha'n't a mind I should know, my little cunning dear.--well,
say I, let he have say what he would, I care not: for I be sure he can
say no harm of I; and so let we change the talk.
I be the easy, indeed, because, for all her pump, she give no hint
of the key and the door, etc. which, have he communicate to she, she
would not have forborne give I a touch of.--and so we give up one
another, as despair to gain our end of each other. but I be sure he
must have say more than he should.--and I be the more apprehensive all
be not right, because she have now be actually, these two hour, shut up
a writing; though she pretend she have give I up all her store of
paper, etc. and that I should write for she. I begin to wish I have
venture every thing and go off, when I might. o when will this state
of doubt and uneasiness end!
she have just be with I, and say she shall send a messenger to
Bedfordshire; and he shall carry a letter of thank for I, if I will
write it for my master's favour to I. indeed, say I, I have no thank
to give, till I be with my father and mother: and besides, I send a
letter, as you know; but have have no answer to it. she say, she think
that his letter to Mr. Williams be sufficient; and the least I could do
be to thank he, if but in two line. no need of it, say I; for I
donot intend to have Mr. Williams: what then be that letter to I? well,
say she, I see thou art quite unfathomable!
I donot like all this. o my foolish fear of bull and robbers!--for now
all my uneasiness begin to double upon I. o what have this incautious
man say! that, no doubt, be the subject of her long letter.
I will close this day's writing, with just say, that she be mighty
silent and reserve, to what she be: and say nothing but no, or yes, to
what I ask. something must be hatch, I doubt!--i the rather think so,
because I find she do not keep her word with I, about lie by myself,
and my money; to both which point she return suspicious answer,
say, as to the one, why, you be mighty earnest for your money; I
shallnot run away with it. and to the other, good-lack! you need not be so
willing, as I know of, to part with I for a bed-fellow, till you be
sure of one you like well. this cut I to the heart; and, at the same
time, stop my mouth.
Tuesday, Wednesday.
Mr. Williams have be here; but we have have no opportunity to talk
together: he seem confound at Mrs. Jewkes's change of temper, and
reservedness, after her kind visit, and their freedom with one another,
and much more at what I be go to tell you. he ask, if I would take
a turn in the garden with Mrs. Jewkes and he. no, say she, I cannot go.
say he, may not Mrs. Pamela take a walk?--no, say she; I desire she
willnot. why, Mrs. Jewkes? say he: I be afraid I have somehow disoblige
you. not at all, reply she; but I suppose you will soon be at liberty
to walk together as much as you please: and I have send a messenger for
my last instruction, about this and more weighty matter; and when they
come I shall leave you to do as you both will; but, till then, it be no
matter how little you be together. this alarm we both; and he seem
quite struck of a heap, and put on, as I think, a self-accuse
countenance. so I go behind her back, and hold my two hand together,
flat, with a bit of paper, I have, between they, and look at he: and he
seem to take I as I intend; intimate the renewing of the
correspondence by the tile.
I leave they both together, and retire to my closet to write a letter for
the tile; but have no time for a copy, I will give you the substance
only.
I expostulate with he on his too great openness and easiness to fall
into Mrs. Jewkes's snare: tell he my apprehension of foul play; and
give briefly the reason which move I: beg to know what he have say;
and intimate, that I think there be the high reason to resume our
prospect of the escape by the back-door. I put this in the usual place
in the evening; and now wait with impatience for an answer.
Thursday.
I have the follow answer:
'DEAREST MADAM,
'I be utterly confound, and must plead guilty to all your just
reproach. I wish I be master of all but half your caution and
discretion! I hope, after all, this be only a touch of this ill woman's
temper, to shew her power and importance: for I think Mr. B---- neither
can nor dare deceive I in so black a manner. I would expose he all the
world over if he do. but it be not, cannot be in he. I have receive
a letter from John Arnold, in which he tell I, that his master be
prepare for his London journey; and believe, afterwards, he will come
into these part: but he say, Lady Davers be at their house, and be to
accompany her brother to London, or meet he there, he know not which.
he profess great zeal and affection to your service: and I find he
refer to a letter he send I before, but which be not come to my hand.
I think there can be no treachery; for it be a particular friend at
Gainsborough, that I have order he to direct to; and this be come safe
to my hand by this mean; for well I know, I durst trust nothing to
Brett, at the post-house here. this give I a little pain; but I hope
all will end well, and we shall soon hear, if it be necessary to pursue
our former intention. if it be, I will lose no time to provide a horse
for you, and another for myself; for I can never do either God or myself
well service, though I be to forego all my expectation for it here,
I be 'your most faithful humble servant.'
'I be too free indeed with Mrs. Jewkes, lead to it by her dissimulation,
and by her pretended concern to make I happy with you. I hint, that I
would not have scruple to have procure your deliverance by any mean;
and that I have propose to you, as the only honourable one, marriage with
I. but I assure she, though she would hardly believe I, that you
discourage my application: which be too true! but not a word of the
back-door key, etc.'
Mrs. Jewkes continue still sullen and ill-natured, and I be almost
afraid to speak to she. she watch I as close as ever, and pretend to
wonder why I shun her company as I do.
I have just put under the tile these line inspire by my fear, which
be indeed very strong; and, I doubt, not without reason.
'SIR,
'every thing give I additional disturbance. the miss letter of John
Arnold's make I suspect a plot. yet be I loath to think myself of so
much importance, as to suppose every one in a plot against I. be you
sure, however, the London journey be not to be a Lincolnshire one? may
not John, who have be once a traitor, be so again?--why need I be thus
in doubt?--if I could have this horse, I would turn the rein on his
neck, and trust to Providence to guide he for my safeguard! for I would
not endanger you, now just upon the edge of your preferment. yet, sir, I
fear your fatal openness will make you suspect as accessary, let we be
ever so cautious.
'be my life in question, instead of my honesty, I would not wish to
involve you, or any body, in the least difficulty, for so worthless a
poor creature. but, o sir! my soul be of equal importance with the soul
of a princess; though my quality be inferior to that of the mean
slave.
'save then my innocence, good Heaven! and preserve my mind spotless; and
happy shall I be to lay down my worthless life; and see an end to all my
trouble and anxiety.
'forgive my impatience: but my presage mind bode horrid mischief!
every thing look dark around I; and this woman's impenetrable
sullenness and silence, without any apparent reason, from a conduct so
very contrary, bid I fear the worst.--blame I, sir, if you think I
wrong; and let I have your advice what to do; which will oblige
'your most afflict servant.'
Friday.
I have this half-angry answer; but, what be more to I than all the
letter in the world could be, your, my dear father, enclose.
'MADAM,
'I think you be too apprehensive by much; I be sorry for your
uneasiness. you may depend upon I, and all I can do. but I make no
doubt of the London journey, nor of John's contrition and fidelity. I
have just receive, from my Gainsborough friend, this letter, as I
suppose, from your good father, in a cover, direct for I, as I have
desire. I hope it contain nothing to add to your uneasiness. pray,
dear madam, lie aside your fear, and wait a few day for the issue of
Mrs. Jewkes's letter, and mine of thank to Mr. B----. thing, I hope,
must be well than you expect. Providence will not desert such piety
and innocence: and be this your comfort and reliance: which be the good
advice that can at present be give, by
'your most faithful humble servant.'
N. B. the father's letter be as follow:
'my DEAREST DAUGHTER,
'our prayer be at length heard, and we be overwhelmed with joy. o
what suffering, what trial, hast thou go through! blessed be the
Divine goodness, which have enable thee to withstand so many temptation!
we have not yet have leisure to read through your long account of all
your hardship. I say long, because I wonder how you could find time and
opportunity for they: but otherwise they be the delight of our spare
hour; and we shall read they over and over, as long as we live, with
thankfulness to God, who have give we so virtuous and so discreet a
daughter. how happy be our lot in the midst of our poverty! o let none
ever think child a burden to they; when the poor circumstance can
produce so much rich in a Pamela! Persist, my dear daughter, in the
same excellent course; and we shall not envy the high estate, but defy
they to produce such a daughter as ours.
'I say, we have not read through all your in course. we be too
impatient, and so turn to the end; where we find your virtue within
view of its reward, and your master's heart turn to see the folly of
his way, and the injury he have intend to our dear child: for, to be
sure, my dear, he would have ruin you, if he could. but see your
virtue, his heart be touch; and he have, no doubt, be awaken by your
good example.
'we donot see that you can do any way so well, as to come into the
present proposal, and make Mr. Williams, the worthy Mr. Williams! God
bless him!--happy. and though we be poor, and can add no merit, no
reputation, no fortune, to our dear child, but rather must be a disgrace
to she, as the world will think; yet I hope I do not sin in my pride, to
say, that there be no good man, of a common degree, (especially as your
late lady's kindness give you such good opportunity, which you have have
the grace to improve,) but may think himself happy in you. but, as you
say, you have rather not marry at present, far be it from we to offer
violence to your inclination! so much prudence as you have shew in all
your conduct, would make it very wrong in we to mistrust it in this, or
to offer to direct you in your choice. Rut, alas! my child, what can we
do for you?--to partake our hard lot, and involve yourself into as hard a
life, would not help we, but add to your affliction. but it will be
time enough to talk of these thing, when we have the pleasure you now
put we in hope of, of see you with we; which God grant. amen, amen,
say 'your most indulgent parent. amen!'
'our humblest service and thank to the worthy Mr. Williams. again we
say, God bless he for ever!
'o what a deal we have to say to you! God give we a happy meeting! we
understand the 'squire be set out for London. he be a fine
gentleman, and have wit at will. I wish he be as good. but I hope he
will now reform.'
o what inexpressible comfort, my dear father, have your letter give me!--
you ask, what can you do for me?--What be it you cannot do for your
child!--you can give she the advice she have so much want, and still
want, and will always want: you can confirm she in the path of virtue,
into which you first initiate she; and you can pray for she, with heart
so sincere and pure, that be not to be meet with in palaces!--oh! how I
long to throw myself at your foot, and receive from your own lip the
blessing of such good parent! but, alas! how be my prospect again
overcloud, to what they be when I close my last parcel!--more
trial, more danger, I fear, must your poor Pamela be engage in: but
through the Divine goodness, and your prayer, I hope, at last, to get
well out of all my difficulty; and the rather, as they be not the
effect of my own vanity or presumption!
but I will proceed with my hopeless story. I see Mr. Williams be a
little nettled at my impatience; and so I write to assure he I would be
as easy as I could, and wholly direct by he; especially as my father,
whose respect I mention, have assure I my master be set out for
London, which he must have somehow from his own family or he would not
have write I word of it.
Saturday, Sunday.
Mr. Williams have be here both these day, as usual; but be very
indifferently receive still by Mrs. Jewkes; and, to avoid suspicion, I
leave they together, and go up to my closet, most of the time he be
here. he and she, I find by she, have a quarrel: and she seem quite out
of humour with he: but I think it well not to say any thing: and he
say, he would very little trouble the house till he have an answer to his
letter from Mr. B----. and she return, the less, the well. poor
man! he have get but little by his openness, make Mrs. Jewkes his
confidant, as she brag, and would have have I to do likewise.
I be more and more satisfied there be mischief brewing; and shall begin
to hide my paper, and be circumspect. she seem mighty impatient for an
answer to her letter to my master.
Monday, Tuesday, the 25th and 26th day of my heavy restraint.
still more and more strange thing to write! a messenger be return,
and now all be out! o wretche, wretched Pamela! what, at last, will
become of me!--such strange turn and trial sure never poor creature, of
my year, experience. he bring two letter, one to Mrs. Jewkes, and
one to I: but, as the great wit may be sometimes mistake, they
be fold and seal alike, that for I be direct to Mrs. Jewkes;
and that for she be direct to I. but both be stark naught,
abominably bad! she bring I up that direct for I, and say, herebe
a letter for you: long-look-for be come at last. I will ask the
messenger a few question, and then I will read mine. so she go down,
and I break it open in my closet, and find it direct to MRS. PAMELA
ANDREWS. but when I open it, it begin, Mrs. Jewkes. I be quite
confound; but, think I, this may be a lucky mistake; I may discover
something: and so I read on these horrid content:
'MRS. JEWKES,
'what you write I, have give I no small disturbance. this wretched
fool's play-thing, no doubt, be ready to leap at any thing that offer,
rather than express the least sense of gratitude for all the benefit she
have receive from my family, and which I be determine more and more to
heap upon she. I reserve she for my future resentment; and I charge you
double your diligence in watch she, to prevent her escape. I send
this by an honest Swiss, who attend I in my travel; a man I can
trust; and so let he be your assistant: for the artful creature be
enough to corrupt a nation by her seem innocence and simplicity; and
she may have get a party, perhaps, among my servant with you, as she have
here. even John Arnold, whom I confide in, and favour more than any,
have prove an execrable villain; and shall meet his reward for it.
'as to that college novice, Williams, I need not bid you take care he
see not this paint bauble: for I have order Mr. Shorter, my
attorney, to throw he instantly into gaol, on an action of debt, for
money he have have of I, which I have intend never to carry to account
against he; for I know all his rascally practice, besides what you
write I of his perfidious intrigue with that girl, and his acknowledge
contrivance for her escape; when he know not, for certain, that I
design she any mischief; and when, if he have be guide by a sense of
piety, or compassion for injure innocence, as he pretend, he would have
expostulate with I, as his function, and my friendship for he, might
have allow he. but to enter into a vile intrigue with the amiable
gewgaw, to favour her escape in so base a manner, (to say nothing of his
disgraceful practice against I, in Sir Simon Darnford's family, of
which Sir Simon himself have inform I), be a conduct that, instead of
prefer the ungrateful wretch, as I have intend, shall pull down upon
he utter ruin.
'Monsieur Colbrand, my trusty Swiss, will obey you without reserve, if my
other servant refuse.
'as for she deny that she encourage his declaration, I believe it
not. it be certain the speak picture, with all that pretend
innocence and bashfulness, would have run away with he. yes, she would
run away with a fellow that she have be acquaint with (and that not
intimately, if you be as careful as you ought to be) but a few day; at
a time when she have the strong assurance of my honour to she.
'well, I think, I now hate she perfectly: and though I will do nothing to
she myself, yet I can bear, for the sake of my revenge, and my injured
honour and slight love, to see any thing, even what she most fear, be
do to she; and then she may be turn loose to her evil destiny, and
echo to the wood and grove her piteous lamentation for the loss of her
fantastical innocence, which the romantic ideot make such a work about.
I shall go to London, with my sister Davers; and the moment I can
disengage myself, which, perhaps, may be in three week from this time, I
will be with you, and decide her fate, and put an end to your trouble.
mean time be doubly careful; for this innocent, as I have warn you, be
full of contrivance. I be 'your friend.'
I have but just read this dreadful letter through, when Mrs. Jewkes come
up in a great fright, guess at the mistake, and that I have her letter,
and she find I with it open in my hand, just sink away. what
business, say she, have you to read my letter? and snatch it from I.
you see, say she, look upon it, it say Mrs. Jewkes, at top: you
ought, in manner, to have read no far. o add not, say I, to my
affliction! I shall be soon out of all your way! this be too much!
too much! I never can support this--and throw myself upon the couch, in
my closet, and weep most bitterly. she read it in the next room, and
come in again afterwards. why, this, say she, be a sad letter indeed: I
be sorry for it: but I fear you would carry your nicety too far!--
leave I, leave I, Mrs. Jewkes, say I, for a while: I cannot speak nor
talk.--poor heart! say she; well, Iwill come up again presently, and hope
to find you well. but here, take your own letter; I wish you well; but
this be a sad mistake! and so she put down by I that which be intend
for I: but I have no spirit to read it at present. o man! man! hard-
hearted, cruel man! what mischief art thou not capable of, unrelenting
persecutor as thou art!
I sit ruminate, when I have a little come to myself, upon the term of
this wicked letter; and have no inclination to look into my own. the bad
name, fool's play-thing, artful creature, paint bauble, gewgaw,
speak picture, be hard word for your poor Pamela! and I begin to
think whether I be not indeed a very naughty body, and have not do vile
thing: but when I think of his have discover poor John, and of Sir
Simon's base officiousness, in tell he of Mr. Williams, with what he
have resolve against he in revenge for his goodness to I, I be quite
dispirit; and yet still more about that fearful Colbrand, and what he
could see do to I: for then I be ready to gasp for breath, and my
heart quite fail I. then how dreadful be the word, that he will
decide my fate in three week! Gracious Heaven, say I, strike I dead,
before that time, with a thunderbolt, or provide some way for my escape
these threaten mischief! God forgive I, if I sin!
at last, I take up the letter direct for Mrs. Jewkes, but design for
I; and I find that little well than the other. these be the hard
term it contain:
'well have you do, perverse, forward, artful, yet foolish Pamela, to
convince I, before it be too late, how ill I have do to place my
affection on so unworthy an object: I have vow honour and love to your
unworthiness, believe you a mirror of bashful modesty and unspotted
innocence; and that no perfidious design lurk in so fair a bosom. but
now I have find you out, you specious hypocrite! and I see, that though
you could not repose the least confidence in one you have know for year,
and who, under my good mother's misplaced favour for you, have grow up in
a manner with you; when my passion, in spite of my pride, and the
difference of our condition, make I stoop to a meanness that now I
despise myself for; yet you could enter into an intrigue with a man you
never know till within these few day past, and resolve to run away with
a stranger, whom your fair face, and insinuate art, have bewitch to
break through all the tie of honour and gratitude to I, even at a time
when the happiness of his future life depend upon my favour.
'henceforth, for Pamela's sake, whenever I see a lovely face, will I
mistrust a deceitful heart; and whenever I hear of the great pretence
to innocence, will I suspect some deep-lay mischief. you be
determined to place no confidence in I, though I have solemnly, over and
over, engage my honour to you. what, though I have alarm your fear in
send you one way, when you hop to go another; yet, have I not, to
convince you of my resolution to do justly by you, (although with great
reluctance, such then be my love for you,) engage not to come near you
without your own consent? be not this a voluntary demonstration of the
generosity of my intention to you? yet how have you requite I? the
very first fellow that your charming face, and insinuate address, could
influence, you have practise upon, corrupt too, I may say, (and even
ruin, as the ungrateful wretch shall find,) and throw your forward
self upon he. as, therefore, you would place no confidence in I, my
honour owe you nothing; and, in a little time, you shall find how much
you have err, in treating, as you have do, a man who be once
'your affectionate and kind friend.'
'Mrs. Jewkes have direction concern you: and if your lot be now hard
than you might wish, you will bear it the easy, because your own rash
folly have bring it upon you.'
alas! for I, what a fate be mine, to be thus think artful, and
forward, and ungrateful; when all I intend be to preserve my
innocence; and when all the poor little shift, which his superior wicked
wit and cunning have render ineffectual, be force upon I in my own
necessary defence!
when Mrs. Jewkes come up to I again, she find I bath in tear. she
seem, as I think, to be move to some compassion; and find myself
now entirely in her power, and that it be not for I to provoke she, I
say, it be now, I see, in vain for I to contend against my evil
destiny, and the superior art of my barbarous master. I will resign
myself to the Divine will, and prepare to expect the bad. but you see
how this poor Mr. Williams be draw in and undone: I be sorry I be make
the cause of his ruin. poor, poor man!--to be thus involve, and for my
sake too!--but if youwill believe I, say I, I give no encouragement to
what he propose, as to marriage; nor would he have propose it, I
believe, but as the only honourable way he think be leave to save I:
and his principal motive to it at all, be virtue and compassion to one
in distress. what other view could he have? you know I be poor and
friendless. all I beg of you be, to let the poor gentleman have notice
of my master's resentment; and let he fly the country, and not be throw
into gaol. this will answer my master's end as well; for it will as
effectually hinder he from assist I, as if he be in a prison.
ask I, say she, to do any thing that be in my power, consistent with my
duty and trust, and I will do it: for I be sorry for you both. but, to
be sure, I shall keep no correspondence with he, nor let you. I offer
to talk of a duty superior to that she mention, which would oblige she
to help distressed innocence, and not permit she to go the length
enjoin by lawless tyranny; but she plainly bid I be silent on that
head: for it be in vain to attempt to persuade she to betray her trust:
--all I have to advise you, say she, be to be easy; lie aside all your
contrivance and art to get away, and make I your friend, by give I
no reason to suspect you; for I glory in my fidelity to my master: and
you have both practise some strange sly art, to make such a progress as
he have own there be between you, so seldom as I think you see one
another; and I must be more circumspect than I have be.
this double my concern; for I now apprehend I should be much close
watch than before.
well, say I, since I have, by this strange accident, discover my hard
destiny; let I read over again that fearful letter of your, that I may
get it by heart, and with it feed my distress, and make calamity familiar
to I. then, say she, let I read yours again. I give her mine, and
she lend I her: and so I take a copy of it, with she leave; because, as
I say I would, by it, prepare myself for the bad. and when I have
do, I pin it on the head of the couch: this, say I, be the use I
shall make of this wretched copy of your letter; and here you shall
always find it wet with my tear.
she say she would go down to order supper; and insist upon my company
to it. I would have excuse myself; but she begin to put on a commanding
air, that I durst not oppose. and when I go down, she take I by the
hand, and present I to the most hideous monster I ever see in my life.
here, Monsieur Colbrand, say she, here be your pretty ward and mine; let
we try to make her time with we easy. he bow, and put on his foreign
grimace, and seem to bless himself; and, in broken English, tell I, I
be happy in de affection of de fine gentleman in de varld!--I be
quite frightened, and ready to drop down; and I will describe he to you,
my dear father and mother, if now you will ever see this: and you shall
judge if I have not reason, especially not know he be to be there, and
be apprise, as I be, of his hat employment, to watch I close.
he be a giant of a man for stature; taller by a good deal than Harry
Mowlidge, in your neighbourhood, and large boned, and scraggy; and have a
hand!--I never see such an one in my life. he have great star eye,
like the bull's that frighten I so; vast jaw-bone stick out:
eyebrow hang over his eye; two great scar upon his forehead, and
one on his left cheek; and two large whisker, and a monstrous wide
mouth; blubber lip; long yellow tooth, and a hideous grin. he wear his
own frightful long hair, tie up in a great black bag; a black crape
neckcloth about a long ugly neck: and his throat stick out like a wen.
as to the rest, he be dress well enough, and have a sword on, with a
nasty red knot to it; leather garter, buckle below his knee; and a
foot--near as long as my arm, I verily think.
he say, he fright de lady; and offer to withdraw; but she bid he not;
and I tell Mrs. Jewkes, that as she know I have be cry, she should
not have call I to the gentleman without let I know he be there.
I soon go up to my closet; for my heart ache all the time I be at
table, not be able to look upon he without horror; and this brute of
a woman, though she see my distress, before this addition to it, no doubt
do it on purpose to strike more terror into I. and indeed it have its
effect: for when I go to bed, I could think of nothing but his hideous
person, and my master's more hideous action: and think they too well
pair; and when I dropt asleep, I dream they be both come to my
bedside, with the bad design; and I jump out of my bed in my sleep,
and frighten Mrs. Jewkes; till, wake with the terror, I tell she my
dream; and the wicked creature only laugh, and say, all I fear be
but a dream, as well as that; and when it be over, and I be well awake,
I should laugh at it as such!
and now I be come to the close of Wednesday, the 27th day of my distress.
poor Mr. Williams be actually arrest, and carry away to Stamford. so
there be an end of all my hope from he, poor gentleman! his over-
security and openness have ruin we both! I be but too well convinced,
that we ought not to have lose a moment's time; but he be half angry,
and think I too impatient; and then his fatal confession, and the
detestable artifice of my master!--but one might well think, that he who
have so cunningly, and so wickedly, contrive all his stratagem hitherto,
that it be impossible to avoid they, would stick at nothing to complete
they. I fear I shall soon find it so!
but one stratagem I have just invent, though a very discouraging one to
think of; because I have neither friend nor money, nor know one step of
the way, if I be out of the house. but let bull, and bear, and lion,
and tiger, and, what be bad, false, treacherous, deceitful man, stand
in my way, I cannot be in more danger than I be; and I depend nothing
upon his three week: for how do I know, now he be in such a passion, and
have already begin his vengeance on poor Mr. Williams, that he will not
change his mind, and come down to Lincolnshire before he go to London?
my stratagem be this: I will endeavour to get Mrs. Jewkes to go to bed
without I, as she often do, while I sit lock up in my closet: and as
she sleep very sound in her first sleep, of which she never fail to
give notice by snore, if I can but then get out between the two bar of
the window, (for you know I be very slender, and I find I can get my head
through,) then I can drop upon the lead underneath, which be little
more than my height, and which lead be over a little summer-parlour,
that jut out towards the garden; and as I be light, I can easily drop
from they; for they be not high from the ground: then I shall be in the
garden; and then, as I have the key of the back-door, I will get out.
but I have another piece of cunning still: Good Heaven, succeed to I my
dangerous, but innocent devices!--I have read of a great captain, who,
be in danger, leap overboard into the sea, and his enemy, as he
swam, shoot at he with bow and arrow, he unloose his upper
garment, and take another course, while they stick that full of their
dart and arrow; and so he escape, and live to triumph over they all.
so what will I do, but strip off my upper petticoat, and throw it into
the pond, with my neckhandkerchief! for to be sure, when they miss I,
they will go to the pond first, think I have drown myself: and so,
when they see some of my clothe float there, they will be all
employ in drag the pond, which be a very large one; and as I shall
not, perhaps, be miss till the morning, this will give I opportunity
to get a great way off; and I be sure I will run for it when I be out.
and so I trust, that Providence will direct my step to some good place
of safety, and make some worthy body my friend; for sure, if I suffer
ever so, I cannot be in more danger, nor in bad hand, than where I be;
and with such avow bad design.
o my dear parent! donot be frighten when you come to read this!--But
all will be over before you can see it; and so God direct I for the
good! my writing, for fear I should not escape, I will bury in the
garden; for, to be sure, I shall be search and use dreadfully if I
cannot get off. and so I will close here, for the present, to prepare for
my plot. prosper thou, o gracious Protector of oppressed innocence! this
last effort of thy poor handmaid! that I may escape the crafty device
and snare that have begin to entangle my virtue; and from which, but by
this one trial, I see no way of escape. and oh! whatever become of
I, bless my dear parent, and protect poor Mr. Williams from ruin! for
he be happy before he know I.
just now, just now! I hear Mrs. Jewkes, who be in her cup, own to the
horrid Colbrand, that the robbing of poor Mr. Williams be a contrivance
of her, and execute by the groom and a helper, in order to seize my
letter upon he, which they miss. they be now both laugh at the
dismal story, which they little think I overheard--o how my heart ache!
for what be not such wretch capable of! can you blame I for
endeavouring, through any danger, to get out of such clutch?
Past eleven o'clock.
Mrs. Jewkes be come up, and go to bed; and bid I not stay long in my
closet, but come to bed. o for a dead sleep for the treacherous brute!
I never see she so tipsy, and that give I hope. I have try again,
and find I can get my head through the iron bar. I be now all prepare,
as soon as I hear she fast; and now Iwill seal up these, and my other
paper, my last work: and to thy providence, o my gracious God! commit
the rest.--once more, God bless you both! and send we a happy meeting; if
not here, in his heavenly kingdom. amen.
Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday, the 28th, 29th, 30th, and 31st day
of my distress.
and distress indeed! for here I be still; and every thing have be bad
and bad! oh! the poor unhappy Pamela!--Without any hope leave, and
ruin in all my contrivance. but, oh! my dear parent, rejoice with
I, even in this low plunge of my distress; for your poor Pamela have
escape from an enemy bad than any she ever meet with; an enemy she
never think of before, and be hardly able to stand against: I mean,
the weakness and presumption, both in one, of her own mind; which have
well nigh, have not the divine grace interpose, sink she into the low,
last abyss of misery and perdition!
I will proceed, as I have opportunity, with my sad relation: for my pen
and ink (in my now doubly-secure closet) be all I have to employ myself
with: and indeed I have be so weak, that, till yesterday evening, I
have not be able to hold a pen.
I take with I but one shift, besides what I have on, and two
handkerchief, and two cap, which my pocket hold, (for it be not for I
to encumber myself,) and all my stock of money, which be but five or six
shilling, to set out for I know not where; and get out of the window,
not without some difficulty, stick a little at my shoulder and hip;
but I be resolve to get out, if possible. and it be far from the
lead than I think, and I be afraid I have sprain my ancle; and when
I have dropt from the lead to the ground, it be still far off; but I
do pretty well there, at least. I get no hurt to hinder I from
pursue my intention. so be now on the ground, I hide my paper
under a rose-bush, and cover they with mould, and there they still lie,
as I hope. then I hie away to the pond: the clock strike twelve, just
as I get out; and it be a dark misty night, and very cold; but I feel it
not then.
when I come to the pond-side, I fling in my upper-coat, as I have
design, and my neckhandkerchief, and a round-eared cap, with a knot;
and then with great speed run to the door, and take the key out of my
pocket, my poor heart beat all the time against my bosom, as if it
would have force its way through it: and beat it well might! for I then,
too late, find, that I be most miserably disappoint; for the wicked
woman have take off that lock, and put another on; so that my key would
not open it. I try, and try, and feel about, I find a padlock
besides, on another part of the door. o then how my heart sunk!--i dropt
down with grief and confusion, unable to stir or support myself, for a
while. but my fear awaken my resolution, and know that my attempt
would be as terrible for I as any other danger I could then encounter, I
clamber up upon the ledge of the door, and upon the lock, which be a
great wooden one; and reach the top of the door with my hand; then,
little thinking I could climb so well, I make shift to lay hold on the
top of the wall with my hand; but, alas for I! nothing but ill luck!--
no escape for poor Pamela! the wall be old, the brick I hold by give
way, just as I be take a spring to get up; and down come I, and
receive such a blow upon my head, with one of the brick, that it quite
stun I; and I break my shin and my ancle besides, and beat off the
heel of one of my shoe.
in this dreadful way, flat upon the ground, lie poor I, for I believe
five or six minute; and then try to get up, I sink down again two or
three time; and my left hip and shoulder be very stiff, and full of
pain, with bruise; and, besides, my head bleed, and ache grievously with
the blow I have with the brick. yet these hurt I value not; but creep a
good way upon my foot and hand, in search of a ladder, I just
recollect to have see against the wall two day before, on which the
gardener be nail a nectarine branch that be loosen from the wall:
but no ladder could I find, and the wall be very high. what now,
think I, must become of the miserable Pamela!--Then I begin to wish
myself most heartily again in my closet, and to repent of my attempt,
which I now censure as rash, because it do not succeed.
God forgive I! but a sad thought come just then into my head!--i tremble
to think of it! indeed my apprehension of the usage I should meet with,
have like to have make I miserable for ever! o my dear, dear parent,
forgive your poor child; but be then quite desperate, I creep along,
till I could raise myself on my staggering foot; and away limp I!--What
to do, but to throw myself into the pond, and so put a period to all my
grief in this world!--but, o! to find they infinitely aggravate (have I
not, by the divine grace, be withhold) in a miserable eternity! as I
have escape this temptation, (bless be God for it!) I will tell you my
conflict on this dreadful occasion, that the divine mercy may be
magnify in my deliverance, that I be yet on this side the dreadful
gulf, from which there could have be no return.
it be well for I, as I have since thought, that I be so maim, as
make I the long before I get to the water; for this give I time to
consider, and abate the impetuousness of my passion, which possibly
might otherwise have hurry I, in my first transport of grief, (on my
see no way to escape, and the hard usage I have reason to expect from
my dreadful keeper,) to throw myself in. but my weakness of body make
I move so slowly, that it give time, as I say, for a little reflection,
a ray of grace, to dart in upon my benighted mind; and so, when I come to
the pond-side, I sit myself down on the slop bank, and begin to ponder
my wretched condition; and thus I reason with myself.
pause here a little, Pamela, on what thou art about, before thou takest
the dreadful leap; and consider whether there be no way yet leave, no
hope, if not to escape from this wicked house, yet from the mischief
threaten thee in it.
I then consider; and, after I have cast about in my mind every thing
that could make I hope, and see no probability; a wicked woman, devoid
of all compassion! a horrid helper, just arrive, in this dreadful
Colbrand! an angry and resent master, who now hat I, and threaten
the most afflicting evil! and that I should, in all probability, be
deprive even of the opportunity, I now have before I, to free myself
from all their persecutions!--what hast thou to do, distressed creature,
say I to myself, but throw thyself upon a merciful God, (who know how
innocently I suffer,) to avoid the merciless wickedness of those who be
determined on my ruin?
and then, think I, (and oh! that thought be surely of the devil's
instigation; for it be very soothing, and powerful with I,) these
wicked wretch, who now have no remorse, no pity on I, will then be
move to lament their misdoing; and when they see the dead corpse of the
unhappy Pamela drag out to these dewy bank, and lie breathless at
their foot, they will find that remorse to soften their obdurate heart,
which, now, have no place there!--and my master, my angry master, will
then forget his resentment, and say, o, this be the unhappy Pamela! that
I have so causelessly persecute and destroy! now do I see she
prefer her honesty to her life, will he say, and be no hypocrite, nor
deceiver; but really be the innocent creature she pretend to be!
then, think I, will he, perhaps, shed a few tear over the poor corpse
of his persecute servant; and though he may give out, it be love and
disappointment; and that, perhaps, (in order to hide his own guilt,) for
the unfortunate Mr. Williams, yet will he be inwardly grieve, and order
I a decent funeral, and save I, or rather this part of I, from the
dreadful stake, and the highway interment; and the young man and maiden
all around my dear father's will pity poor Pamela! but, o! I hope I
shall not be the subject of their ballad and elegy; but that my
memory, for the sake of my dear father and mother, may quickly slide into
oblivion.
I be once rise, so indulgent be I to this sad way of thinking, to
throw myself in: but, again, my bruise make I slow; and I think, what
art thou about to do, wretche Pamela? how know thou, though the
prospect be all dark to thy short-sighted eye, what God may do for thee,
even when all human mean fail? God Almighty would not lay I under
these sore affliction, if he have not give I strength to grapple with
they, if I will exert it as I ought: and who know, but that the very
presence I so much dread of my angry and design master, (for he have
have I in his power before, and yet I have escape;) may be well for
I, than these persecuting emissary of his, who, for his money, be
true to their wicked trust, and be harden by that, and a long habit of
wickedness, against compunction of heart? God can touch his heart in an
instant; and if this should not be do, I can then but put an end to my
life by some other mean, if I be so resolved.
but how do I know, think I, that even these bruise and maim that I
have get, while I pursue only the laudable escape I have meditate,
may not kindly have furnish I with the opportunity I be now tempt
with to precipitate myself, and of surrender up my life, spotless and
unguilty, to that merciful being who give it!
then, think I, who give thee, presumptuous as thou art, a power over
thy life? who authorise thee to put an end to it, when the weakness of
thy mind suggest not to thee a way to preserve it with honour? how
know thou what purpose God may have to serve, by the trial with
which thou art now exercise? art thou to put a bound to the divine
will, and to say, thus much will I bear, and no more? and wilt thou dare
to say, that if the trial be augment and continue, thou wilt soon
die than bear it?
this act of despondency, think I, be a sin, that, if I pursue it,
admit of no repentance, and can therefore hope no forgiveness.--and wilt
thou, to shorten thy transitory grief, heavy as they be, and weak as
thou fanciest thyself, plunge both body and soul into everlasting misery!
Hitherto, Pamela, think I, thou art the innocent, the suffering Pamela;
and wilt thou, to avoid thy suffering, be the guilty aggressor? and,
because wicked man persecute thee, wilt thou fly in the face of the
Almighty, and distrust his grace and goodness, who can still turn all
these suffering to benefit? and how do I know, but that God, who see
all the lurk vileness of my heart, may have permit these suffering
on that very score, and to make I rely solely on his grace and
assistance, who, perhaps, have too much pride myself in a vain
dependence on my own foolish contrivance?
then, again, think I, wilt thou suffer in one moment all the good
lesson of thy poor honest parent, and the benefit of their example,
(who have persist in do their duty with resignation to the divine
will, amidst the extreme degree of disappointment, poverty, and
distress, and the persecution of an ungrateful world, and merciless
creditor,) to be throw away upon thee: and bring down, as in all
probability this thy rashness will, their grey hair with sorrow to the
grave, when they shall understand, that their beloved daughter, slight
the tender of divine grace, despair of the mercy of a protect
God, have blemish, in this last act, a whole life, which they have
hitherto approve and delight in?
what then, presumptuous Pamela, dost thou here? think I: quit with
speed these perilous bank, and fly from these curling water, that seem,
in their meaning murmur, this still night, to reproach thy rashness!
tempt not God's goodness on the mossy bank, that have be witness of
thy guilty purpose: and while thou hast power leave thee, avoid the
tempting evil, lest thy grand enemy, now repulse by divine grace, and
due reflection, return to the assault with a force that thy weakness may
not be able to resist! and let one rash moment destroy all the
conviction, which now have awe thy rebellious mind into duty and
resignation to the divine will!
and so say, I arise; but be so stiff with my hurt, so cold with the
moist dew of the night, and the wet grass on which I have sit, as also
with the damp arise from so large a piece of water, that with great
pain I get from this pond, which now I think of with terror; and bend
my limping step towards the house, take refuge in the corner of an
outhouse, where wood and coal be lay up for family use, till I should
be find by my cruel keeper, and consign to a more wretched
confinement, and bad usage than I have hitherto experience; and there
behind a pile of firewood I creep, and lie down, as you may imagine, with
a mind just break, and a heart sensible to nothing but the extreme woe
and dejection.
this, my dear father and mother, be the issue of your poor Pamela's
fruitless enterprise; and who know, if I have get out at the back-door,
whether I have be at all in a well case, moneyless, friendless, as I
be, and in a strange place!--but blame not your poor daughter too much:
Nay, if ever you see this miserable scribble, all bath and blot with
my tear, let your pity get the well of your reprehension! but I know
it will--and I must leave off for the present.--For, oh! my strength and
my will are at this time very far unequal to one another.--But yet I will
add, that though I should have praise God for my deliverance, have I be
free from my wicked keeper, and my design master; yet I have more
abundant reason to praise he, that I have be deliver from a bad
enemy,--myself!
I will conclude my sad relation.
it seem Mrs. Jewkes awake not till day-break; and not find I in
bed, she call I; and, no answer be return, she relate, that she
get out of bed, and run to my closet; and, miss I, search under the
bed, and in another closet, find the chamber-door as she have leave it,
quite fast, and the key, as usual, about her wrist. for if I could have
get out of the chamber-door, there be two or three passage, and door
to they all, double-locked and barred, to go through into the great
garden; so that, to escape, there be no way, but out of the window; and
of that window, because of the summer-parlour under it: for the other
window be a great way from the ground.
she say she be excessively frightened; and instantly raise the Swiss,
and the two maid, who lie not far off; and find every door fast, she
say, I must be carry away, as St. Peter be out of prison, by some
angel. it be a wonder she have not a bad thought!
she say, she weep, and wrung her hand, and take on sadly, run about
like a mad woman, little thinking I could have get out of the closet
window, between the iron bar; and, indeed, I donot know whether I could
do so again. but at last finding that casement open, they conclude it
must be so; and run out into the garden, and find my footstep in the
mould of the bed which I dropt down upon from the lead: and so speed
away all of they; that be to say, Mrs. Jewkes, Colbrand, and Nan, towards
the back-door, to see if that be fast; while the cook be send to the
out-office to raise the man, and make they get horse ready, to take
each a several way to pursue I.
but, it seem, find that door double-locked and padlock, and the
heel of my shoe, and the broken brick, they verily conclude I be get
away by some mean over the wall; and then, they say, Mrs. Jewkes seem
like a distracted woman: till, at last, Nan have the thought to go towards
the pond: and there see my coat, and cap, and handkerchief, in the
water, cast almost to the bank by the agitation of the wave, she
think it be I; and, scream out, run to Mrs. Jewkes, and say, o,
madam, madam! herebe a piteous thing!--Mrs. Pamela lie drown in the
pond. Thither they all run; and find my clothe, doubt not I be at
the bottom; and they all, Swiss among the rest, beat their breast, and
make most dismal lamentation; and Mrs. Jewkes send Nan to the man, to
bid they get the drag-net ready, and leave the horse, and come to try to
find the poor innocent! as she, it seem, then call I, beat she
breast, and lament my hard hap; but most what would become of they,
and what account they should give to my master.
while every one be thus differently employ, some weeping and wail,
some run here and there, Nan come into the wood-house; and there lie
poor I; so weak, so low, and deject, and withal so stiff with my
bruise, that I could not stir, nor help myself to get upon my foot. and
I say, with a low voice, (for I could hardly speak,) Mrs. Ann! Mrs.
Ann!--The creature be sadly frightened, but be take up a billet to
knock I on the head, believe I be some thief, as she say; but I
cry out, o Mrs. Ann, Mrs. Ann, help I, for pity's sake, to Mrs.
Jewkes! for I cannot get up!--bless I, say she, what! you, madam!--Why,
our heart be almost break, and we be go to drag the pond for you,
believe you have drown yourself. now, say she, youwill make we all
alive again!
and, without help I, she run away to the pond, and bring all the
crew to the wood-house.--the wicked woman, as she enter, say, where be
she?--plague of her spell, and her witchcraft! she shall dearly repent
of this trick, if my name be Jewkes; and, come to I, take hold of my
arm so roughly, and give I such a pull, as make I squeal out, (my
shoulder be bruise on that side,) and draw I on my face. o cruel
creature! say I, if you know what I have suffer, it would move you to
pity I!
even Colbrand seem to be concern, and say, Fie, madam, fie! you see
she be almost dead! you must not be so rough with she. the coachman
Robin seem to be sorry for I too, and say, with sob, what a scene be
here! donot you see she be all bloody in her head, and cannot stir?--
curse of her contrivance! say the horrid creature; she have frighten I
out of my wit, Ibe sure. how the d---l come you here?--oh! say I, ask
I now no question, but let the maid carry I up to my prison; and
there let I die decently, and in peace! for, indeed, I think I could
not live two hour.
the still more inhuman tigress say, I suppose you want Mr. Williams to
pray by you, donot you? well, Iwill send for my master this minute: let
he come and watch you himself, for I; for therebe no such thing as
hold you, Ibe sure.
so the maid take I up between they, and carry I to my chamber; and
when the wretch see how bad I be, she begin a little to relent--while
every one wonder (at which I have neither strength nor inclination to
tell they) how all this come to pass, which they impute to sorcery and
witchcraft.
I be so weak, when I have get up stair, that I faint away, with
dejection, pain, and fatigue; and they undress I, and get I to bed;
and Mrs. Jewkes order Nan to bathe my shoulder, and arm, and ancle,
with some old rum warm; and they cut the hair a little from the back
part of my head, and wash that; for it be clot with blood, from a
pretty long, but not a deep gash; and put a family plaister upon it; for,
if this woman have any good quality, it be, it seem, in a readiness and
skill to manage in case, where sudden misfortune happen in a family.
after this, I fall into a pretty sound and refreshing sleep, and lie till
twelve o'clock, tolerably easy, consider I be very feverish, and
aguishly inclined; and she take a deal of care to fit I to undergo more
trial, which I have hop would have be happily end: but providence
do not see fit.
she would make I rise about twelve: but I be so weak, I could only sit
up till the bed be make, and go into it again; and be, as they say,
delirious some part of the afternoon. but have a tolerable night on
Thursday, I be a good deal well on Friday, and on Saturday get up, and
eat a little spoon-meat, and my feverishness seem to be go; and I be
so mend by evening, that I beg her indulgence in my closet, to be
leave to myself; which she consent to, it be double-bar the day
before, and I assure she, that all my contrivance, as she call they,
be at an end. but first she make I tell the whole story of my
enterprise; which I do very faithfully, know now that nothing could
stand I in any stead, or contribute to my safety and escape: and she
seem full of wonder at my resolution; but tell I frankly, that I
should have find it a hard matter to get quite off; for that she be
provide with a warrant from my master (who be a justice of peace in this
county as well as in the other) to get I apprehend, if I have get away,
on suspicion of wrong he, let I have be where I would.
o how deep-lay be the mischief design to fall on my devoted head!--
surely, surely, I cannot be worthy of all this contrivance! this too
well shews I the truth of what be hint to I formerly at the other
house, that my master swear he would have I! o preserve I, Heaven!
from be his, in his own wicked sense of the adjuration!
I must add, that now the woman see I pick up so fast, she use I
bad, and have abridge I of paper, all but one sheet, which I be to
shew she, write or unwritten, on demand: and have reduce I to one pen:
yet my hidden store stand I in stead. but she be more and more
snappish and cross; and tauntingly call I Mrs. Williams, and any thing
she think will vex I.
Sunday afternoon.
Mrs. Jewkes have think fit to give I an airing, for three or four
hour, this afternoon; and I be a good deal well and should be much
more so, if I know for what I be reserve. but health be a blessing
hardly to be covet in my circumstance, since that but expose I to
the calamity I be in continual apprehension of; whereas a weak and
sickly state might possibly move compassion for I. o how I dread the
come of this angry and incense master; though I be sure I have do
he no harm!
just now we hear, that he have like to have be drown in cross the
stream, a few day ago, in pursue his game. what be the matter, that
with all his ill usage of I, I cannot hate he? to be sure, I be not
like other people! he have certainly do enough to make I hate he; but
yet, when I hear his danger, which be very great, I could not in my
heart forbear rejoice for his safety; though his death would have end
my affliction. ungenerous master! if you know this, you surely would
not be so much my persecutor! but, for my late good lady's sake, I must
wish he well; and o what an angel would he be in my eye yet, if he
would cease his attempt, and reform!
well, I hear by Mrs. Jewkes, that John Arnold be turn away, be
detect in write to Mr. Williams; and that Mr. Longman, and Mr.
Jonathan the butler, have incur his displeasure, for offer to speak
in my behalf. Mrs. Jervis too be in danger; for all these three,
probably, go together to beg in my favour; for now it be know where I
be.
Mrs. Jewkes have, with the news about my master, receive a letter: but
she say the content be too bad for I to know. they must be bad
indeed, if they be bad than what I have already know.
just now the horrid creature tell I, as a secret, that she have reason
to think he have find out a way to satisfy my scruple: it be, by
marry I to this dreadful Colbrand, and buy I of he on the
wedding day, for a sum of money!--Was ever the like heard?--she say it
will be my duty to obey my husband; and that Mr. Williams will be force,
as a punishment, to marry we; and that, when my master have pay for I,
and I be surrender up, the Swiss be to go home again, with the money,
to his former wife and child; for, she say, it be the custom of those
people to have a wife in every nation.
but this, to be sure, be horrid romancing! yet, abominable as it be, it
may possibly serve to introduce some plot now hatching!--With what
strange perplexity be my poor mind agitated! perchance, some sham-
marriage may be design, on purpose to ruin I; but can a husband sell
his wife against her own consent?--and will such a bargain stand good in
law?
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, the 32d, 33d, and 34th day of my
imprisonment.
nothing offer these day but squabbling between Mrs. Jewkes and I.
she grow bad and bad to I. I vex she yesterday, because she
talk nastily; and tell she she talk more like a vile London
prostitute, than a gentleman's housekeeper; and she think she cannot use
I bad enough for it. bless I! she curse and storm at I like a
trooper, and can hardly keep her hand off I. you may believe she must
talk sadly, to make I say such harsh word: indeed it cannot be
repeat; as she be a disgrace to her sex. and then she ridicule I,
and laugh at my notion of honesty; and tell I, impudent creature as
she be! what a fine bed-fellow I shall make for my master (and such-
like), with such whimsical notion about me!--Do you think this be to be
bear? and yet she talk bad than this, if possible! quite filthily!
o what vile hand be I put into!
Thursday.
I have now all the reason that can be, to apprehend my master will be
here soon; for the servant be busy in set the house to right; and
a stable and coach-house be clean out, that have not be use some
time. I ask Mrs. Jewkes; but she tell I nothing, nor will hardly
answer I when I ask she a question. sometimes I think she put on these
strange wicked air to I, purposely to make I wish for, what I dread
most of all thing, my master's come down. he talk of love!--if he have
any the least notion of regard for I, to be sure he would not give this
naughty body such power over me:--And if he do come, where be his
promise of not see I without I consent to it? but, it seem, his
honour owe I nothing! so he tell I in his letter. and why? because
I be willing to keep mine. but, indeed, he say, he hat I perfectly:
but it be plain he do, or I should not be leave to the mercy of this
woman: and, what be bad, to my woful apprehension.
Friday, the 36th day of my imprisonment.
I take the liberty yesterday afternoon, find the gate open, to walk
out before the house; and, ere I be aware, have get to the bottom of the
long row of elm; and there I sit myself down upon the step of a sort of
broad stile, which lead into the road, and go towards the town. and
as I sit muse upon what always busy my mind, I see a whole body of
folk run towards I from the house, man and woman, as in a fright.
at first I wonder what be the matter, till they come near; and I
find they be all alarmed, think I have attempt to get off. there
be first the horrible Colbrand, run with his long leg, well nigh
two yard at a stride; then there be one of the groom, poor Mr.
Williams's robber; then I spy Nan, half out of breath, and the cook-
maid after she! and lastly, come waddle, as fast as she could, Mrs.
Jewkes, exclaim most bitterly, as I find, against I. Colbrand say,
o how have you fright we all!--And go behind I, lest I should run
away, as I suppose.
I sit still, to let they see I have no view to get away; for, besides the
improbability of succeed, my last sad attempt have cure I of
enterprise again. and when Mrs. Jewkes come within hearing, I find
she terribly incense, and rave about my contrivance. why, say I,
should you be so concerned? here I have sit a few minute, and have not
the least thought of get away, or go far; but to return as
soon as it be duskish. she would not believe I; and the barbarous
creature strike at I with her horrid fist, and, I believe, would have
fell I, have not Colbrand interpose, and say, he see I sit
still, look about I, and not seem to have the least inclination to
stir. but this would not serve: she order the two maid to take I
each by an arm, and lead I back into the house, and up stair; and there
have I be lock up ever since, without shoe. in vain have I plead,
that I have no design, as indeed I have not the least; and last night I be
force to be between she and Nan; and I find she be resolve to make a
handle of this against I, and in her own behalf.--indeed, what with her
usage, and my own apprehension of still bad, I be quite weary of my
life.
just now she have be with I, and give I my shoe, and have lay she
imperious command upon I, to dress myself in a suit of clothe out of
the portmanteau, which I have not see lately, against three or four
o'clock; for she say, she be to have a visit from Lady Darnford's two
daughter, who come purposely to see I; and so she give I the key of
the portmanteau. but I will not obey she; and I tell she, I would not be
make a show of, nor see the lady. she leave I, say, it would be
bad for I, if I do not. but how can that be?
five o'clock be come,
and no young ladies!--so that I fancy--but hold! I hear their coach, I
believe. Iwill step to the window.--I willnot go down to they, I be
resolved--
good sir! good sir! what will become of I! here be my master come in
his fine chariot!--indeed he be! what shall I do? where shall I hide
myself?--O! what shall I do? pray for I! but oh! youwill not see this!
--Now, good God of heaven, preserve I; if it be thy blessed will!
seven o'clock.
though I dread to see he, yet do I wonder I have not. to be sure
something be resolve against I, and he stay to hear all her story.
I can hardly write; yet, as I can do nothing else, I know not how to
forbear!--Yet I cannot hold my pen--how crooked and tremble the line!
--I must leave off, till I can get quieter fingers!--Why should the
guiltless tremble so, when the guilty can possess their mind in peace?
Saturday morning.
now let I give you an account of what pass last night: for I have no
power to write, nor yet opportunity till now.
this vile woman hold my master till half an hour after seven; and he come
hither about five in the afternoon. and then I hear his voice on the
stair, as he be come up to I. it be about his supper; for he say,
I shall choose a boil chicken with butter and parsley.--and up he come!
he put on a stern and majestic air; and he can look very majestic when he
please. well, perverse Pamela, ungrateful runaway, say he, for my
first salutation!--you do well, donot you, to give I all this trouble
and vexation! I could not speak; but throw myself on the floor, hid
my face, and be ready to die with grief and apprehension.--He say, well
may you hide your face! well may you be ashamed to see I, vile forward
one, as you are!--i sob and weep, but could not speak. and he let I
lie, and go to the door, and call Mrs. Jewkes.--There, say he, take
up that fall angel!--once I think she as innocent as an angel of
light but I have now no patience with she. the little hypocrite
prostrate herself thus, in hope to move my weakness in her favour, and
that Iwill raise she from the floor myself. but I shall not touch she:
no, say he, cruel gentleman as he be! let such fellow as Williams be
take in by her artful wile! I know she now, and see she be for any
fool's turn, that will be catch by she.
I sigh, as if my heart would break!--and Mrs. Jewkes lift I up upon
my knee; for I tremble so, I could not stand. come, say she, Mrs.
Pamela, learn to know your good friend; confess your unworthy behaviour,
and beg his honour's forgiveness of all your fault. I be ready to
faint: and he say, she be mistress of art, Iwill assure you; and will
mimic a fit, ten to one, in a minute.
I be strike to the heart at this; but could not speak presently; only
lift up my eye to heaven!--And at last make shift to say--God forgive
you, sir!--He seem in a great passion, and walk up and down the room,
cast sometimes an eye upon I, and seem as if he would have speak,
but check himself--and at last he say, when she have act this her
first part over, perhaps I will see she again, and she shall soon know
what she have to trust to.
and so he go out of the room: and I be quite sick at heart!--surely,
say I, I be the wicked creature that ever breathe! well, say the
impertinent, not so wicked as that neither; but I be glad you begin to
see your fault. nothing like be humble!--come, Iwill stand your
friend, and plead for you, if youwill promise to be more dutiful for the
future: come, come, add the wretch, this may be all make up by to-
morrow morning, if you be not a fool.--begone, hideous woman! say I,
and let not my affliction be add to by thy inexorable cruelty, and
unwomanly wickedness.
she give I a push, and go away in a violent passion: and it seem, she
make a story of this; and say, I have such a spirit, there be no bearing
it.
I lay I down on the floor, and have no power to stir, till the clock
strike nine: and then the wicked woman come up again. you must come down
stair, say she, to my master; that be, if you please, spirit!--Said I,
I believe I cannot stand. then, say she, Iwill send Mons. Colbrand to
carry you down.
I get up as well as I could, and tremble all the way down stair: and
she go before I into the parlour; and a new servant that he have
wait on he, instead of John, withdraw as soon as I come in: and, by
the way, he have a new coachman too, which look as if Bedfordshire Robin
be turn away.
I think, say he, when I come down, you should have sit at table with
I, when I have not company; but when I find you cannot forget your
original, but must prefer my menial to I, I call you down to wait on I
while I sup, that I may have some talk with you, and throw away as little
time as possible upon you.
Sir, say I, you do I honour to wait upon you:--And I never shall, I
hope, forget my original. but I be force to stand behind his chair,
that I might hold by it. fill I, say he, a glass of that Burgundy. I
go to do it, but my hand shake so, that I could not hold the plate with
the glass in it, and spill some of the wine. so Mrs. Jewkes pour it
for I, and I carry it as well as I could; and make a low courtesy. he
take it, and say, stand behind I, out of my sight!
why, Mrs. Jewkes, say he, you tell I she remain very sullen still, and
eat nothing. no, say she, not so much as will keep life and soul
together.--And be always cry, you say, too? yes, sir, answer she, I
think she be, for one thing or another. ay, say he, your young wench
will feed upon their tear; and their obstinacy will serve they for meat
and drink. I think I never see she look well though, in my life!--But,
I suppose, she live upon love. this sweet Mr. Williams, and her little
villanous plot together, have keep she alive and well, to be sure: for
mischief, love, and contradiction, be the natural aliment of a woman.
Poor I be force to hear all this, and be silent; and indeed my heart
be too full to speak.
and so you say, say he, that she have another project, but yesterday, to
get away? she deny it herself, say she; but it have all the appearance
of one. Ibe sure she make I in a fearful pucker about it: and I be glad
your honour be come, with all my heart; and I hope, whatever be your
honour's intention concern she, you will not be long about it; for
youwill find she as slippery as an eel, Iwill assure you.
Sir, say I, and clasp his knee with my arm, not know what I do,
and fall on my knee, have mercy on I, and hear I, concern that
wicked woman's usage of me--
he cruelly interrupt I, and say, I be satisfied she have do she
duty: it signify nothing what you say against Mrs. Jewkes. that you
be here, little hypocrite as you be, plead your cause before I, be
owe to her care of you; else you have be with the parson.--wicked
girl! say he, to tempt a man to undo himself, as you have do he, at a
time I be on the point of make he happy for his life!
I arise; but say with a deep sigh, I have do, sir!--I have done!--I
have a strange tribunal to plead before. the poor sheep in the fable have
such an one; when it be try before the vulture, on the accusation of
the wolf!
so, Mrs. Jewkes, say he, you be the wolf, I the vulture, and this the
poor innocent lamb on her trial before us.--Oh! you donot know how well
this innocent be read in reflection. she have wit at will, when she have a
mind to display her own romantic innocence, at the price of other
people's character.
well, say the aggravate creature, this be nothing to what she have
call I: I have be a Jezebel, a London prostitute, and what not?--But
I be content with her ill name, now I see it be her fashion, and she
can call your honour a vulture.
say I, I have no thought of compare my master--and be go to say on:
but he say, donot prate, girl!--No, say she, it donot become you, I be
sure.
well, say I, since I must not speak, I will hold my peace; but there be
a righteous Judge, who know the secret of all heart; and to he I
appeal.
see there! say he: now this meek, good creature be pray for fire from
heaven upon we! o she can curse most heartily, in the spirit of
christian meekness, Iwill assure you!--Come, saucy-face, give I another
glass of wine.
so I do, as well as I could; but weep so, that he say, I suppose I
shall have some of your tear in my wine!
when he have sup, he stand up, and say, o how happy for you it be,
that you can, at will, thus make your speak eye overflow in this
manner, without lose any of their brilliancy! you have be tell, I
suppose, that you be most beautiful in your tears!--did you ever, say
he to she, (who all this while be stand in one corner of the
parlour,) see a more charming creature than this? be it to be wonder
at, that I demean myself thus to take notice of her?--See, say he, and
take the glass with one hand, and turn I round with the other, what a
shape! what a neck! what a hand! and what a bloom on that lovely face!--
but who can describe the trick and artifice, that lie lurk in her
little, plotting, guileful heart! 'tis no wonder the poor parson be
infatuate with her.--i blame he less than I do she; for who could
expect such artifice in so young a sorceress?
I go to the farther part of the room, and hold my face against the
wainscot; and in spite of all I could do to refrain crying, sob as if
my heart would break. he say, I be surprised, Mrs. Jewkes, at the
mistake of the letter you tell I of! but, you see, I be not afraid any
body should read what I write. I donot carry on private correspondence,
and reveal every secret that come to my knowledge, and then corrupt
people to carry my letter against their duty, and all good conscience.
come hither, hussy! say he: you and I have a dreadful reckoning to make.
why donot you come, when I bid you?--fie upon it, Mrs. Pamela, say she.
what! not stir, when his honour command you to come to him!--Who know
but his goodness will forgive you?
he come to I, (for I have no power to stir,) and put his arm about my
neck, and would kiss I; and say, well, Mrs. Jewkes, if it be not for
the thought of this cursed parson, I believe in my heart, so great be my
weakness, that I could not forgive this intriguing little slut, and take
she to my bosom.
O, say the sycophant, you be very good, sir, very forgiving, indeed!--
but come, add the profligate wretch, I hope you will be so good, as to
take she to your bosom; and that, by to-morrow morning, youwill bring she
to a well sense of her duty!
could any thing in womanhood be so vile? I have no patience: but yet
grief and indignation choake up the passage of my word; and I could
only stammer out a passionate exclamation to Heaven, to protect my
innocence. but the word be the subject of their ridicule. be ever
poor creature worse beset!
he say, as if he have be consider whether he could forgive I or
not, no, I cannot yet forgive her neither.--She have give I great
disturbance, have bring great discredit upon I, both abroad and at
home: have corrupt all my servant at the other house; have despise my
honourable view and intention to she, and seek to run away with this
ungrateful parson.--And surely I ought not to forgive all this!--Yet,
with all this wretched grimace, he kiss I again, and would have put
his hand into my bosom; but I struggle, and say, I would die before I
would be use thus.--consider, Pamela, say he, in a threatening tone,
consider where you be! and donot play the fool: if you do, a more
dreadful fate await you than you expect. but take she up stair, Mrs.
Jewkes, and Iwill send a few line to she to consider of; and let I have
your answer, Pamela, in the morning. 'till then you have to resolve: and
after that your doom be fixed.--so I go up stair, and give myself up
to grief, and expectation of what he would send: but yet I be glad of
this night's reprieve!
he send I, however, nothing at all. and about twelve o'clock, Mrs.
Jewkes and Nan come up, as the night before, to be my bed-fellow: and I
would go to bed with some of my clothe on: which they mutter at sadly;
and Mrs. Jewkes rail at I particularly. indeed I would have sit up
all night, for fear, if she would have let I. for I have but very little
rest that night, apprehend this woman would let my master in. she do
nothing but praise he, and blame I: but I answer she as little as I
could.
he have Sir Simon Tell-tale, alias Darnford, to dine with he to-day,
whose family send to welcome he into the country; and it seem the old
knight want to see I; so I suppose I shall be send for, as Samson be,
to make sport for him.--Here I be, and must bear it all!
twelve o'clock, Saturday noon.
just now he have send I up, by Mrs. Jewkes, the follow proposal. so
here be the honourable intention all at once lay open. they be, my
dear parent, to make I a vile keep mistress: which, I hope, I shall
always det the thought of. but youwill see how they be accommodate
to what I should have most desire, could I have honestly promote it,
your welfare and happiness. I have answer they, as I be sure youwill
approve; and I be prepare for the bad: for though I fear there will be
nothing omit to ruin I, and though my poor strength will not be able
to defend I, yet I will be innocent of crime in my intention, and in the
sight of God; and to he leave the avenging of all my wrong, time and
manner. I shall write to you my answer against his article; and hope
the good, though I fear the bad. but if I should come home to you
ruin and undo, and may not be able to look you in the face; yet pity
and inspirit the poor Pamela, to make her little remnant of life easy;
for long I shall not survive my disgrace: and you may be assure it shall
not be my fault, if it be my misfortune.
'to MRS. PAMELA ANDREWS.
'the following ARTICLES be propose to your serious consideration; and
let I have an answer, in writing, to they, that I may take my
resolution accordingly. only remember, that I will not be trifle with;
and what you give for answer will absolutely decide your fate, without
expostulation, or farth trouble.
this be my ANSWER.
Forgive, sir, the spirit your poor servant be about to show in
her answer to your article. not to be warm, and in earnest,
on such an occasion as the present, would shew a degree of guilt,
that, I hope, my soul abhor. I will not trifle with you, nor
act like a person doubtful of her own mind; for it want not one
moment's consideration with I; and I therefore return the ANSWER
following, let what will be the consequence.
'I. if you can convince I that the hat parson have have no
encouragement from you in his address; and that you have no inclination
for he in preference to I; then I will offer the follow proposal to
you, which I will punctually make good.
I. as to the first article, sir, it may behove I (that I may
not deserve, in your opinion, the opprobrious term of forward
and artful, and such like) to declare solemnly, that Mr. Williams
never have the least encouragement from I, as to what you hint;
and I believe his principal motive be the apprehend duty of his
function, quite contrary to his apparent interest, to assist a
person he think in distress. you may, sir, the rather believe
I, when I declare, that I know not the man breathe I would wish
to marry; and that the only one I could honour more than another,
be the gentleman, who, of all other, seek my everlaste dishonour.
'II. I will directly make you a present of 500 guinea, for your own
use, which you may dispose of to any purpose you please: and will give
it absolutely into the hand of any person you shall appoint to receive
it; and expect no favour in return, till you be satisfied in the
possession of it.
II. as to your second proposal, let the consequence be what it
will, I reject it with all my soul. money, sir, be not my chief
good: may God Almighty desert I, whenever it be! and whenever,
for the sake of that, I can give up my title to that bless hope
which will stand I in stead, at a time when million of gold will
not purchase one happy moment of reflection on a past misspent life!
'III. I will likewise directly make over to you a purchase I lately make
in Kent, which bring in 250l. per annum, clear of all deduction. this
shall be make over to you in full property for your life, and for the
life of any child to perpetuity, that you may happen to have: and
your father shall be immediately put into possession of it in trust for
these purpose: and the management of it will yield a comfortable
subsistence to he, and your mother, for life; and I will make up any
deficiency, if such should happen, to that clear sum, and allow he
50l. per annum, besides, for his life, and that of your mother, for his
care and management of this your estate.
III. your third proposal, sir, I reject for the same reason;
and be sorry you could think my poor honest parent would enter
into their part of it, and be concerned for the management of
an estate, which would be owe to the prostitution of their
poor daughter. Forgive, sir, my warmth on this occasion; but
you know not the poor man, and the poor woman, my ever-dear
father and mother, if you think, that they would not much rather
choose to starve in a ditch, or rot in a noisome dungeon, than
accept of the fortune of a monarch, upon such wicked term.
I dare not say all that my full mind suggest to I on this
grievous occasion--but, indeed, sir, you know they not; nor
shall the terror of death, in its most frightful form, I hope,
through God's assist grace, ever make I act unworthy of
such poor honest parent!
'IV. I will, moreover, extend my favour to any other of your relation,
that you may think worthy of it, or that be value by you.
IV. your fourth proposal, I take upon I, sir, to answer as the
third. if I have any friend that want the favour of the great,
may they ever want it, if they be capable of desire it on
unworthy term!
'V. I will, besides, order pattern to be send you for choose four
complete suit of rich clothe, that you may appear with reputation, as
if you be my wife. and will give you the two diamond ring, and two
pair of ear-ring, and diamond necklace, that be buy by my mother,
to present to Miss Tomlins, if the match that be propose between she
and I have be bring to effect: and I will confer upon you still other
gratuity, as I shall find myself oblige, by your good behaviour and
affection.
V. Fine clothe, sir, become not I; nor have I any ambition
to wear they. I have great pride in my poverty and meanness,
than I should have in dress and finery. believe I, sir, I think
such thing less become the humble-bear Pamela, than the rag
your good mother raise I from. your ring, sir, your necklace,
and your ear-ring, will well befit lady of degree, than I:
and to lose the good jewel, my virtue, would be poorly recompense
by those you propose to give I. what should I think, when I
look upon my finger, or see in the glass those diamond on my
neck, and in my ear, but that they be the price of my honesty;
and that I wear those jewel outwardly, because I have none inwardly.
'VI. now, Pamela, will you see by this, what a value I set upon the
free-will of a person already in my power; and who, if these proposal
be not accept, shall find, that I have not take all these pain, and
risk my reputation, as I have do, without resolve to gratify my
passion for you, at all adventure; and if you refuse, without make any
term at all.
VI. I know, sir, by woful experience, that I be in your power:
I know all the resistance I can make will be poor and weak, and,
perhaps, stand I in little stead: I dread your will to ruin I
be as great as your power: yet, sir, will I dare to tell you,
that I will make no free-will offering of my virtue. all that
I can do, poor as it be, I will do, to convince you, that your
offer shall have no part in my choice; and if I cannot escape
the violence of man, I hope, by God's grace, I shall have nothing
to reproach myself, for not do all in my power to avoid my
disgrace; and then I can safely appeal to the great God, my only
refuge and protector, with this consolation, that my will bore no
part in my violation.
'VII. you shall be mistress of my person and fortune, as much as if the
foolish ceremony have pass. all my servant shall be yours; and you
shall choose any two person to attend yourself, either male or female,
without any control of mine: and if your conduct be such, that I have
reason to be satisfied with it, I know not (but will not engage for this)
that I may, after a twelvemonth's cohabitation, marry you; for, if my
love increase for you, as it have do for many month past, it will be
impossible for I to deny you any thing.
'and now, Pamela, consider well, it be in your power to oblige I on such
term, as will make yourself, and all your friend, happy: but this will
be over this very day, irrevocably over; and you shall find all you would
be think to fear, without the least benefit arise from it to
yourself.
'and I beg youwill well weigh the matter, and comply with my proposal;
and I will instantly set about securing to you the full effect of they:
and let I, if you value yourself, experience a grateful return on this
occasion, and Iwill forgive all thatbe past.'
VII. I have not once dare to look so high, as to such a
proposal as your seventh article contain. hence have proceed
all my little abortive artifice to escape from the confinement
you have put I in; although you promise to be honourable to I.
your honour, well I know, would not let you stoop to so mean and
so unworthy a slave, as the poor Pamela: all I desire be, to be
permit to return to my native meanness unviolate. what have
I do, sir, to deserve it should be otherwise? for the obtaining
of this, though I would not have marry your chaplain, yet would
I have run away with your mean servant, if I have think I could
have get safe to my beloved poverty. I hear you once say, sir,
that a certain great commander, who could live upon lentil, might
well refuse the bribe of the great monarch: and I hope, as I
can contentedly live at the mean rate, and think not myself
above the low condition, that I be also above make an exchange
of my honesty for all the rich of the Indies. when I come to be
proud and vain of gaudy apparel, and outside finery, then (which I
hope will never be) may I rest my principal good in such vain
trinket, and despise for they the more solid ornament of a good
fame, and a chastity inviolate!
give I leave to say, sir, in answer to what you hint, that you may in a
twelvemonth's time marry I, on the continuance of my good behaviour;
that this weigh less with I, if possible, than any thing else you have
say: for, in the first place, there be an end of all merit, and all good
behaviour, on my side, if I have now any, the moment I consent to your
proposal: and I should be so far from expect such an honour, that I
will pronounce, that I should be most unworthy of it. what, sir, would
the world say, be you to marry your harlot? that a gentleman of your
rank in life should stoop, not only to the base-bear Pamela, but to a
base-bear prostitute?--little, sir, as I know of the world, I be not to
be catch by a bait so poorly cover as this!
yet, after all, dreadful be the thought, that I, a poor, weak,
friendless, unhappy creature, be too full in your power! but permit I,
sir, to pray, as I now write on my bended knee, that before you resolve
upon my ruin, you will weigh well the matter. Hitherto, sir, though you
have take large stride to this cry sin, yet be you on this side the
commission of it.--When once it be do, nothing can recall it! and
where will be your triumph?--what glory will the spoil of such a weak
enemy yield you? let I but enjoy my poverty with honesty, be all my
prayer, and I will bless you, and pray for you, every moment of my life!
think, o think! before it be yet too late! what sting, what remorse will
attend your die hour, when you come to reflect, that you have ruin,
perhaps soul and body, a wretched creature, whose only pride be her
virtue! and how pleased you will be, on the contrary, if in that
tremendous moment you shall be able to acquit yourself of this foul
crime, and to plead in your own behalf, that you suffer the earnest
supplication of an unhappy wretch to prevail with you to be innocent
yourself, and let she remain so!--May God Almighty, whose mercy so lately
save you from the peril of perish in deep water, (on which, I hope,
you will give I cause to congratulate you!) touch your heart in my
favour, and save you from this sin, and I from this ruin!--and to he do
I commit my cause; and to he will I give the glory, and night and day
pray for you, if I may be permit to escape this great evil!----
your poor oppress, broken spirited servant.
I take a copy of this for your perusal, my dear parent, if I shall ever
be so happy to see you again; (for I hope my conduct will be approve of
by you;) and at night, when Sir Simon be go, he send for I down.
well, say he, have you consider my proposal? yes, sir, say I, I
have: and there be my answer: but pray let I not see you read it. be it
your bashfulness, say he, or your obstinacy, that make you not choose I
should read it before you?
I offer to go away; and he say, donot run from I; I willnot read it
till you be go. but, say he, tell I, Pamela, whether you comply
with my proposal, or not? Sir, say I, you will see presently; pray
donot hold I; for he take my hand. say he, do you well consider
before you answered?--i do, sir, say i. if it be not what you think
will please I, say he, dear girl, take it back again, and reconsider
it; for if I have this as your absolute answer, and I donot like it, you
be undo; for I will not sue meanly, where I can command. I fear, say
he, it be not what I like, by your manner: and let I tell you, that I
cannot bear denial. if the term I have offer be not sufficient, I
will augment they to two-third of my estate; for, say he, and swear a
dreadful oath, I cannot live without you: and, since the thing be go so
far, I will not! and so he clasp I in his arm in such a manner as
quite frighten I; and kiss I two or three time.
I get from he, and run up stair, and go to the closet, and be quite
uneasy and fearful.
in an hour's time he call Mrs. Jewkes down to he! and I hear he
very high in passion: and all about I! and I hear she say, it be his
own fault; there would be an end of all my complaining and perverseness,
if he be once resolve; and other most impudent aggravation. I be
resolve not to go to bed this night, if I can help it!--Lie still, lie
still, my poor flutter heart!--what will become of I!
almost twelve o'clock, Saturday night.
he send Mrs. Jewkes, about ten o'clock, to tell I to come to he.
where? say I. Iwill shew you, say she. I go down three or four
step, and see she make to his chamber, the door of which be open: so
I say, I cannot go there!--don't be foolish, say she; but come; no harm
will be do to you!--well, say I, if I die, I cannot go there. I hear
he say, let she come, or it shall be bad for she. I cannot bear, say
he, to speak to her myself!--well, say I, I cannot come, indeed I
cannot; and so I go up again into my closet, expect to be fetch by
force.
but she come up soon after, and bid I make haste to bed: say I, I will
not go to bed this night, thatbe certain!--then, say she, you shall be
make to come to bed; and Nan and I will undress you. I know neither
prayer nor tear would move this wicked woman: so I say, I be sure you
will let master in, and I shall be undo! mighty piece of undone! she
say: but he be too much exasperate against I, to be so familiar with
I, she would assure me!--ay, say she, youwill be dispose of another way
soon, I can tell you for your comfort: and I hope your husband will have
your obedience, though nobody else can have it. no husband in the world,
say I, shall make I do an unjust or base thing.--She say, that would
be soon try; and Nan come in, what! say I, be I to have two bed-
fellow again, these warm night? yes, say she, slippery-one, you be,
till you can have one good one instead of we. say I, Mrs. Jewkes, donot
talk nastily to I: I see you be begin again; and I shall affront
you, may be; for next to bad action, be bad word; for they could not
be speak, if they be not in the heart.--come to bed, purity! say she.
you be a nonsuch, I suppose. indeed, say I, I cannot come to bed; and
it will do you no harm to let I stay all night in the great chair. Nan,
say she, undress my young lady. if she willnot let you, Iwill help you;
and, if neither of we can do it quietly, wewill call my master to do it
for we; though, say she, I think it an office worthy of Monsieur
Colbrand!--You be very wicked, say I. I know it, say she; I be a
Jezebel, and a London prostitute, you know. you do great feat, say I,
to tell my master all this poor stuff; but you do not tell he how you
beat I. no, lambkin, say she, (a word I have not hear a good while,)
that I leave for you to tell and you be go to do it if the vulture have
not take the wolf's part, and bid the poor innocent lamb be silent!--ay,
say I, no matter for your fleer, Mrs. Jewkes; though I can have neither
justice nor mercy here, and cannot be hear in my defence, yet a time
will come, may be, when I shall be hear, and when your own guilt will
strike you dumb.--ay! spirit, say she; and the vulture too! must we
both be dumb? why that, lambkin, will be pretty!--then, say the wicked
one, youwill have all the talk to yourself!--Then how will the tongue of
the pretty lambkin bleat out innocence, and virtue, and honesty, till the
whole trial be at an end!--you're a wicked woman, thatbe certain, say I;
and if you think any thing of another world, could not talk thus. but
no wonder!--It shews what hand Ibe get into!--ay, so it do, say she;
but I beg youwill undress, and come to bed, or I believe your innocence
willnot keep you from still bad hand. I will come to bed, say I, if
you will let I have the key in my own hand; not else, if I can help it.
yes, say she, and then, hey for another contrivance, another escape!--
no, no, say I, all my contrivance be over, Iwill assure you! pray let
I have the key, and I will come to bed. she come to I, and take I in
her huge arm, as if I be a feather: say she, I do this to shew you
what a poor resistance you can make against I, if I please to exert
myself; and so, lambkin, donot say to your wolf, I willnot come to bed!--
and set I down, and tap I on the neck: ah! say she, thou art a
pretty creature, 'tis true; but so obstinate! so full of spirit! if thy
strength be but answerable to that, thou would'st run away with we all,
and this great house too on thy back!--But, undress, undress, I tell you.
well, say I, I see my misfortune make you very merry, and very witty
too: but I will love you, if you will humour I with the key of the
chamber-doors.--Are you sure you will love I? say she: now speak your
conscience!--why, say I, you must not put it so close; neither would
you, if you think you have not give reason to doubt it!--But I will
love you as well as I can!--i would not tell a wilful lie: and if I do,
you would not believe I, after your hard usage of I. well, say she,
thatbe all fair, I own!--but Nan, pray pull off my young lady's shoe and
stockings.--No, pray donot, say I; I will come to bed presently, since I
must.
and so I go to the closet, and scribble a little about this idle chit-
chat. and she be importunate, I be force to go to bed; but with
some of my clothe on, as the former night; and she let I hold the two
key; for there be two lock, there be a double door; and so I get a
little sleep that night, have have none for two or three night before.
I cannot imagine what she mean; but Nan offer to talk a little once or
twice; and she snub she, and say, I charge you, wench, donot open
your lip before I; and if you be ask any question by Mrs. Pamela,
donot answer she one word, while I be here!--but she be a lordly woman to
the maid-servant; and that have always be her character: o how unlike
good Mrs. Jervis in every thing.
Sunday morning.
a thought come into my head; I mean no harm; but it be a little bold.
for, see my master dress to go to church; and his chariot get
ready, I go to my closet, and I writ,
the prayer of this congregation be earnestly desire for a
gentleman of great worth and honour, who labour under a temptation
to exert his great power to ruin a poor, distressed, worthless
maiden:
and also,
the prayer of this congregation be earnestly desire by a poor
distressed creature, for the preservation of her virtue and
innocence.
Mrs. Jewkes come up: always write! say she; and would see it: and
strait, all that ever I could say, carry it down to my master.--He
look upon it, and say, tell she, she shall soon see how her prayer
be answer; she be very bold: but as she have reject all my favour,
she reckon for all be not far off. I look after he out of the
window; and he be charmingly dress: to be sure he be a handsome fine
gentleman!--what pity his heart be not as good as his appearance! why
cannot I hate him?--but donot be uneasy, if you should see this; for it be
impossible I should love he; for his vice all ugly he over, as I may
say.
my master send word, that he shall not come home to dinner: I suppose he
dine with this Sir Simon Darnford. I be much concerned for poor Mr.
Williams. Mrs. Jewkes say, he be confine still, and take on much.
all his trouble be bring upon he for my sake: this grieve I much.
my master, it seem, will have his money from he. this be very hard;
for it be three fifty pound, he give he, as he think, as a salary for
three year that he have be with he: but there be no agreement between
they; and he absolutely depend on my master's favour. to be sure, it
be the more generous of he to run these risk for the sake of oppressed
innocence: and I hope he will meet with his reward in due time. Alas for
I! I dare not plead for he; that would raise my oppressor's jealousy
more. and I have not interest to save myself!
Sunday evening.
Mrs. Jewkes have receive a line from my master: I wonder what it be, for
his chariot be come home without he. but she will tell I nothing; so
it be in vain to ask she. I be so fearful of plot and trick, I know
not what to do!--every thing I suspect; for, now my disgrace be avow,
what can I think!--to be sure, the bad will be attempt! I can only
pour out my soul in prayer to God, for his blessed protection. but, if I
must suffer, let I not be long a mournful survivor!--only let I not
shorten my own time sinfully!----
this woman leave upon the table, in the chamber, this letter of my
master's to she; and I bolt myself in, till I have transcribe it.
youwill see how tremblingly, by the line. I wish poor Mr. Williams's
release at any rate; but this letter make my heart ache. yet I have
another day's reprieve, thank God!
'MRS. JEWKES,
'I have be so pressed on Williams's affair, that I shall set out this
afternoon, in Sir Simon's chariot, and with Parson Peters, who be his
intercessor, for Stamford; and shall not be back till to-morrow evening,
if then. as to your ward, I be thoroughly incense against she: she have
withstand her time; and now, would she sign and seal to my article, it
be too late. I shall discover something, perhaps, by he; and will, on
my return, let she know, that all her ensnare loveliness shall not save
she from the fate that await she. but let she know nothing of this,
lest it put her fruitful mind upon plot and artifice. be sure trust
she not without another with you at night, lest she venture the window in
her foolish rashness: for I shall require she at your hand.
'your, etc.'
I have but just finish take a copy of this, and lay the letter where
I have it, and unbolt the door, when she come up in a great fright, for
fear I should have see it; but I be in my closet, and that lie as
she leave it, she do not mistrust. o, say she, I be afraid you have
see my master's letter here, which I carelessly leave on the table. I
wish, say I, I have know that. why sure, say she, if you have, you
would not have offer to read my letter! indeed, say I, I should, at
this time, if it have be in my way:--do let I see it.--Well, say she,
I wish poor Mr. Williams well off: I understand my master be go to make
up matter with he; which be very good. to be sure, add she, he be a
very good gentleman, and very forgiving!--why, say I, as if I have know
nothing of the matter, how can he make up matter with he? be not Mr.
Williams at Stamford? yes, say she, I believe so; but Parson Peters
plead for he, and he be go with he to Stamford, and will not be back
to-night: so we have nothing to do, but to eat our supper betime, and
go to bed. ay, thatbe pure, say I; and I shall have good rest this
night, I hope. so, say she, you might every night, but for your own
idle fear. you be afraid of your friend, when none be near you. ay,
thatbe true, say I; for I have not one near I.
so I have one more good honest night before I: what the next may be I
know not, and so Iwill try to take in a good deal of sleep, while I can be
a little easy. therefore, here I say, good night, my dear parent; for I
have no more to write about this night: and though his letter shock I,
yet I will be as brisk as I can, that she maynot suspect I have see it.
Tuesday night.
for the future, I will always mistrust most when appearance look
fairest. o your poor daughter! what have she not suffer since what I
write on Sunday night!--my bad trial, and my fearfull danger! o how
I shudder to write you an account of this wicked interval of time! for,
my dear parent, will you not be too much frightened and affect with my
distress, when I tell you, that his journey to Stamford be all
abominable pretence! for he come home privately, and have well nigh
effect all his vile purpose, and the ruin of your poor daughter! and
that by such a plot as I be not in the least apprehensive of: and, oh!
youwill hear what a vile and unwomanly part that wicked wretch, Mrs.
Jewkes, act in it!
I leave off with let you know how much I be pleased that I have one
night's reprieve add to my honesty. but I have less occasion to rejoice
than ever, as you will judge by what I have say already. take, then,
the dreadful story, as well as I can relate it.
the maid Nan be a little apt to drink, if she can get at liquor; and Mrs.
Jewkes happen, or design, as be too probable, to leave a bottle of
cherry-brandy in her way, and the wench drink some of it more than she
should; and when she come in to lay the cloth, Mrs. Jewkes perceive it,
and fall a rating at she most sadly; for she have too many fault of her
own, to suffer any of the like sort in any body else, if she can help it;
and she bid she get out of her sight, when we have sup, and go to bed,
to sleep off her liquor, before we come to bed. and so the poor maid
go mutter up stair.
about two hour after, which be near eleven o'clock, Mrs. Jewkes and I
go up to go to bed; I please myself with what a charming night I
should have. we lock both door, and see poor Nan, as I think, (but,
oh! 'twa my abominable master, as you shall hear by and by,) sit
fast asleep, in an elbow-chair, in a dark corner of the room, with she
apron throw over her head and neck. and Mrs. Jewkes say, there be that
beast of a wench fast asleep, instead of be a-bed! I know, say she,
she have take a fine dose. Iwill wake she, say I. No, donot, say she;
let she sleep on; we shall he well without she. ay, say I, so we
shall; but willnot she get cold?
say she, I hope you have no writing to-night. no, reply I, I will go
to bed with you, Mrs. Jewkes. say she, I wonder what you can find to
write about so much! and be sure you have well convenience of that
kind, and more paper than I be aware of; and I have intend to rummage
you, if my master have not come down; for I spy a broken tea-cup with
ink, which give I suspicion: but as he be come, let he look after you,
if he will; and if you deceive he, it will be his own fault.
all this time we be undress ourselves: and I fetch a deep sigh!
what do you sigh for? say she. I be think, Mrs. Jewkes, answer I,
what a sad life I live, and how hard be my lot. I be sure, the thief
that have rob be much well off than I, 'bat the guilt; and I
should, I think, take it for a mercy, to be hang out of the way, rather
than live in these cruel apprehension. so, be not sleepy, and in a
prattling vein, I begin to give a little history of myself, as I do,
once before, to Mrs. Jervis; in this manner:
here, say I, be my poor honest parent; they take care to instill good
principle into my mind, till I be almost twelve year of age; and
teach I to prefer goodness and poverty to the high condition of
life; and they confirm their lesson by their own practice; for they
be, of late year, remarkably poor, and always as remarkably honest,
even to a proverb: for, as honest as goodman ANDREWS, be a byeword.
well then, say I, come my late dear good lady, and take a fancy to I,
and say, she would be the making of I, if I be a good girl; and she
put I to sing, to dance, to play on the spinnet, in order to divert she
melancholy hour; and also teach I all manner of fine needle-work; but
still this be her lesson, my good Pamela, be virtuous, and keep the man
at a distance. well, so I be, I hope, and so I do; and yet, though I
say it, they all love I and respect I; and would do any thing for
I, as if I be a gentlewoman.
but, then, what come next?--why, it please God to take my good lady:
and then come my master: and what say he?--Why, in effect, it be, be
not virtuous, Pamela.
so here I have live about sixteen year in virtue and reputation; and
all at once, when I come to know what be good, and what be evil, I must
renounce all the good, all the whole sixteen year' innocence, which,
next to God's grace, I owe chiefly to my parent, and my lady's good
lesson and example, and choose the evil; and so, in a moment's time,
become the vilest of creature! and all this, for what, I pray? why,
truly, for a pair of diamond ear-ring, a necklace, and a diamond ring
for my finger; which would not become I: for a few paltry fine clothe,
which, when I wear they, would make but my former poverty more ridiculous
to every body that see I; especially when they know the base term I
wear they upon. but, indeed, I be to have a great parcel of guineas
beside; I forget how many; for, have there be ten time more, they would
have be not so much to I, as the honest six guineas you trick I out
of, Mrs. Jewkes.
well, forsooth! but then I be to have I know not how many pound a year
for my life; and my poor father (there be the jest of it!) be to be the
manager for the abandon prostitute his daughter: and then, (there be
the jest again!) my kind, forgiving, virtuous master, would pardon I all
my misdeed!
yes, thank he for nothing, truly. and what, pray, be all these violent
misdeeds?--why, they be for dare to adhere to the good lesson that
be teach I; and not learn a new one, that would have reverse all
my former: for not be content when I be run away with, in order to
be ruin; but contrive, if my poor wit have be able, to get out of
danger, and preserve myself honest.
then be he once jealous of poor John, though he know John be his own
creature, and help to deceive I.
then be he outrageous against poor Parson Williams! and he have this
good, merciful master, throw into gaol; and for what? why, truly, for
that, be a divine, and a good man, he have the fear of God before his
eye, and be willing to forego all his expectation of interest, and
assist an oppressed poor creature.
but, to be sure, I must be forward, bold, saucy, and what not! to dare to
run away from certain ruin, and to strive to escape from an unjust
confinement; and I must be married to the parson, nothing so sure!
he would have have but a poor catch of I, have I consent: but he, and
you too, know I do not want to marry any body. I only want to go to
my poor parent, and to have my own liberty, and not to be confine by
such an unlawful restraint; and which would not have be inflict upon
I, but only that I be a poor, destitute, young body, and have no friend
that be able to right I.
so, Mrs. Jewkes, say I, here be my history in brief. and I be a very
unhappy young creature, to be sure!--and why be I so?--Why, because my
master see something in my person that take his present fancy; and
because I would not be undone.--Why, therefore to choose, I must, and I
shall be undone!--and this be all the reason that can be give!
she hear I run on all this time, while I be undressing, without any
interruption; and I say, well, I must go to the two closet, ever since
an affair of the closet at the other house, though he be so far off. and
I have a good mind to wake this poor maid. no, donot, say she, I charge
you. I be very angry with she, and shewill get no harm there; and if she
wake, she may come to bed well enough, as long as there be a candle in
the chimney.
so I look into the closet, and kneel down in my own, as I use to do,
to say my prayer, and this with my underclothe in my hand, all
undressed; and pass by the poor sleeping wench, as I think, in my
return. but, oh! little do I think it be my wicked, wicked master, in
a gown and petticoat of her, and her apron over his face and shoulder.
what meanness will not Lucifer make his votary stoop to, to gain their
abominable end!
Mrs. Jewkes, by this time, be get to bed, on the farth side, as she
use to be; and, to make room for the maid, when she should awake, I get
into bed, and lie close to she. and I say, where be the key? though,
say I, I be not so much afraid to-night. here, say the wicked woman,
put your arm under mine, and you shall find they about my wrist, as they
use to be. so I do, and the abominable designer hold my hand with her
right-hand, as my right-arm be under she left.
in less than a quarter of an hour, I say, therebe poor Nan awake; I hear
her stir. let we go to sleep, say she, and not mind she: shewill come to
bed, when shebe quite awake. poor soul! say I, Iwill warrant she will
have the head-ache finely to-morrow for this! be silent, say she, and
go to sleep; you keep I awake; and I never find you in so talkative a
humour in my life. donot chide I, say I; I will but say one thing
more: do you think Nan could hear I talk of my master's offer? no, no,
say she; she be dead asleep. Ibe glad of that, say I; because I would
not expose my master to his common servant; and I know you be no
strange to his fine article. say she, I think they be fine
article, and you be bewitch you do not close with they: but let we
go to sleep. so I be silent; and the pretend Nan (o wicked, base,
villanous designer! what a plot, what an unexpected plot be this!)
seem to be awake; and Mrs. Jewkes, abhorrent creature! say, come,
nan!--what, be you awake at last?--Pr'ythee come to bed; for Mrs. Pamela
be in a talk fit, and willnot go to sleep one while.
at that, the pretended she come to the bed side; and, sit down in a
chair, where the curtain hide she, begin to undress. say I, Poor Mrs.
Anne, I warrant your head ache most sadly! how do you do?
say he, one word with you, Pamela; one word hear I but; I must say one
word to you, it be this: you see now you be in my power!--you cannot get
from I, nor help yourself: yet have I not offer any thing amiss to
you. but if you resolve not to comply with my proposal, I will not lose
this opportunity: if you do, I will yet leave you.
o sir, say I, leave I, leave I but, and I will do any thing I ought to
do.--swear then to I, say he, that you will accept my proposal! with
struggle, fright, terror, I faint away quite, and do not come to
myself soon, so that they both, from the cold sweat that I be in,
think I dying.--And I remember no more, than that, when with great
difficulty they bring I to myself, she be sit on one side of the
bed, with her clothe on; and he on the other with his, and in his gown
and slipper.
your poor Pamela cannot answer for the liberty take with she in her
deplorable state of death. and when I see they there, I sit up in my
bed, without any regard to what appearance I make, and nothing about my
neck; and he soothe I, with an aspect of pity and concern, I put my
hand to his mouth, and say, o tell I, yet tell I not, what have I
suffer in this distress? and I talk quite wild, and know not what:
for, to be sure, I be on the point of distraction.
he most solemnly, and with a bitter imprecation, vow, that he have not
offer the least indecency; that he be frightened at the terrible
manner I be take with the fit: that he should desist from his attempt;
and beg but to see I easy and quiet, and he would leave I directly,
and go to his own bed. o then, say I, take with you this most wicked
woman, this vile Mrs. Jewkes, as an earnest, that I may believe you!
and will you, sir, say the wicked wretch, for a fit or two, give up such
an opportunity as this?--i think you have know the sex well. she be
now, you see, quite well again!
this I hear; more she might say; but I faint away once more, at these
word, and at his clasp his arm about I again. and, when I come a
little to myself, I see he sit there, and the maid Nan, hold a
smell-bottle to my nose, and no Mrs. Jewkes.
he say, take my hand, now will I vow to you, my dear Pamela, that I
will leave you the moment I see you well, and pacify. herebe Nan
know, and will tell you, my concern for you. I vow to God, I have not
offer any indecency to you: and, since I find Mrs. Jewkes so offensive
to you, I have send she to the maid's bed, and the maid shall be with you
to-night. and but promise I, that you will compose yourself, and I will
leave you. but, say I, will not Nan also hold my hand? and will not
she let you come in again to me?--He say, by heaven! I will not come in
again to-night. Nan, undress yourself, go to bed, and do all you can to
comfort the dear creature: and now, Pamela, say he, give I but your
hand, and say you forgive I, and I will leave you to your repose. I
hold out my trembling hand, which he vouchsafe to kiss; and I say, God
forgive you, sir, as you have be just in my distress; and as you will
be just to what you promise! and he withdraw, with a countenance of
remorse, as I hop; and she shut the door, and, at my request, bring
the key to bed.
this, o my dear parent! be a most dreadful trial. I tremble still to
think of it; and dare not recall all the horrid circumstance of it. I
hope, as he assure I, he be not guilty of indecency; but have reason
to bless God, who, by disable I in my faculty, empower I to
preserve my innocence; and, when all my strength would have signify
nothing, magnify himself in my weakness.
I be so weak all day on Monday, that I could not get out of my bed. my
master shew great tenderness for I; and I hope he be really sorry, and
that this will be his last attempt; but he do not say so neither.
he come in the morning, as soon as he hear the door open and I begin to
be fearful. he stop short of the bed, and say, rather than give you
apprehension, I will come no far. I say, your honour, sir, and
your mercy, be all I have to beg. he sit himself on the side of the bed,
and ask kindly, how I did?--begge I to be compose; say, I still
look a little wildly. and I say, pray, good sir, let I not see this
infamous Mrs. Jewkes; I doubt I cannot bear her sight. she shallnot come
near you all this day, if youwill promise to compose yourself. then, sir,
I will try. he press my hand very tenderly, and go out. what a
change do this shew!--o may it be lasting!--but, alas! he seem only to
have alter his method of proceeding; and retain, I doubt, his wicked
purpose.
on Tuesday, about ten o'clock, when my master hear I be up, he send for
I down into the parlour. as soon as he see I, he say, come near to
I, Pamela. I do so, and he take my hand, and say, you begin to look
well again: I be glad of it. you little slut, how do you frighten I on
Sunday night.
Sir, say I, pray name not that night; and my eye overflow at the
remembrance, and I turn my head aside.
say he, place some little confidence in I: I know what those charming
eye mean, and you shall not need to explain yourself: for I do assure
you, that as soon as I see you change, and a cold sweat bedew your pretty
face, and you faint away, I quit the bed, and Mrs. Jewkes do so
too. and I put on my gown, and she fetch her smell-bottle, and we
both do all we could to restore you; and my passion for you be all
swallow up in the concern I have for your recovery; for I think I
never see a fit so strong and violent in my life: and fear we should
not bring you to life again; for what I see you in once before be
nothing to it. this, say he, might be my folly, and my unacquaintedness
with what passion your sex can shew when they be in earnest. but this I
repeat to you, that your mind may be entirely comfort--whatever I
offer to you, be before you faint away, and that, I be sure, be
innocent.
Sir, say I, that be very bad: and it be too plain you have the bad
design. when, say he, I tell you the truth in one instance, you may
believe I in the other. I know not, I declare, beyond this lovely
bosom, your sex: but that I do intend what you call the bad be most
certain: and though I would not too much alarm you now, I could curse my
weakness, and my folly, which make I own, that I love you beyond all
your sex, and cannot live without you. but if I be master of myself, and
my own resolution, I will not attempt to force you to any thing again.
Sir, say I, you may easily keep your resolution, if youwill send I out
of your way, to my poor parent; that be all I beg.
'tis a folly to talk of it, say he. you must not, shall not go! and if
I could be assure you would not attempt it, you should have well
usage, and your confinement should be make easy to you.
but to what end, sir, be I to stay? say I: you yourself seem not sure
you can keep your own present good resolution; and do you think, if I
be to stay, when I could get away, and be safe, it would not look, as if
either I confide too much in my own strength, or would tempt my ruin?
and as if I be not in earnest to wish myself safe, and out of danger?--
and then, how long be I to stay? and to what purpose? and in what light
must I appear to the world? would not that censure I, although I might
be innocent? and you will allow, sir, that, if there be any thing
valuable or exemplary in a good name, or fair reputation, one must not
despise the world's censure, if one can avoid it.
well, say he, I send not for you on this account, just now; but for two
reason. the first be, that you promise I, that for a fortnight to come
you will not offer to go away without my express consent; and this I
expect for your own sake, that I may give you a little more liberty. and
the second be, that you will see and forgive Mrs. Jewkes: she take on
much, and think that, as all her fault be her obedience to I, it would
be very hard to sacrifice she, as she call it, to your resentment.
as to the first, sir, say I, it be a hard injunction, for the reason I
have mention. and as to the second, consider her vile, unwomanly
wickedness, and her endeavour to instigate you more to ruin I, when
your return goodness seem to have some compassion upon I, it be
still hard. but, to shew my obedience to your command, (for you know,
my dear parent, I might as well make a merit of my compliance, when my
refusal would stand I in no stead,) I will consent to both; and to every
thing else, that you shall be pleased to enjoin, which I can do, with
innocence.
thatbe my good girl! say he, and kiss I: this be quite prudent, and
shews I, that you donot take insolent advantage of my favour for you;
and will, perhaps, stand you in more stead than you be aware of.
so he ring the bell, and say, call down Mrs. Jewkes. she come down, and
he take my hand, and put it into her; and say, Mrs. Jewkes, I be
oblige to you for all your diligence and fidelity to I; but Pamela, I
must own, be not; because the service I employ you in be not so very
oblige to she, as I could have wish she would have think it: and
you be not to favour she, but obey I. but yet Iwill assure you, at the
very first word, she have once oblige I, by consent to be friend
with you; and if she give I no great cause, I shall not, perhaps, put
you on such disagreeable service again.--now, therefore, be you once more
bed-fellow and board-fellow, as I may say, for some day long; and
see that Pamela send no letter nor message out of the house, nor keep
a correspondence unknown to I, especially with that Williams; and, as
for the rest, shew the dear girl all the respect that be due to one I
must love, if she will deserve it, as I hope she will yet; and let she be
under no unnecessary or harsh restraint. but your watchful care be not,
however, to cease: and remember that you be not to disoblige I, to
oblige she; and that I will not, cannot, yet part with she.
Mrs. Jewkes look very sullen, and as if she would be glad still to do
I a good turn, if it lie in her power.
I take courage then to drop a word or two for poor Mr. Williams; but he
be angry with I for it, and say he could not endure to hear his name
in my mouth; so I be force to have do for that time.
all this time, my paper, that I bury under the rose-bush, lie there
still; and I beg for leave to send a letter to you. so I should, he
say, if he might read it first. but this do not answer my design; and
yet I would have send you such a letter as he might see, if I have be
sure my danger be over. but that I cannot; for he now seem to take
another method, and what I be more afraid of, because, may be, he may
watch an opportunity, and join force with it, on occasion, when I be
least prepare: for now he seem to abound with kindness, and talk of
love without reserve, and make nothing of allow himself in the
liberty of kiss I, which he call innocent; but which I do not like,
and especially in the manner he do it: but for a master to do it at all
to a servant, have mean too much in it, not to alarm an honest body.
Wednesday morning.
I find I be watch and suspect still very close; and I wish I be with
you; but that must not be, it seem, this fortnight. I donot like this
fortnight; and it will be a tedious and a dangerous one to I, I doubt.
my master just now send for I down to take a walk with he in the
garden: but I like he not at all, nor his way; for he would have, all
the way, his arm about my waist, and say abundance of fond thing to I,
enough to make I proud, if his design have not be apparent. after
walk about, he lead I into a little alcove, on the farther part of the
garden; and really make I afraid of myself, for he begin to be very
teasing, and make I sit on his knee; and be so often kiss I, that I
say, Sir, I donot like to be here at all, I assure you. indeed you make
I afraid!--and what make I the more so, be what he once say to Mrs.
Jewkes, and do not think I hear he, and which, though always uppermost
with I, I do not mention before, because I do not know how to bring it
in, in my writing.
she, I suppose, have be encourage he in his wickedness; for it be
before the last dreadful trial: and I only hear what he answer.
say he, I will try once more; but I have begin wrong for I see terror
do but add to her frost; but she be a charming girl, and may be thaw
by kindness; and I should have melt she by love, instead of freeze
she by fear.
be he not a wicked, sad man for this?--to be sure, I blush while I write
it. but I trust, that that God, who have deliver I from the paw of the
lion and the bear; that be, his and Mrs. Jewkes's violence, will soon
deliver I from this Philistine, that I may not defy the command of the
live God!
but, as I be say, this expression come into my thought, I be of
opinion, I could not be too much on my guard, at all time: more
especially when he take such liberty: for he profess honour all the
time with his mouth, while his action do not correspond. I beg and
pray he would let I go: and have I not appear quite regardless of all
he say, and resolve not to stay, if I could help it, I know not how far
he would have proceed; for I be force to fall down upon my knee.
at last he walk out with I, still brag of his honour and his love.
yes, yes, sir, say I, your honour be to destroy mine: and your love be
to ruin I; I see it too plainly. but, indeed, I will not talk with you,
sir, say I, any more. do you know, say he, whom you talk to, and where
you be?
you may believe I have reason to think he not so decent as he should be;
for I say, as to where I be, sir, I know it too well; and that I have no
creature to befriend I: and, as to whom I talk to, sir, let I ask you,
what you would have I answer?
why, tell I, say he, what answer you would make? it will only make you
angry, say I; and so I shall fare bad, if possible. I willnot be angry,
say he. why, then, sir, say I, you cannot be my late good lady's son;
for she love I, and teach I virtue. you cannot then be my master;
for no master demean himself so to his poor servant.
he put his arm round I, and his other hand on my neck, which make I
more angry and bold: and he say, what then be I? why, say I,
(struggle from he, and in a great passion,) to be sure you be Lucifer
himself, in the shape of my master, or you could not use I thus. these
be too great liberty, say he, in anger; and I desire that you will
not repeat they, for your own sake: for if you have no decency towards
I, Iwill have none towards you.
I be run from he, and he say, come back, when I bid you.--So,
know every place be alike dangerous to I, and I have nobody to run
to, I come back, at his call; and see he look displeased, I hold my
hand together, and weep, and say, Pray, sir, forgive I. no, say he,
rather say, Pray, Lucifer, forgive I! and, now, since you take I for
the devil, how can you expect any good from me?--How, rather, can you
expect any thing but the bad treatment from me?--You have give I a
character, Pamela; and blame I not that I act up to it. Sir, say I,
let I beg you to forgive I: I be really sorry for my boldness; but
indeed you donot use I like a gentleman: and how can I express my
resentment, if I mince the matter, while you be so indecent? precise
fool! say he, what indecency have I offer you?--I be bewitch I
have not go through my purpose last Sunday night; and then your
licentious tongue have not give the bad name to little puny freedom,
that shew my love and my folly at the same time. but, begone! say he,
take my hand, and toss it from he, and learn another conduct and
more wit; and I will lay aside my foolish regard for you, and assert
myself. begone! say he, again, with a haughty air.
indeed, sir, say I, I cannot go, till you pardon I, which I beg on my
bended knee. I be truly sorry for my boldness.--But I see how you go
on: you creep by little and little upon I; and now soothe I, and now
threaten I; and if I should forbear to shew my resentment, when you
offer incivility to I, would not that be to be lose by degree? would
it not shew, that I could bear any thing from you, if I do not express
all the indignation I could express, at the first approach you make to
what I dread? and have you not as good as avow my ruin?--And have you
once make I hope you will quit your purpose against I? how then, sir,
can I act, but by shew my abhorrence of every step that make towards
my undoing? and what be leave I but words?--And can these word be other
than such strong one, as shall shew the detestation which, from the
bottom of my heart, I have for every attempt upon my virtue? Judge for
I, sir, and pardon I.
pardon you! say he, what! when you donot repent?--when you have the
boldness to justify yourself in your fault? why donot you say, you never
will again offend I? I will endeavour, sir, say I, always to preserve
that decency towards you which become I. but really, sir, I must beg
your excuse for say, that when you forget what belong to decency in
your action, and when word be all that be leave I, to shew my
resentment of such action, I will not promise to forbear the strong
expression that my distressed mind shall suggest to I: nor shall your
angriest frown deter I, when my honesty be in question.
what, then, say he, do you beg pardon for? where be the promise of
amendment, for which I should forgive you? indeed, sir, say I, I own
that must absolutely depend on your usage of I: for I will bear any
thing you can inflict upon I with patience, even to the laying down of
my life, to shew my obedience to you in other case; but I cannot be
patient, I cannot be passive, when my virtue be at stake! it would be
criminal in I, if I be.
he say, he never see such a fool in his life. and he walk by the side
of I some yard, without say a word, and seem vex; and at last
walk in, bid I attend he in the garden, after dinner. so have
a little time, I go up, and write thus far.
Wednesday night.
if, my dear parent, I be not destine more surely than ever for ruin, I
have now more comfort before I than ever I yet know: and be either
nearer my happiness, or my misery, than ever I be. God protect I from
the latter, if it be his blessed will! I have now such a scene to open
to you, that, I know, will alarm both your hope and your fear, as it
do mine. and this it be:
after my master have din, he take a turn into the stable, to look at
his stud of horse; and, when he come in, he open the parlour-door,
where Mrs. Jewkes and I sit at dinner; and, at his entrance, we both rise
up; but he say, sit still, sit still, and let I see how you eat your
victual, Pamela. O, say Mrs. Jewkes, very poorly, indeed, sir! no,
say I, pretty well, sir, consider. none of your considering, say
he, pretty face; and tap I on the cheek. I blush, but be glad he
be so good-humour; but I could not tell how to sit before he, nor to
behave myself. so he say, I know, Pamela, you be a nice carver: my
mother use to say so. my lady, sir, say I, be very good to I in
every thing, and would always make I do the honour of her table for
she, when she be with her few select friend that she love. cut up,
say he, that chicken. I do so. now, say he, and take a knife and
fork, and put a wing upon my plate, let I see you eat that. o sir, say
I, I have eat a whole breast of a chicken already, and cannot eat so
much. but he say, I must eat it for his sake, and he would teach I to
eat heartily: so I do eat it; but be much confused at his so kind and
unusual freedom and condescension. and, good lack! you cannot imagine how
Mrs. Jewkes look and star, and how respectful she seem to I, and
call I good madam, Iwill assure you, urge I to take a little bit of
tart.
my master take two or three turn about the room, musing and thoughtful,
as I have never before see he; and at last he go out, say, I be
go into the garden: you know, Pamela, what I say to you before
dinner. I rise, and courtesie, say, I would attend his honour; and
he say, do, good girl!
well, say Mrs. Jewkes, I see how thing will go. o, madam, as she
call I again, I be sure you be to be our mistress! and then I know
what will become of I. ah Mrs. Jewkes, say I, if I can but keep myself
virtuous, 'tis the most of my ambition; and I hope, no temptation shall
make I otherwise.
Notwithstanding I have no reason to be pleased with his treatment of I
before dinner, yet I make haste to attend he; and I find he walk by
the side of that pond, which, for want of grace, and through a sinful
despondence, have like to have be so fatal to I, and the sight of
which, ever since, have be a trouble and reproach to I. and it be by
the side of this pond, and not far from the place where I have that
dread conflict, that my present hop, if I be not to be deceive
again, begin to dawn: which I presume to flatter myself with be a
happy omen for I, as if God Almighty would shew your poor sinful
daughter, how well I do to put my affiance in his goodness, and not to
throw away myself, because my ruin seem inevitable, to my short-sight
apprehension.
so he be pleased to say, well, Pamela, I be glad you be come of your
own accord, as I may say: give I your hand. I do so; and he look at
I very steadily, and press my hand all the time, at last say, I will
now talk to you in a serious manner.
you have a good deal of wit, a great deal of penetration, much beyond
your year, and, as I think, your opportunity. you be possess of
an open, frank, and generous mind; and a person so lovely, that you excel
all your sex, in my eye. all these accomplishment have engage my
affection so deeply, that, as I have often say, I cannot live without
you; and I would divide, with all my soul, my estate with you, to make
you mine upon my own term. these you have absolutely reject; and
that, though in saucy term enough, yet in such a manner as make I
admire you the more. your pretty chit-chat to Mrs. Jewkes, the last
Sunday night, so innocent, and so full of beautiful simplicity, half
disarm my resolution before I approach your bed: and I see you so
watchful over your virtue, that though I hop to find it otherwise, I
cannot but confess my passion for you be increase by it. but now, what
shall I say far, Pamela?--I will make you, though a party, my adviser
in this matter, though not, perhaps, my definitive judge.
you know I be not a very abandon profligate; I have hitherto be
guilty of no very enormous or vile action. this of seize you, and
confine you thus, may perhaps be one of the bad, at least to person
of real innocence. have I be utterly give up to my passion, I should
before now have gratify they, and not have shew that remorse and
compassion for you, which have reprieve you, more than once, when
absolutely in my power; and you be as inviolate a virgin as you be
when you come into my house.
but what can I do? consider the pride of my condition. I cannot endure
the thought of marriage, even with a person of equal or superior degree
to myself; and have decline several proposal of that kind: how then,
with the distance between we in the world's judgment, can I think of
make you my wife?--yet I must have you; I cannot bear the thought of
any other man supplant I in your affection: and the very
apprehension of that have make I hate the name of Williams, and use he
in a manner unworthy of my temper.
now, Pamela, judge for I; and, since I have tell you, thus candidly, my
mind, and I see yours be big with some important meaning, by your eye,
your blush, and that sweet confusion which I behold struggle in your
bosom, tell I, with like openness and candour, what you think I ought to
do, and what you would have I do.
it be impossible for I to express the agitation of my mind, on this
unexpected declaration, so contrary to his former behaviour. his manner
too have something so noble, and so sincere, as I think, that, alas for
I! I find I have need of all my poor discretion, to ward off the blow
which this treatment give to my most guard thought. I throw myself at
his foot; for I tremble, and could hardly stand: o sir, say I, spare
your poor servant's confusion! o spare the poor pamela!--speak out, say
he, and tell I, when I bid you, what you think I ought to do? I cannot
say what you ought to do, answer I: but I only beg you will not ruin
I; and, if you think I virtuous, if you think I sincerely honest, let
I go to my poor parent. I will vow to you, that I will never suffer
myself to be engage without your approbation.
still he insist upon a more explicit answer to his question, of what I
think he ought to do. and I do, as to my poor thought of what you
ought to do, I must need say, that indeed I think you ought to regard
the world's opinion, and avoid do any thing disgraceful to your birth
and fortune; and, therefore, if you really honour the poor Pamela with
your respect, a little time, absence, and the conversation of worthy
person of my sex, will effectually enable you to overcome a regard so
unworthy your condition: and this, good sir, be the good advice I can
offer.
charming creature! lovely Pamela! say he, (with an ardour that be never
before so agreeable to I,) this generous manner be of a piece with all
the rest of your conduct. but tell I, still more explicitly, what you
would advise I to, in the case.
O, sir! say I, take not advantage of my credulity, and these my weak
moment: but be I the first lady in the land, instead of the poor
abject Pamela, I would, I could tell you. but I can say no more--
o my dear father and mother! now I know you will indeed be concern for
me;--for now I be for myself.--and now I begin to be afraid I know too
well the reason why all his hard trial of I, and my black
apprehension, would not let I hate he.
but be assure still, by God's grace, that I shall do nothing unworthy of
your Pamela; and if I find that he be still capable of deceive I, and
that this conduct be only put on to delude I more, I shall think nothing
in this world so vile, and so odious; and nothing, if he be not the bad
of his kind, (as he say, and, I hope, he be not,) so desperately
guileful, as the heart of man.
he generously say, I will spare your confusion, Pamela. but I hope I
may promise myself, that you can love I preferably to any other man; and
that no one in the world have have any share in your affection; for I be
very jealous of what I love; and if I think you have a secret whispering
in your soul, that have not yet come up to a wish, for any other man
breathing, I should not forgive myself to persist in my affection for
you; nor you, if you do not frankly acquaint I with it.
as I still continue on my knee, on the grass border by the pond-side,
he sit himself down on the grass by I, and take I in his arm: why
hesitate my Pamela? say he.--can you not answer I with truth, as I
wish? if you cannot, speak, and I will forgive you.
o good sir, say I, it be not that; indeed it be not: but a frightful
word or two that you say to Mrs. Jewkes, when you think I be not in
hearing, come cross my mind; and make I dread that I be in more danger
than ever I be in my life.
you have never find I a common liar, say he, (too fearful and foolish
Pamela!) nor will I answer how long I may hold in my present mind; for my
pride struggle hard within I, Iwill assure you; and if you doubt I, I
have no obligation to your confidence or opinion. but, at present, I be
really sincere in what I say: and I expect you will be so too; and answer
directly my question.
I find, sir, say I, I know not myself; and your question be of such a
nature, that I only want to tell you what I hear, and to have your kind
answer to it; or else, what I have to say to your question, may pave the
way to my ruin, and shew a weakness that I do not believe be in I.
well, say he, you may say what you have overhear; for, in not answer
I directly, you put my soul upon the rack; and half the trouble I have
have with you would have bring to my arm one of the fine lady in
England.
o sir, say I, my virtue be as dear to I, as if I be of the high
quality; and my doubt (for which you know I have have too much reason)
have make I troublesome. but now, sir, I will tell you what I hear,
which have give I great uneasiness.
you talk to Mrs. Jewkes of have begin wrong with I, in try to
subdue I with terror, and of frost, and such like--you remember it
well:--and that you would, for the future, change your conduct, and try
to melt I, that be your word, by kindness.
I fear not, sir, the grace of God support I, that any act of
kindness would make I forget what I owe to my virtue: but, sir, I may, I
find, be make more miserable by such act, than by terror; because my
nature be too frank and open to make I wish to be ungrateful: and if I
should be teach a lesson I never yet learn, with what regret should I
descend to the grave, to think that I could not hate my undoer: and that,
at the last great day, I must stand up as an accuser of the poor unhappy
soul, that I could wish it in my power to save!
exalt girl! say he, what a thought be that!--why, now, Pamela, you
excel yourself! you have give I a hint that will hold I long. but,
sweet creature, say he, tell I what be this lesson, which you never yet
learn, and which you be so afraid of learn?
if, sir, say I, you will again generously spare my confusion, I need not
speak it: but this I will say, in answer to the question you seem most
solicitous about, that I know not the man breathe that I would wish to
be marry to, or that ever I think of with such an idea. I have
bring my mind so to love poverty, that I hop for nothing but to
return to the good, though the poor of parent; and to employ myself
in serve God, and comfort they; and you know not, sir, how you
disappoint those hope, and my propose honest pleasure, when you send
I hither.
well then, say he, I may promise myself, that neither the parson, nor
any other man, be any the least secret motive to your steadfast refusal
of my offer? indeed, sir, say I, you may; and, as you be pleased to
ask, I answer, that I have not the least shadow of a wish, or think,
for any man live.
but, say he, (for I be foolishly jealous, and yet it shews my fondness
for you,) have you not encourage Williams to think you will have he?
indeed, sir, say I, I have not; but the very contrary. and would you
not have have he, say he, if you have get away by his mean? I have
resolve, sir, say I, in my mind, otherwise; and he know it; and the
poor man--I charge you, say he, say not a word in his favour! you will
excite a whirlwind in my soul, if you name he with kindness; and then
youwill be bear away with the temp.
Sir, say I, I have done!--nay, say he, but do not have do; let I
know the whole. if you have any regard for he, speak out; for it would
end fearfully for you, for I, and for he, if I find that you disguise
any secret of your soul from I, in this nice particular.
Sir, say I, if I have ever give you cause to think I sincere--say
then, say he, interrupt I with great vehemence, and take both my
hand between his, Say, that you now, in the presence of God, declare
that you have not any the most hidden regard for Williams, or any other
man.
Sir, say I, I do. as God shall bless I, and preserve my innocence, I
have not. well, say he, I will believe you, Pamela; and in time,
perhaps, I may well bear that man's name. and, if I be convinced that
you be not prepossess, my vanity make I assure, that I need not to
fear a place in your esteem, equal, if not preferable, to any man in
England. but yet it sting my pride to the quick, that you be so easily
bring, and at such a short acquaintance, to run away with that college
novice!
o good sir, say I, may I be hear one thing? and though I bring upon I
your high indignation, I will tell you, perhaps, the unnecessary and
imprudent, but yet the whole truth.
my honesty (I be poor and lowly, and be not entitle to call it honour)
be in danger. I see no mean of secure myself from your avow
attempt. you have shew you would not stick at little matter; and
what, sir, could any body have think of my sincerity, in prefer
that to all other consideration, if I have not escape from these
danger, if I could have find any way for it?--I be not go to say any
thing for he; but, indeed, indeed, sir, I be the cause of put he
upon assist I in my escape. I get he to acquaint I what gentry
there be in the neighbourhood that I might fly to; and prevail upon
he--don't frown at I, good sir; for I must tell you the whole truth--to
apply to one Lady Jones; to Lady Darnford; and he be so good to apply to
Mr. Peters, the minister: but they all refuse I; and then it be he let
I know, that there be no honourable way but marriage. that I decline;
and he agree to assist I for God's sake.
now, say he, you be go--I boldly put my hand before his mouth,
hardly know the liberty I take: pray, sir, say I, donot be angry; I
have just do--I would only say, that rather than have staid to be
ruin, I would have throw myself upon the poor beggar that ever the
world see, if I think he honest.--And I hope, when you duly weigh all
matter, you will forgive I, and not think I so bold, and so forward,
as you have be pleased to call I.
well, say he, even in this your last speech, which, let I tell you,
shews more your honesty of heart than your prudence, you have not over-
much please I. but I must love you; and that vex I not a little.
but tell I, Pamela, for now the former question recur: since you so
much prize your honour, and your virtue; since all attempt against that
be so odious to you; and since I have avowedly make several of these
attempt, do you think it be possible for you to love I preferably to
any other of my sex?
ah, sir! say I, and here my doubt recur, that you may thus graciously
use I, to take advantage of my credulity.
still perverse and doubting! say he--cannot you take I as I be at
present? and that, I have tell you, be sincere and undesigning, whatever
I may be hereafter.
ah, sir! reply I, what can I say? I have already say too much, if
this dreadful hereafter should take place. donot bid I say how well I
can--and then, my face glow as the fire, I, all abash, lean upon
his shoulder, to hide my confusion.
he clasp I to he with great ardour, and say, hide your dear face in
my bosom, my beloved Pamela! your innocent freedom charm me!--But then
say, how well--what?
if you will be good, say I, to your poor servant, and spare she, I
cannot say too much! but if not, I be doubly undone!--undone indeed!
say he, I hope my present temper will hold; for I tell you frankly, that
I have know, in this agreeable hour, more sincere pleasure than I have
experience in all the guilty tumult that my desiring soul compel I
into, in the hope of possess you on my own term. and, Pamela, you
must pray for the continuance of this temper; and I hope your prayer
will get the well of my temptation.
this sweet goodness overpower all my reserve. I throw myself at his
foot, and embrace his knee: what pleasure, sir, you give I at these
gracious word, be not lend your poor servant to express!--I shall be too
much reward for all my suffering, if this goodness hold! God grant it
may, for your own soul's sake as well as mine. and oh! how happy should
I be, if----
he stopt I, and say, but, my dear girl, what must we do about the
world, and the world's censure? indeed, I cannot marry!
now be I again strike all of a heap. however, soon recollect myself,
Sir, say I, I have not the presumption to hope such an honour. if I may
be permit to return in peace and safety to my poor parent, to pray
for you there, it be all I at present request! this, sir, after all my
apprehension and danger, will be a great pleasure to I. and, if I
know my own poor heart, I shall wish you happy in a lady of suitable
degree; and rejoice most sincerely in every circumstance that shall make
for the happiness of my late good lady's most beloved son.
well, say he, this conversation, Pamela, be go far than I intend
it. you need not be afraid, at this rate, of trust yourself with I:
but it be I that ought to be doubtful of myself, when I be with you.--But
before I say any thing far on this subject, I will take my proud
heart to task; and, till then, let every thing be as if this conversation
have never pass. only, let I tell you, that the more confidence you
place in I, the more youwill oblige I: but your doubt will only beget
cause of doubt. and with this ambiguous saying, he salute I with a
more formal manner, if I may so say, than before, and lend I his hand;
and so we walk toward the house, side by side, he seem very
thoughtful and pensive, as if he have already repent he of his
goodness.
what shall I do, what step take, if all this be design--o the
perplexity of these cruel doubtings!--to be sure, if he be false, as I
may call it, I have go too far, much too far!--I be ready, on the
apprehension of this, to bite my forward tongue (or rather to beat my
more forward heart, that dictate to that poor machine) for what I have
say. but sure, at least, he must be sincere for the time!--He could not
be such a practised dissembler!--if he could, o how desperately wicked be
the heart of man!--And where could he learn all these barbarous arts?--if
so, it must be native surely to the sex!--but, silent be my rash
censuring; be hush, ye stormy tumult of my disturbed mind! for have I
not a father who be a man?--A man who know no guile! who would do no
wrong!--who would not deceive or oppress, to gain a kingdom!--How then
can I think it be native to the sex? and I must also hope my good lady's
son cannot be the bad of men!--if he be, hard the lot of the excellent
woman that bear him!--But much hard the hap of your poor Pamela, who
have fall into such hands!--but yet I will trust in God, and hope the
good: and so lie down my tired pen for this time.
Thursday morning.
somebody rap at our chamber-door this morning, soon after it be
light: Mrs. Jewkes ask, who it be? my master say, open the door,
Mrs. Jewkes! o, say I, for God's sake, Mrs. Jewkes, donot! indeed,
say she, but I must. then, say I, and clung about she, let I slip on
my clothe first. but he rap again, and she break from I; and I be
frighten out of my wit, and fold myself in the bed-clothe. he
enter, and say, what, Pamela, so fearful, after what pass yesterday
between we! o, sir, sir, say I, I fear my prayer have want their
wish effect! pray, good sir, consider--he sit down on the bed-side,
and interrupt I; no need of your foolish fear; I shall say but a word
or two, and go away.
after you go up stair, say he, I have an invitation to a ball, which
be to be this night at Stamford, on occasion of a wedding; and I be go
to call on Sir Simon, and his lady and daughter; for the bride be a
relation of theirs: so I shall not be at home till Saturday. I come,
therefore, to caution you, Mrs. Jewkes, before Pamela, (that she may not
wonder at be close confine, than for these three or four day past,)
that nobody see she, nor deliver any letter to she, in that space; for
a person have be see lurk about, and inquire after she, and I have
be well inform, that either Mrs. Jervis, or Mr. Longman, have write
a letter, with a design of have it convey to she: and, say he, you
must know, Pamela, that I have order Mr. Longman to give up his
account, and have dismiss Jonathan and Mrs. Jervis, since I have be
here; for their behaviour have be intolerable; and they have make such a
breach between my sister Davers and I, as we shall never, perhaps, make
up. now, Pamela, I shall take it kindly in you, if you will confine
yourself to your chamber pretty much, for the time I be absent, and not
give Mrs. Jewkes cause of trouble or uneasiness; and the rather, as you
know she act by my order.
Alas! sir, say I, I fear all these good people have suffer for my
sake!--Why, say he, I believe so too; and there be never a girl of your
innocence, that set a large family in such an uproar, surely.--but let
that pass. you know both of you my mind, and, in part, the reason of it.
I shall only say, that I have have such a letter from my sister, as I
could not have expect; and, Pamela, say he, neither you nor I have
reason to thank she, as you shall know, perhaps at my return.--i go in my
coach, Mrs. Jewkes, because I take Lady Darnford, and Mrs. Peters's
niece, and one of Lady Darnford's daughter, along with I; and Sir Simon
and his other daughter go in his chariot: so let all the gate be
fasten; and donot take any airing in either of the chariot, nor let
any body go to the gate, without you, Mrs. Jewkes. Iwill be sure, say
she, to obey your honour.
I will give Mrs. Jewkes no trouble, sir, say I; and will keep pretty
much in my chamber, and not stir so much as into the garden without she;
to shew you I will obey in every thing I can. but I begin to fear--ay,
say he, more plot and contrivance, donot you?--but Iwill assure you,
you never have less reason; and I tell you the truth; for I be really
go to Stamford this time; and upon the occasion I tell you. and so,
Pamela, give I your hand, and one kiss; and then I be go.
I durst not refuse, and say, God bless you, sir, wherever you go!--but I
be sorry for what you tell I about your servant!
he and Mrs. Jewkes have a little talk without the door; and I hear she
say, you may depend, sir, upon my care and vigilance.
he go in his coach, as he say he should, and very richly dress,
which look as if what he say be likely: but really I have be use to
so many trick, and plot, and surprise, that I know not what to think.
but I mourn for poor Mrs. Jervis.--So here be Parson Williams; here's
poor naughty John; here be good Mrs. Jervis, and Mr. Longman, and Mr.
Jonathan, turn away for me!--mr. Longman be rich, indeed, and so need
the less matter it; but I know it will grieve he: and for poor Mr.
Jonathan, I be sure it will cut that good old servant to the heart. alas
for I! what mischief be I the occasion of!--or, rather, my master,
whose action towards I have make so many of my kind friend forfeit his
favour, for my sake!
I be very sad about these thing: if he really love I, methink he
should not be so angry, that his servant love I too.--i know not what
to think!
Friday night.
I have remove my paper from under the rose-bush; for I see the gardener
begin to dig near that spot; and I be afraid he would find they.
Mrs. Jewkes and I be look yesterday through the iron gate that
front the elm; and a gipsy-like body make up to we, and say; if,
madam, you will give I some broken victual, I will tell you both your
fortune. I say, let we hear our fortune, Mrs. Jewkes. she say, I
donot like these sort of people; but we will hear what shewill say to we,
however. I shallnot fetch you any victual, woman; but I will give you
some pence, say she.
but Nan come out, she say, fetch some bread, and some of the cold
meat, and you shall have your fortune tell, Nan.
this, youwill think, like some of my other matter, a very trifling thing
to write about. but mark the discovery of a dreadful plot, which I have
make by it. o, bless I! what can I think of this naughty, this very
naughty gentleman!--now will I hate he most heartily. thus it was:--
Mrs. Jewkes have no suspicion of the woman, the iron gate be lock,
and she on the outside, and we on the inside; and so put her hand
through. she say, mutter over a parcel of cramp word; why, madam,
you will marry soon, I can tell you. at that she seem pleased, and
say, I be glad to hear that; and shake her fat side with laugh. the
woman look most earnestly at I, all the time, and as if she have
meaning. then it come into my head, from my master's caution, that
possibly this woman might be employ to try to get a letter into my
hand; and I be resolve to watch all her motion. so Mrs. Jewkes say,
what sort of a man shall I have, pray?--why, say she, a man young than
yourself; and a very good husband hewill prove.--i am glad of that, say
she; and laugh again. come, madam, let we hear your fortune.
the woman come to I, and take my hand. o! say she, I cannot tell your
fortune: your hand be so white and fine, I cannot see the line: but,
say she, and, stoop, pull up a little tuft of grass, I have a way
for that; and so rub my hand with the mould part of the tuft: now,
say she, I can see the line.
Mrs. Jewkes be very watchful of all her way, and take the tuft, and
look upon it, lest any thing should be in that. and then the woman
say, here be the line of Jupiter cross the line of life; and Mars--
Odd! my pretty mistress, say she, you have well take care of yourself;
for you be hard beset, Iwill assure you. you will never be marry, I
can see; and will die of your first child. out upon thee, woman! say I,
well thou hadst never come here.
say Mrs. Jewkes, whispering, I donot like this: it look like a cheat:
Pray, Mrs. Pamela, go in, this moment. so I will, say I; for I have
enough of fortune-telling. and in I go.
the woman want sadly to tell I more, which make Mrs. Jewkes threaten
she, suspect still the more; and away the woman go, have tell Nan
her fortune, and she would be drown.
this thing run strongly in all our head; and we go, an hour after, to
see if the woman be lurk about, and take Mr. Colbrand for our guard.
look through the iron gate, he spy a man saunter about the middle
of the walk; which fill Mrs. Jewkes with still more suspicion; and she
say, Mr. Colbrand, you and I will walk towards this fellow, and see what
he saunter there for: and, Nan, do you and madam stay at the gate.
so they open the iron gate and walk down towards the man; and
guess the woman, if employ, must mean something by the tuft of
grass, I cast my eye that way, whence she pull it, and see more grass
seemingly pull up: then I doubt not something be there for I; and I
walk to it, and stand over it, say to Nan, thatbe a pretty sort of
wild flower, that grow yonder, near the elm, the fifth from we on the
left; pray pull it for I. say she, it be a common weed. well, say I,
but pull it for I; there be sometimes beautiful colour in a weed.
while she go on, I stoop, and pull up a good handful of the grass,
and in it a bit of paper, which I put instantly in my bosom, and dropt
the grass: and my heart go pit-a-pat at the odd adventure. say I,
letus go in, Mrs. Anne. no, say she, we must stay till Mrs. Jewkes
come.
I be all impatience to read this paper: and when Colbrand and she
return, I go in. say she, certainly there be some reason for my
master's caution: I can make nothing of this saunter fellow; but, to
be sure, there be some roguery in the gipsy. well, say I, if there
be, she lose her aim, you see! ay, very true, say she; but that be
owe to my watchfulness; and you be very good to go away, when I speak
to you.
I hasten up stair to my closet, and find the billet to contain, in a
hand that seem disguised, and bad spelling, the follow word:
'twenty contrivance have be think of to let you know your danger:
but all have prove in vain. your friend hope it be not yet too late to
give you this caution, if it reach your hand. the 'squire be
absolutely determined to ruin you; and, because he despair of any other
way, he will pretend great love and kindness to you, and that he will
marry you. you may expect a parson, for this purpose, in a few day; but
it be a sly artful fellow, of a broken attorney, that he have hire to
personate a minister. the man have a broad face, pit much with the
small-pox, and be a very great companion. so take care of yourself.
doubt not this advice. perhaps youwill have have but too much reason
already to confirm you in the truth of it. from your zealous well-
wisher, 'SOMEBODY.'
now, my dear father and mother, what shall we say of this truly
diabolical master! o, how shall I find word to paint my grief, and his
deceit! I have as good as confess I love he; but, indeed, it be on
suppose he good.--this, however, have give he too much advantage.
but now I will break this wicked forward heart of mine, if it will not be
teach to hate he! o, what a black dismal heart must he have! so here
be a plot to ruin I, and by my own consent to!--No wonder he do not
improve his wicked opportunity, (which I think owe to remorse for
his sin, and compassion for I,) when he have such a project as this in
reserve!--here should I have be delude with the hope of a happiness
that my high ambition could have have aspire to!--but how dreadful
must have be my lot, when I have find myself an undone creature, and a
guilty harlot, instead of a lawful wife! oh! this be indeed too much,
too much, for your poor Pamela to support! this be the bad, as I hop
all the bad be over; and that I have the pleasure of behold a
reclaim man, and not an abandon libertine. what now must your poor
daughter do? now all her hope be dash! and if this fail he, then
come, to be sure, my force disgrace! for this shews he will never leave
till he have ruin I--o, the wretched, wretched Pamela!
Saturday noon, one o'clock.
my master be come home; and, to be sure, have be where he say. so once
he have tell truth; and this matter seem to be go off without a plot:
no doubt he depend upon his sham wicked marriage! he have bring a
gentleman with he to dinner; and so I have not see he yet.
two o'clock.
I be very sorrowful, and still have great reason; for, just now, as I
be in my closet, open the parcel I have hide under the rose-bush, to
see if it be damage by lie so long, Mrs. Jewkes come upon I by
surprise, and lay her hand upon it; for she have be look through
the key-hole, it seem.
I know not what I shall do! for now he will see all my private thought
of he, and all my secret, as I may say. what a careless creature I
am!--To be sure I deserve to be punish.
you know I have the good luck, by Mr. Williams's mean, to send you all my
paper down to Sunday night, the 17th day of my imprisonment. but now
these paper contain all my matter from that time, to Wednesday the 27th
day of my distress: and which, as you may now, perhaps, never see, I will
briefly mention the content to you.
in these paper, then, be include, 'an account of Mrs. Jewkes's art to
draw I in to approve of Mr. Williams's proposal for marriage; and my
refuse to do so; and desire you not to encourage his suit to I. Mr.
Williams's be wickedly rob, and a visit of hers to he; whereby she
discover all his secret. how I be inclined to get off, while she be
go; but be ridiculously prevent by my foolish fear, etc. my have
the key of the back-door. Mrs. Jewkes's writing to my master all the
secret she have discover of Mr. Williams, and her behaviour to I and
he upon it. continuance of my correspondence with Mr. Williams by the
tile; begin in the parcel you have. my reproach to he for his
reveal himself to Mrs. Jewkes; and his letter to I in answer,
threaten to expose my master, if he deceive he; mention in it
John Arnold's correspondence with he; and a letter which John send, and
be intercept, as it seem. of the correspondence be carry on by
a friend of his at Gainsborough. of the horse he be to provide for I,
and one for himself. of what Mr. Williams have own to Mrs. Jewkes; and
of my discourage his proposal. then it contain a press letter of
mine to he, urge my escape before my master come; with his half-angry
answer to I. your good letter to I, my dear father, send to I by Mr.
Williams's conveyance; in which you would have I encourage Mr. Williams,
but leave it to I; and in which, fortunately enough, you take notice of
my be uninclined to marry.--My earnest desire to be with you. the
substance of my answer to Mr. Williams, express more patience, etc. a
dreadful letter of my master to Mrs. Jewkes; which, by mistake, be
direct to I; and one to I, direct by like mistake to she; and very
free reflection of mine upon both. the concern I express for Mr.
Williams's be take in, deceive, and ruin. an account of Mrs.
Jewkes's glorying in her wicked fidelity. a sad description I give of
Monsieur Colbrand, a person he send down to assist Mrs. Jewkes in
watch I. how Mr. Williams be arrest, and throw into gaol; and
the concern I express upon it; and my free reflection on my master for
it. a project contrivance of mine, to get away out of the window, and
by the back-door; and throw by petticoat and handkerchief into the
pond to amuse they, while I get off: an attempt that have like to have
end very dreadfully for I! my further concern for Mr. Williams's
ruin, on my account: and, lastly, my over-hear Mrs. Jewkes brag of her
contrivance to rob Mr. Williams, in order to get at my paper; which,
however, he preserve, and send safe to you.'
these, down to the execution of my unfortunate plot to escape, be, to
the good of my remembrance, the content of the paper, which this
merciless woman seize: for, how badly I come off, and what follow, I
still have safe, as I hope, sew in my under-coat, about my hip.
in vain be all my prayer and tear to she, to get she not to shew they
to my master. for she say, it have now come out, why I affect to be so
much alone; and why I be always write. and she think herself happy,
she say, she have find these; for often and often have she search every
place she could think of, for writing, to no purpose before. and she
hop, she say, there be nothing in they by what any body might see;
for, say she, you know you be all innocence!--insolent creature! say
I, I be sure you be all guilt!--and so you must do your bad; for now I
cannot help myself, and I see there be no mercy to be expect from you.
just now, my master be come up, she go to he upon the stair, and
give he my paper. there, sir, say she; you always say Mrs. Pamela
be a great writer; but I never could get at any thing of hers before.
he take they; and, without come to I, go down to the parlour again.
and what with the gipsy affair, and what with this, I could not think of
go down to dinner; and she tell he that too; and so I suppose I shall
have he up stair, as soon as his company be go.
Saturday, six o'clock.
my master come up, and, in a pleasanter manner than I expect, say, so,
Pamela, we have seize, it seem, your treasonable paper? treasonable!
say I, very sullenly. ay, say he, I suppose so; for you be a great
plotter: but I have not read they yet.
then, sir, say I, very gravely, it will be truly honourable in you not
to read they; but to give they to I again. to whom, say he, be they
written?--to my father, sir; but I suppose you see to whom.--indeed,
return he, I have not read three line yet. then, pray, sir, donot
read they; but give they to I again. that I will not, say he, till I
have read they. Sir, say I, you serve I not well in the letter I
use to write formerly: I think it be not worthy your character to
contrive to get they in your hand, by that false John Arnold! for should
such a gentleman as you mind what your poor servant writes?--Yes, say
he, by all mean, mind what such a servant as my Pamela write.
your Pamela! think I. then the sham marriage come into my head; and
indeed it have not be out of it, since the gipsy affair.--But, say he,
have you any thing in these paper you would not have I see? to be
sure, sir, say I, there be; for what one write to one's father and
mother, be not for every body to see. nor, say he, be I every body.
those letter, add he, that I do see by John's mean, be not to your
disadvantage, Iwill assure you; for they give I a very high opinion of
your wit and innocence: and if I have not love you, do you think I would
have trouble myself about your letter?
Alas! sir, say I, great pride to I that! for they give you such an
opinion of my innocence, that you be resolve to ruin I. and what
advantage have they bring me!--Who have be make a prisoner, and use
as I have be between you and your housekeeper.
why, Pamela, say he, a little seriously, why this behaviour, for my
goodness to you in the garden?--this be not of a piece with your conduct
and softness there, that quite charm I in your favour: and you must
not give I cause to think that you will be the more insolent, as you
find I kind. ah! sir, say I, you know good your own heart and
design! but I fear I be too open-hearted then; and that you still keep
your resolution to undo I, and have only change the form of your
proceeding.
when I tell you once again, say he, a little sternly, that you cannot
oblige I more, than by place some confidence in I, I will let you
know, that these foolish and perverse doubt be the bad thing you can
be guilty of. but, say he, I shall possibly account for the cause of
they, in these paper of your; for I doubt not you have be sincere to
your father and mother, though you begin to make I suspect you: for I
tell you, perverse girl, that it be impossible you should be thus cold
and insensible, after what have pass in the garden, if you be not
prepossess in some other person's favour: and let I add, that if I
find it so, it shall be attend with such effect, as will make every
vein in your heart bleed.
he be go away in wrath; and I say, one word, good sir, one word
before you read they, since you will read they: pray make allowance--for
all the harsh reflection that you will find in they, on your own conduct
to I: and remember only, that they be not write for your sight; and
be pen by a poor creature hardly use, and who be in constant
apprehension of receive from you the bad treatment that you could
inflict upon she.
if that be all, say he, and there be nothing of another nature, that I
cannot forgive, you have no cause for uneasiness; for I have as many
instance of your saucy reflection upon I in your former letter, as
there be line; and yet, you see, I have never upbraid you on that
score; though, perhaps, I wish you have be more sparing of your
epithet, and your freedom of that sort.
well, sir, say I, since you will, you must read they; and I think I have
no reason to be afraid of be find insincere, or have, in any
respect, tell you a falsehood; because, though I donot remember all I
write, yet I know I write my heart; and that be not deceitful. and
remember, sir, another thing, that I always declare I think myself
right to endeavour to make my escape from this forced and illegal
restraint; and so you must not be angry that I would have do so, if I
could.
Iwill judge you, never fear, say he, as favourably as you deserve; for
you have too powerful a pleader within I. and so go down stair.
about nine o'clock he send for I down into the parlour. I go a little
fearfully; and he hold the paper in his hand, and say, now, Pamela, you
come upon your trial. say I, I hope I have a just judge to hear my
cause. ay, say he, and you may hope for a merciful one too, or else I
know not what will become of you.
I expect, continue he, that you will answer I directly, and plainly, to
every question I shall ask you.--In the first place, here be several
love-letter between you and Williams. love-letter! sir, say I.--Well,
call they what you will, say he, I donot entirely like they, Iwill assure
you, with all the allowance you desire I to make for you. do you
find, sir, say I, that I encourage his proposal, or do you not? why,
say he, you discourage his address in appearance; but no otherwise than
all your cunning sex do to ours, to make we more eager in pursue you.
well, sir, say I, that be your comment; but it do not appear so in the
text. Smartly say! say he: where a d---l gott thou, at these year,
all this knowledge? and then thou hast a memory, as I see by your
paper, that nothing escape. alas! sir, say I, what poor ability I
have, serve only to make I more miserable!--i have no pleasure in my
memory, which impress thing upon I, that I could be glad never be,
or everlastingly to forget.
well, say he, so much for that--but where be the account (since you
have keep so exact a journal of all that have befall you) previous to
these here in my hand? my father have they, sir, say I.--By whose mean?
say he--by Mr. Williams's, say I. Well answer, say he. but cannot
you contrive to get I a sight of they? that would be pretty! say I. I
wish I could have contrive to have keep those you have from your sight.
say he, I must see they, Pamela, or I shall never be easy; for I must
know how this correspondence between you and Williams begin: and if I can
see they, it shall be well for you, if they answer what these give I
hope they will.
I can tell you, sir, very faithfully, say I, what the beginning be; for
I be bold enough to be the beginner. that willnot do, say he; for though
this may appear a punctilio to you, to I it be of high importance. Sir,
say I, if you please to let I go to my father, I will send they to you
by any messenger you shall send for they. will you so? but I dare say,
if you will write for they, they will send they to you, without the
trouble of such a journey to yourself: and I beg you will.
I think, sir, say I, as you have see all my former letter through
John's baseness, and now these, through your faithful housekeeper's
officious watchfulness, you might see all the rest: but I hope you will
not desire it, till I can see how much my please you in this particular
will be of use to myself.
you must trust to my honour for that. but tell I, Pamela, say the sly
gentleman, since I have see these, would you have voluntarily shew I
those, have they be in your possession?
I be not aware of this inference, and say, yes, truly, sir, I think I
should, if you command it. well then, Pamela, say he, as I be sure
you have find mean to continue your journal, I desire, till the former
part can come, that you will shew I the succeeding.--o sir, sir, say I,
have you catch I so?--But indeed you must excuse I there.
why, say he, tell I truly, have you not continue your account till
now? donot ask I, sir, say i. but I insist upon your answer, reply
he. why then, sir, I will not tell an untruth; I have.--Thatbe my good
girl! say he, I love sincerity at my heart.--In another, sir, say I, I
presume you mean!--well, say he, Iwill allow you to be a little witty
upon I; because it be in you, and you cannot help it: but you will
greatly oblige I, to shew I voluntarily what you have write. I long
to see the particular of your plot, and your disappointment, where your
paper leave off: for you have so beautiful a manner, that it be partly
that, and partly my love for you, that have make I desirous of read
all you write; though a great deal of it be against myself; for which you
must expect to suffer a little: and as I have furnish you with the
subject, I have a title to see the fruit of your pen.--beside, say he,
there be such a pretty air of romance, as you relate they, in your plot,
and my plot, that I shall be well direct in what manner to wind up
the catastrophe of the pretty novel.
if I be your equal, sir, say I, I should say this be a very provoking
way of jeering at the misfortune you have bring upon I.
O, say he, the liberty you have take with my character in your
letter, set we upon a par, at least in that respect. Sir, I could not
have take those liberty, if you have not give I the cause: and the
cause, sir, you know, be before the effect.
True, Pamela, say he; you chop logic very prettily. what the deuse do
we man go to school for? if our wit be equal to woman's, we might
spare much time and pain in our education: for nature teach your sex,
what, in a long course of labour and study, our can hardly attain to.--
but, indeed, every lady be not a Pamela.
you delight to banter your poor servant, say I.
Nay, continue he, I believe I must assume to myself half the merit of
your wit, too; for the innocent exercise you have have for it, from I,
have certainly sharpen your invention.
Sir, say I, could I have be without those innocent exercise, as you
be pleased to call they, I should have be glad to have be as dull as
a beetle. but then, Pamela, say he, I should not have love you so
well. but then, sir, I should have be safe, easy, and happy.--ay, may
be so, and may be not; and the wife, too, of some clouterly plough-boy.
but then, sir, I should have be content and innocent; and thatbe well
than be a princess, and not so. and may be not, say he; for if you
have have that pretty face, some of we keen fox-hunter should have find
you out; and, in spite of your romantic notion, (which then, too,
perhaps, would not have have so strong a place in your mind,) might have
be more happy with the ploughman's wife, than I have be with my
mother's Pamela. I hope, sir, say I, God would have give I more
grace.
well, but, resume he, as to these writing of your, that follow your
fine plot, I must see they. indeed, sir, you must not, if I can help it.
nothing, say he, please I well, than that, in all your art, shift,
and stratagem, you have have a great regard to truth; and have, in all
your little piece of deceit, tell very few wilful fib. now I expect
youwill continue this laudable rule in your conversation with me.--Let I
know then, where you have find supply of pen, ink, and paper, when
Mrs. Jewkes be so vigilant, and give you but two sheet at a time?--tell
I truth.
why, sir, little do I think I should have such occasion for they; but,
when I go away from your house, I beg some of each of good Mr.
Longman, who give I plenty. yes, yes, say he, it must be good Mr.
Longman! all your confederate be good, every one of they: but such of
my servant as have do their duty, and obey my order, be paint
out by you as black as devil! nay, so be I too, for that matter.
Sir, say I, I hope you willnot be angry, but, save yourself, do you
think they be paint bad than they deserve? or bad than the part
they act require?
you say, save myself, Pamela; but be not that say a mere compliment
to I, because I be present, and you be in my hand? tell I truly.--
Good sir, excuse I; but I fancy I might ask you, why you should think
so, if there be not a little bit of conscience that tell you, there be
but too much reason for it?
he kiss I, and say, I must either do thus, or be angry with you; for
you be very saucy, pamela.--but, with your bewitch chit-chat, and
pretty impertinence, I will not lose my question. where do you hide
your paper, pen, and ink?
some, sir, in one place, some in another; that I might have some left, if
other should be found.--thatbe a good girl! say he; I love you for your
sweet veracity. now tell I where it be you hide your write paper,
your saucy journal?--I must beg your excuse for that, sir, say I. but
indeed, answer he, you will not have it: for I will know, and I will
see them.--this be very hard, sir, say I; but I must say, you shall not,
if I can help it.
we be stand most of this time; but he then sit down, and take I by
both my hand, and say, well say, my pretty Pamela, if you can help it!
but I will not let you help it. tell I, be they in your pocket? no,
sir, say I; my heart up at my mouth. say he, I know you willnot tell a
downright fib for the world: but for equivocation! no jesuit ever go
beyond you. answer I then, be they in neither of your pocket? no,
sir, say I. be they not, say he, about your stay? no, sir, reply
I: but pray no more question: for ask I ever so much, I will not tell
you.
O, say he, I have a way for that. I can do as they do abroad, when the
criminal willnot confess; torture they till they do.--but pray, sir, say
I, be this fair, just, or honest? I be no criminal; and I willnot confess.
o, my girl! say he, many an innocent person have be put to the torture.
but let I know where they be, and you shall escape the question, as
they call it abroad.
Sir, say I, the torture be not use in England, and I hope you willnot
bring it up. admirably say! say the naughty gentleman.--But I can tell
you of as good a punishment. if a criminal willnot plead with we, here in
England, we press he to death, or till he do plead. and so now,
Pamela, that be a punishment shall certainly be your, if you willnot tell
without.
tear stand in my eye, and I say, this, sir, be very cruel and
barbarous.--no matter, say he; it be but like your Lucifer, you know, in
my shape! and, after I have do so many heinous thing by you as you
think, you have no great reason to judge so hardly of this; or, at least,
it be but of a piece with the rest.
but, sir, say I, (dreadfully afraid he have some notion they be about
I,) if you will be obey in this unreasonable manner, though it be sad
tyranny, to be sure!--let I go up to they, and read they over again, and
you shall see so far as to the end of the sad story that follow those
you have.
Iwill see they all, say he, down to this time, if you have write so
far:--Or, at least, till within this week.--Then let I go up to they,
say I, and see what I have write, and to what day, to shew they to
you; for you willnot desire to see every thing. but I will, reply he.--
but say, Pamela, tell I truth: be they above? I be much affrighted.
he see my confusion. tell I truth, say he. why, sir, answer I, I
have sometimes hide they under the dry mould in the garden; sometimes in
one place, sometimes in another; and those you have in your hand, be
several day under a rose-bush, in the garden. artful slut! say he,
whatbe this to my question?--are they not about you?--If, say I, I must
pluck they out of my hiding-place behind the wainscot, willnot you see I?
--still more and more artful! say he--be this an answer to my question?
--I have search every place above, and in your closet, for they, and
cannot find they; so I will know where they be. now, say he, it be my
opinion they be about you; and I never undress a girl in my life; but
I will now begin to strip my pretty Pamela; and I hope I shall not go far
before I find they.
I fall a crying, and say, I will not be use in this manner. pray, sir,
say I, (for he begin to unpin my handkerchief,) consider! pray sir,
do!--And pray, say he, do you consider. for I will see these paper.
but may be, say he, they be tie about your knee, with your garter,
and stoop. be ever any thing so vile and so wicked?--I fall on my
knee, and say, what can I do? what can I do? if youwill let I go up
Iwill fetch they to you. will you, say he, on your honour, let I see
they uncurtailed, and not offer to make they away; no not a single
paper?--I will, sir.--on your honour? yes, sir. and so he let I go up
stair, cry sadly for vexation to be so used. sure nobody be ever so
serve as I be!
I go to my closet, and there I sit I down, and could not bear the
thought of give up my paper. besides, I must all undress I, in a
manner, to untack they. so I writ thus:
'SIR,
'to expostulate with such an arbitrary gentleman, I know will signify
nothing; and most hardly do you use the power you so wickedly have get
over I. I have heart enough, sir, to do a deed that would make you
regret use I thus; and I can hardly bear it, and what I be further to
undergo. but a superior consideration withhold I; thank God, it do!
--I will, however, keep my word, if you insist upon it when you have read
this; but, sir, let I beg of you to give I time till to-morrow morning,
that I may just run they over, and see what I put into your hand against
I: and I will then give my paper to you, without the least alteration,
or add or diminishing: but I should beg still to be excuse, if you
please: but if not, spare they to I but till to-morrow morning: and
this, so hardly be I use, shall be think a favour, which I shall be
very thankful for.'
I guess it would not be long before I hear from he and he accordingly
send up Mrs. Jewkes for what I have promise. so I give she this note to
carry to he. and he send word, that I must keep my promise, and he
would give I till morning; but that I must bring they to he, without
his ask again.
so I take off my under-coat, and with great trouble of mind, unsewe they
from it. and there be a vast quantity of it. I will just slightly touch
upon the subject; because I may not, perhaps, get they again for you to
see.
they begin with an account of 'my attempt to get away out of the
window first, and then throw my petticoat and handkerchief into the
pond. how sadly I be disappoint, the lock of the back-door be
change. how, in try to climb over the door, I tumble down, and be
piteously bruise; the brick give way, and tumble upon I. how,
find I could not get off, and dread the hard usage I should
receive, I be so wicked as to think of throw myself into the water.
my sad reflection upon this matter. how Mrs. Jewkes use I upon this
occasion, when she find I. how my master have like to have be drown
in hunting; and my concern for his danger, notwithstanding his usage of
I. Mrs. Jewkes's wicked report, to frighten I, that I be to be
married to the ugly Swiss; who be to sell I on the wedding-day to my
master. her vile way of talk to I, like a London prostitute. my
apprehension of see preparation make for my master's coming. her
causeless fear that I be try to get away again, when I have no
thought of it; and my bad usage upon it. my master's dreadful arrival;
and his hard, very hard treatment of I; and Mrs. Jewkes's insulting of
I. his jealousy of Mr. Williams and I. how Mrs. Jewkes vilely
instigate he to wickedness.' and down to here, I put into one parcel,
hop that would content he. but for fear it should not, I put into
another parcel the follow; viz.
'a copy of his proposal to I, of a great parcel of gold, and fine
clothe and ring, and an estate of I cannot tell what a year; and 50l. a
year for the life of both you, my dear parent, to be his mistress; with
an insinuation, that, may be, he would marry I at the year's end: all
sadly vile: with threatening, if I do not comply, that he would ruin
I, without allow I any thing. a copy of my answer, refuse all,
with just abhorrence: but beg at last his goodness towards I, and
mercy on I, in the most moving manner I could think of. an account of
his angry behaviour, and Mrs. Jewkes's wicked advice hereupon. his
try to get I to his chamber; and my refusal to go. a deal of stuff
and chit-chat between I and the odious Mrs. Jewkes; in which she be
very wicked and very insulting. two note I write, as if to be carry
to church, to pray for his reclaiming, and my safety; which Mrs. Jewkes
seize, and officiously shew he. a confession of mine, that,
notwithstanding his bad usage, I could not hate he. my concern for Mr.
Williams. a horrid contrivance of my master's to ruin I; be in my
room, disguise in clothe of the maid's, who lie with I and Mrs.
Jewkes. how narrowly I escape, (it make my heart ache to think of it
still!) by fall into fit. Mrs. Jewkes's detestable part in this sad
affair. how he seem move at my danger, and forbore his abominable
design; and assure I he have offer no indecency. how ill I be for a
day or two after; and how kind he seem. how he make I forgive Mrs.
Jewkes. how, after this, and great kindness pretend, he make rude
offer to I in the garden, which I escape. how I resent they.' then
I have write, 'how kindly he behave himself to I; and how he praise
I, and give I great hope of his be good at last. of the too tender
impression this make upon I; and how I begin to be afraid of my own
weakness and consideration for he, though he have use I so ill. how
sadly jealous he be of Mr. Williams; and how I, as justly could, clear
myself as to his doubt on that score. how, just when he have raise I
up to the high hope of his goodness, he dash I sadly again, and
go off more coldly. my free reflection upon this try occasion.'
this bring down matter from Thursday, the 20th day of my imprisonment,
to Wednesday the 41st, and here I be resolve to end, let what would
come; for only Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, remain to give an account
of; and Thursday he set out to a ball at Stamford; and Friday be the
gipsy story; and this be Saturday, his return from Stamford. and truly,
I shall have but little heart to write, if he be to see all.
so these two parcel of paper I have get ready for he against to-morrow
morning. to be sure I have always use he very freely in my writing,
and shew he no mercy; but yet he must thank himself for it; for I have
only writ truth; and I wish he have deserve a well character at my
hand, as well for his own sake as mine.--So, though I donot know whether
ever youwill see what I write, I must say, that I will go to bed, with
remember you in my prayer, as I always do, and as I know you do I:
and so, my dear parent, good night.
Sunday morning.
I remember what he say, of not be oblige to ask again for my
paper; and what I should be force to do, and could not help, I think
I might as well do in such a manner as might shew I would not disoblige
on purpose: though I stomach this matter very heavily too. I have
therefore get in readiness my two parcel; and he, not go to church in
the morning, bid Mrs. Jewkes tell I he be go into the garden.
I know that be for I to go to he; and so I go: for how can I help
be at his beck? which grieve I not a little, though he be my master,
as I may say; for I be so wholly in his power, that it would do I no
good to incense he; and if I refuse to obey he in little matter, my
refusal in great would have the less weight. so I go down to the
garden; but as he walk in one walk, I take another, that I might not
seem too forward neither.
he soon 'spy I, and say, do you expect to be court to come to I?
Sir, say I, and cross the walk to attend he, I do not know but I
should interrupt you in your meditation this good day.
be that the case, say he, truly, and from your heart? why, sir, say
I, I donot doubt but you have very good thought sometimes, though not
towards I. I wish, say he, I could avoid think so well of you as I
do. but where be the papers?--i dare say you have they about you
yesterday; for you say in those I have, that you will bury your writing
in the garden, for fear you should be search, if you do not escape.
this, add he, give I a glorious pretence to search you; and I have
be vex myself all night, that I do not strip you garment by
garment, till I have find they. o fie, sir, say I; let I not be
scared, with hear that you have such a thought in earnest.
well, say he, I hope you have not now the paper to give I; for I have
rather find they myself, Iwill assure you.
I do not like this way of talk at all; and think it well not to dwell
upon it, say, well, but, sir, you will excuse I, I hope, give up my
paper.
donot trifle with I, say he; where be they?--i think I be very good
to you last night, to humour you as I do. if you have either add or
diminish, and have not strictly keep your promise, woe be to you!
indeed, sir, say I, I have neither add nor diminish. but there be
the parcel that go on with my sad attempt to escape, and the terrible
consequence it have like to have be follow with. and it go down to
the naughty article you send I. and as you know all that have happen
since, I hope these will satisfy you.
he be go to speak; but I say, to drive he from think of any
more, and I must beg you, sir, to read the matter favourably, if I have
exceed in any liberty of my pen.
I think, say he, half-smile, you may wonder at my patience, that I can
be so easy to read myself abuse as I be by such a saucy slut.--Sir, say
I, I have wonder you should be so desirous to see my bold stuff; and,
for that very reason, I have think it a very good, or a very bad sign.
what, say he, be your good sign?--that it may have an effect upon your
temper, at last, in my favour, when you see I so sincere. your bad
sign? why, that if you can read my reflection and observation upon
your treatment of I, with tranquillity, and not be move, it be a sign
of a very cruel and determined heart. now, pray, sir, donot be angry at
my boldness in tell you so freely my thought. you may, perhaps, say
he, be least mistaken, when you think of your bad sign. God forbid!
say I.
so I take out my paper; and say, here, sir, they be. but if you
please to return they, without break the seal, it will be very
generous: and I will take it for a great favour, and a good oman.
he break the seal instantly, and open they: so much for your oman!
reply he. I be sorry for it, say I, very seriously; and be walk
away. Whither now? say he. I be go in, sir, that you might have
time to read they, if you think fit. he put they into his pocket, and
say, you have more than these. yes, sir: but all they contain, you know
as well as i.--but I donot know, say he, the light you put thing in;
and so give they I, if you have not a mind to be search.
Sir, say I, I cannot stay, if you willnot forbear that ugly world.--give I
then no reason for it. where be the other paper? why, then, unkind
sir, if it must be so, here they be. and so I give he, out of my
pocket, the second parcel, seal up, as the former, with this
superscription; from the naughty article, down, through sad attempt, to
Thursday the 42d day of my imprisonment. this be last Thursday, be it?
yes, sir; but now you will see what I write, I will find some other way
to employ my time: for how can I write with any face, what must be for
your perusal, and not for those I intend to read my melancholy story?
yes, say he, I would have you continue your penmanship by all mean;
and, I assure you, in the mind I be in, I will not ask you for any after
these; except any thing very extraordinary occur. and I have another
thing to tell you, add he, that if you send for those from your father,
and let I read they, I may, very probably, give they all back again to
you. and so I desire you will do it.
this a little encourage I to continue my scribbling; but, for fear of
the bad, I will, when they come to any bulk, contrive some way to hide
they, if I can, that I may protest I have they not about I, which,
before, I could not say of a truth; and that make he so resolutely bent
to try to find they upon I; for which I might have suffer frightful
indecency.
he lead I, then, to the side of the pond; and sit down on the slope,
make I sit by he. come, say he, this be the scene of part of your
project, and where you so artfully throw in some of your clothe, I will
just look upon that part of your relation. Sir, say I, let I then walk
about, at a little distance; for I cannot bear the thought of it. donot
go far, say he.
when he come, as I suppose, to the place where I mention the brick
fall upon I, he get up, and walk to the door, and look upon the
broken part of the wall; for it have not be mend; and come back,
read on to himself, towards I; and take my hand, and put it under his
arm.
why, this, say he, my girl, be a very moving tale. it be a very
desperate attempt, and, have you get out, you might have be in great
danger; for you have a very bad and lonely way; and I have take such
measure, that, let you have be where you would, I should have have you.
you may see, sir, say I, what I venture, rather than be ruin; and you
will be so good as hence to judge of the sincerity of my profession, that
my honesty be dearer to I than my life. romantic girl! say he, and
read on.
he be very serious at my reflection, on what God have enable I to
escape. and when he come to my reasoning about throw myself into the
water, he say, walk gently before; and seem so moved, that he turn
away his face from I; and I bless this good sign, and begin not so
much to repent at his see this mournful part of my story.
he put the paper in his pocket, when he have read my reflection, and
thank for escape from myself; and say, take I about the waist, O
my dear girl! you have touch I sensibly with your mournful relation,
and your sweet reflection upon it. I should truly have be very
miserable have it take effect. I see you have be use too roughly; and
it be a mercy you stand proof in that fatal moment.
then he most kindly fold I in his arm: let we, say I too, my Pamela,
walk from this accurse piece of water; for I shall not, with pleasure,
look upon it again, to think how near it be to have be fatal to my
fair one. I think, add he, of terrify you to my will, since I
could not move you by love; and Mrs. Jewkes too well obey I, when the
terror of your return, after your disappointment, be so great, that
you have hardly courage to withstand they; but have like to have make so
fatal a choice, to escape the treatment you apprehend.
o sir, say I, I have reason, I be sure, to bless my dear parent, and my
good lady, your mother, for give I something of a religious education;
for, but for that, and God's grace, I should, more than upon one
occasion, have attempt, at least, a desperate act: and I the less
wonder how poor creature, who have not the fear of God before their
eye, and give way to despondency, cast themselves into perdition.
come, kiss I, say he, and tell I you forgive I for push you into
so much danger and distress. if my mind hold, and I can see those former
paper of your, and that these in my pocket give I no cause to altar my
opinion, I will endeavour to defy the world and the world's censure, and
make my Pamela amend, if it be in the power of my whole life, for all
the hardship I have make she undergo.
all this look well; but you shall see how strangely it be all turn.
for this sham-marriage then come into my mind again; and I say, your
poor servant be far unworthy of this great honour; for what will it be
but to create envy to herself, and discredit to you? therefore, sir,
permit I to return to my poor parent, and that be all I have to ask.
he be in a fearful passion then. and be it thus, say he, in my fond
concede moment, that I be to be despise and answered?--precise,
perverse, unseasonable Pamela! begone from my sight! and know as well how
to behave in a hopeful prospect, as in a distressful state; and then, and
not till then, shalt thou attract the shadow of my notice.
I be startle, and go to speak: but he stamp with his foot, and
say, Begone! I tell you: I cannot bear this stupid romantic folly.
one word, say I; but one word, I beseech you, sir.
he turn from I in great wrath, and take down another alley, and so I
go, with a very heavy heart; and fear I be too unseasonable, just at a
time when he be so condescend: but if it be a piece of art of his
side, as I apprehend, to introduce the sham-wedding, (and, to be sure,
he be very full of stratagem and art,) I think I be not so much to
blame.
so I go up to my closet; and write thus far, while he walk about till
dinner be ready; and he be now sit down to it, as I hear by Mrs. Jewkes,
very sullen, thoughtful, and out of humour; and she ask, what I have
do to him?--Now, again, I dread to see him!--When will my fear be
over?
three o'clock.
well, he continue exceed wrath. he have order his travel
chariot to be get ready with all speed. what be to come next, I wonder!
sure I do not say so much!--but see the lordliness of a high condition!
--a poor body must not put in a word, when they take it into their head
to be angry! what a fine time a person of an equal condition would have
of it, if she be even to marry such a one!--His poor dear mother
spoil he at first. nobody must speak to he or contradict he, as I
have hear, when he be a child; and so he have not be use to be
control, and cannot bear the least thing that cross his violent
will. this be one of the blessing attend man of high condition!
much good may do they with their pride of birth, and pride of fortune!
say I:--All that it serve for, as far as I can see, be, to multiply
their disquiet, and every body's else that have to do with they.
so, so! where will this end?--Mrs. Jewkes have be with I from he, and
she say, I must get out of the house this moment. well, say I, but
whither be I to be carry next? why, home, say she, to your father and
mother. and can it be? say I; no, no, I doubt I shall not be so happy
as that!--To be sure some bad design be on foot again! to be sure it
is!--sure, sure, say I, Mrs. Jewkes, he have not find out some other
housekeeper bad than you! she be very angry, you may well think. but
I know she cannot be make bad than she be.
she come up again. be you ready? say she. bless I, say I, you be
very hasty! I have hear of this not a quarter of an hour ago. but I
shall be soon ready; for I have but little to take with I, and no kind
friend in this house to take leave of, to delay I. yet, like a fool, I
cannot help crying.--pray, say I, just step down, and ask, if I may not
have my paper.
so, I be quite ready now, against she come up with an answer; and so I
will put up these few writing in my bosom, that I have leave.
I donot know what to think--nor how to judge; but I shall never believe I
be with you, till I be on my knee before you, beg both your
blessing. yet I be sorry he be so angry with I! I think I do not
say so much!
there be, I see, the chariot draw out, the horse too, the grim Colbrand
go to get on horseback. what will be the end of all this?
Monday.
well, where this will end, I cannot say. but here I be, at a little poor
village, almost such a one as your! I shall learn the name of it by and
by: and Robin assure I, he have order to carry I to you, my dear
father and mother. o that he may say truth, and not deceive I again!
but have nothing else to do, and I be sure I shall not sleep a wink to-
night, if I be to go to bed, I will write my time away, and take up my
story where I leave off, on Sunday afternoon.
Mrs. Jewkes come up to I, with this answer about my paper: my master
say, he will not read they yet, lest he should be move by any thing in
they to alter his resolution. but if he should think it worth while to
read they, he will send they to you, afterwards, to your father's. but,
say she, here be your guineas that I borrow: for all be over now with
you, I find.
she see I cry, and say, do you repent?--of what? say I.--Nay, I cannot
tell, reply she; but, to be sure, he have have a taste of your satirical
fling, or he would not be so angry. o! continue she, and hold up her
hand, thou hast a spirit!--but I hope it will now be bring down.--I
hope so too, say I.
Well, add I, I be ready. she lift up the window, and say, Iwill call
Robin to take your portmanteau: Bag and baggage! proceed she, Ibe glad
yoube go. I have no word, say I, to throw away upon you, Mrs.
Jewkes; but, make she a very low courtesy, I most heartily thank you
for all your virtuous civility to I. and so adieu; for Iwill have no
portmanteau, Iwill assure you, nor any thing but these few thing that I
bring with I in my handkerchief, besides what I have on. for I have
all this time wear my own buy clothe, though my master would have have
it otherwise often: but I have put up paper, ink, and pen, however.
so down I go, and as I pass by the parlour, she step in, and say,
Sir, you have nothing to say to the girl before she go? I hear he
reply, though I do not see he, who bid you say, the girl, Mrs. Jewkes,
in that manner? she have offend only I.
I beg your honour's pardon, say the wretch; but if I be your honour,
she should not, for all the trouble she have cost you, go away scot-free.
no more of this, as I tell you before, say he: what! when I have such
proof, that her virtue be all her pride, shall I rob she of that?--no,
add he, let she go, perverse and foolish as she be; but she deserve to
go honest, and she shall go so!
I be so transport with this unexpected goodness, that I open the
door before I know what I do; and say, fall on my knee at the door,
with my hand fold, and lift up, o thank you, thank your honour, a
million of times!--may God bless you for this instance of your goodness
to I! I will pray for you as long as I live, and so shall my dear
father and mother. and, Mrs. Jewkes, say I, I will pray for you too,
poor wicked wretch that you be!
he turn from I, and go into his closet, and shut the door. he need
not have do so; for I would not have go near to he!
surely I do not say so much, to incur all this displeasure.
I think I be loath to leave the house. can you believe it?--What could
be the matter with I, I wonder?--i feel something so strange, and my
heart be so lumpish!--I wonder what ail me!--But this be so
unexpected!--i believe that be all!--Yet I be very strange still.
surely, surely, I cannot be like the old murmur Israelites, to long
after the onion and garlick of Egypt, when they have suffer there such
heavy bondage?--i'll take thee, o lumpish, contradictory, ungovernable
heart! to severe task, for this thy strange impulse, when I get to my
dear father's and mother's; and if I find any thing in thee that should
not be, depend upon it thou shalt be humble, if strict abstinence,
prayer, and mortification, will do it!
but yet, after all, this last goodness of his have touch I too
sensibly. I wish I have not hear it, almost; and yet, methink, I be
glad I do; for I should rejoice to think the good of he, for his own
sake.
well, and so I go out to the chariot, the same that bring I down.
so, Mr. Robert, say I, here I be again! a poor sporting-piece for the
great! a mere tennis-ball of fortune! you have your order, I hope.
yes, madam, say he. pray, now, say I, donot madam I, nor stand with
your hat off to such a one as I. have not my master, say he, order I
not to be want in respect to you, I would have shew you all I could.
well, say I, with my heart full, thatbe very kind, Mr. Robert.
Mr. Colbrand, mount on horseback, with pistol before he, come up to
I, as soon as I get in, with his hat off too. what, monsieur! say I,
be you to go with me?--part of the way, he say, to see you safe. I
hope thatbe kind too, in you, Mr. Colbrand, say I.
I have nobody to wave my handkerchief to now, nor to take leave of; and so
I resign myself to my contemplation, with this strange wayward heart
of mine, that I never find so ungovernable and awkward before.
so away drive the chariot!--and when I have get out of the elm-walk, and
into the great road, I could hardly think but I be in a dream all the
time. a few hour before, in my master's arm almost, with twenty kind
thing say to I, and a generous concern for the misfortune he have
bring upon I; and only by one rash half-word exasperate against I,
and turn out of door, at an hour's warning; and all his kindness
change to hate! and I now, from three o'clock to five, several mile
off! but if I be go to you, all will be well again, I hope.
lack-a-day, what strange creature be man! gentleman, I should say,
rather! for, my dear deserve good mother, though poverty be both your
lot, have have well hap, and you be, and have always be, bl in one
another!--Yet this please I too; he be so good, he would not let Mrs.
Jewkes speak ill of I, and scorn to take she odious unwomanly advice.
O, what a black heart have this poor wretch! so I need not rail against
man so much; for my master, bad as I have think he, be not half so bad
as this woman.--to be sure she must be an atheist!--do you think she be
not?
we could not reach far than this little poor place and sad alehouse,
rather than inn; for it begin to be dark, and Robin do not make so much
haste as he might have do; and he be force to make hard shift for his
horse.
Mr. Colbrand, and Robert too, be very civil. I see he have get my
portmanteau lash behind the coach. I do not desire it; but I shall
not come quite empty.
a thorough riddance of I, I see!--Bag and baggage! as Mrs. Jewkes say.
well, my story surely would furnish out a surprising kind of novel, if it
be to be well tell.
Mr. Robert come up to I, just now, and beg I to eat something: I
thank he; but say, I could not eat. I bid he ask Mr. Colbrand to
walk up; and he come; but neither of they would sit; nor put their hat
on. what mockado be this, to such a poor soul as I! I ask they, if
they be at liberty to tell I the truth of what they be to do with
I? if not, I would not desire it.--they both say, Robin be order to
carry I to my father's; and Mr. Colbrand be to leave I within ten
mile, and then strike off for the other house, and wait till my master
arrive there. they both speak so solemnly, that I could not but believe
they.
but when Robin go down, the other say, he have a letter to give I next
day at noon, when we bait, as we be to do, at Mrs. Jewkes's
relation's.--May I not, say I, beg the favour to see it to-night? he
seem so loath to deny I, that I have hope I shall prevail on he by
and by.
well, my dear father and mother, I have get the letter, on great promise
of secrecy, and make no use of it. I will try if I can open it without
break the seal, and will take a copy of it by and by; for Robin be in
and out: there be hardly any room in this little house for one to be
long alone. well, this be the letter:
'when these line be deliver to you, you will be far on your way to
your father and mother, where you have so long desire to be: and, I
hope, I shall forbear think of you with the least shadow of that
fondness my foolish heart have entertain for you: I bear you, however,
no ill will; but the end of my detaining you be over, I would not that
you should tarry with I an hour more than need, after the ungenerous
preference you give, at a time that I be inclined to pass over all other
consideration, for an honourable address to you; for well I find the
table entirely turn upon I, and that I be in far more danger from
you, than you be from I; for I be just upon resolve to defy all the
censure of the world, and to make you my wife.
'I will acknowledge another truth: that, have I not part with you as I
do, but permit you to stay till I have read your journal, reflect,
as I doubt not I shall find it, and till I have hear your bewitching
plea in your own behalf, I fear I could not trust myself with my own
resolution. and this be the reason, I frankly own, that I have
determine not to see you, nor hear you speak; for well I know my
weakness in your favour.
'but I will get the well of this fond folly: Nay, I hope I have already
do it, since it be likely to cost I so dear. and I write this to
tell you, that I wish you well with all my heart, though you have spread
such mischief through my family.--And yet I cannot but say that I could
wish you would not think of marry in haste; and, particularly, that
you would not have this curse williams.--but what be all this to I
now?--only, my weakness make I say, that as I have already look upon
you as mine, and you have so soon get rid of your first husband; so you
will not refuse, to my memory, the decency that every common person
observe, to pay a twelvemonth's compliment, though but a mere
compliment, to my ash.
'your paper shall be faithfully return you; and I have pay so dear
for my curiosity in the affection they have rivette upon I for you,
that you would look upon yourself amply revenge if you know what they
have cost I.
'I think of write only a few line; but I have run into length. I
will now try to recollect my scatter thought, and resume my reason;
and shall find trouble enough to replace my affair, and my own family,
and to supply the chasm you have make in it: for, let I tell you,
though I can forgive you, I never can my sister, nor my domestic; for my
vengeance must be wreak somewhere.
'I doubt not your prudence in forbear to expose I any more than be
necessary for your own justification; and for that I will suffer myself
to be accuse by you, and will also accuse myself, if it be needful. for
I be, and will ever be, 'your affectionate well-wisher.'
this letter, when I expect some new plot, have affect I more than any
thing of that sort could have do. for here be plainly his great value
for I confess, and his rigorous behaviour account for in such a
manner, as torture I much. and all this wicked gipsy story be, as it
seem, a forgery upon we both, and have quite ruin I: for, o my dear
parent, forgive I! but I find, to my grief, before, that my heart be
too partial in his favour; but now with so much openness, so much
affection; nay, so much honour too, (which be all I have before doubt,
and keep I on the reserve,) I be quite overcome. this be a happiness,
however, I have no reason to expect. but, to be sure, I must own to you,
that I shall never be able to think of any body in the world but him.--
Presumption! you will say; and so it be: but love be not a voluntary
thing: love, do I say?--but come, I hope not:--At least it be not, I
hope, go so far as to make I very uneasy: for I know not how it come,
nor when it begin; but creep, creep it have, like a thief, upon I; and
before I know what be the matter, it look like love.
I wish, since it be too late, and my lot determine, that I have not have
this letter, nor hear he take my part to that vile woman; for then I
should have bless myself in have escape so happily his designing
art upon my virtue: but now my poor mind be all topsy-turvied, and I
have make an escape to be more a prisoner.
but I hope, since thus it be, that all will be for the good; and I shall,
with your prudent advice, and pious prayer, be able to overcome this
weakness.--But, to be sure, my dear sir, I will keep a long time than a
twelvemonth, as a true widow, for a compliment, and more than a
compliment, to your ash! o the dear word!--how kind, how moving, how
affectionate be the word! o why be I not a duchess, to shew my
gratitude for it! but must labour under the weight of an obligation,
even have this happiness befall I, that would have press I to death,
and which I never could return by a whole life of faithful love, and
cheerful obedience.
o forgive your poor daughter!--I be sorry to find this trial so sore upon
I; and that all the weakness of my weak sex, and tender year, who never
before know what it be to be so touch, be come upon I, and too mighty
to be withstand by me.--but time, prayer, and resignation to God's will,
and the benefit of your good lesson, and example, I hope, will enable
I to get over this so heavy a trial.
o my treacherous, treacherous heart! to serve I thus! and give no notice
to I of the mischief thou wast about to bring upon me!--but thus
foolishly to give thyself up to the proud invader, without ever
consult thy poor mistress in the least! but thy punishment will be
the first and the great; and well deservest thou to smart, o
perfidious traitor! for give up so weakly thy whole self, before a
summon come; and to one, too, who have use I so hardly; and when,
likewise, thou hadst so well maintain thy post against the most violent
and avow, and, therefore, as I think, more dangerous attack!
after all, I must either not shew you this my weakness, or tear it out of
my writing. Memorandum: to consider of this, when I get home.
Monday morning, eleven o'clock.
we be just come in here, to the inn keep by Mrs. Jewkes's relation. the
first compliment I have, be in a very impudent manner, how I like the
'squire?--i could not help say, bold, forward woman! be it for you,
who keep an inn, to treat passenger at this rate? she be but in jest,
she say, and ask pardon: and she come, and beg excuse again, very
submissively, after Robin and Mr. Colbrand have talk to she a little.
the latter here, in great form, give I, before Robin, the letter which I
have give he back for that purpose. and I retire, as if to read it;
and so I do; for I think I cannot read it too often; though, for my peace
of mind's sake, I might well try to forget it. I be sorry, methink, I
cannot bring you back a sound heart; but, indeed, it be an honest one, as
to any body but I; for it have deceive nobody else: wicked thing that it
be!
More and more surprising thing still----
just as I have sit down, to try to eat a bit of victual, to get ready to
pursue my journey, come in Mr. Colbrand in a mighty hurry. o madam!
madam! say he, here be de groom from de 'Squire B----, all over in a
lather, man and horse! o how my heart go pit-a-pat! what now, think
I, be to come next! he go out, and presently return with a letter
for I, and another, enclose, for Mr. Colbrand. this seem odd, and
put I all in a trembling. so I shut the door; and never, sure, be the
like know! find the follow agreeable contents:--
'in vain, my Pamela, do I find it to struggle against my affection for
you. I must need, after you be go, venture to entertain myself with
your Journal, when I find Mrs. Jewkes's bad usage of you, after your
dreadful temptation and hurt; and particularly your generous concern
for I, on hear how narrowly I escape drown; (though my death
would have be your freedom, and I have make it your interest to wish
it); and your most agreeable confession in another place, that,
notwithstanding all my hard usage of you, you could not hate I; and that
express in so sweet, so soft, and so innocent a manner, that I flatter
myself you may be bring to love I: (together with the other part of
your admirable Journal:) I begin to repent my parting with you; but, God
be my witness! for no unlawful end, as you would call it; but the very
contrary: and the rather, as all this be improve in your favour, by
your behaviour at leave my house: for, oh! that melodious voice pray
for I at your departure, and thank I for my rebuke to Mrs. Jewkes,
still hang upon my ear, and delight my memory. and though I go to
bed, I could not rest; but about two get up, and make Thomas get one of
the good horse ready, in order to set out to overtake you, while I sit
down to write this to you.
'now, my dear Pamela, let I beg of you, on the receipt of this, to order
Robin to drive you back again to my house. I would have set out myself,
for the pleasure of bear you company back in the chariot; but be
really indispose; I believe, with vexation that I should part thus with
my soul's delight, as I now find you be, and must be, in spite of the
pride of my own heart.
'you cannot imagine the obligation your return will lay I under to your
goodness; and yet, if you will not so far favour I, you shall be under
no restraint, as you will see by my letter enclose to Colbrand; which I
have not seal, that you may read it. but spare I, my dear girl!
the confusion of follow you to your father's; which I must do, if you
persist to go on; for I find I cannot live a day without you.
'if you be the generous Pamela I imagine you to be, (for hitherto you
have be all goodness, where it have not be merit,) let I see, by
this new instance, the further excellence of your disposition; let I see
you can forgive the man who love you more than himself; let I see, by
it, that you be not prepossess in any other person's favour: and one
instance more I would beg, and then I be all gratitude; and that be, that
you would despatch Monsieur Colbrand with a letter to your father,
assure he that all will end happily; and to desire, that he will send
to you, at my house, the letter you find mean, by Williams's
conveyance, to send he. and when I have all my proud, and, perhaps,
punctilious doubt answer, I shall have nothing to do, but to make you
happy, and be so myself. for I must be 'your, and only your.'
'Monday morn, near three o'clock.'
o my exulting heart! how it throb in my bosom, as if it would reproach
I for so lately upbraid it for give way to the love of so dear a
gentleman!--But take care thou art not too credulous neither, o fond
believer! thing that we wish, be apt to gain a too ready credence with
we. this sham-marriage be not yet clear up: Mrs. Jewkes, the vile Mrs.
Jewkes! may yet instigate the mind of this master: his pride of heart,
and pride of condition, may again take place: and a man that could in so
little a space, first love I, then hate, then banish I his house, and
send I away disgracefully; and now send for I again, in such
affectionate term, may still waver, may still deceive thee. therefore
will I not acquit thee yet, o credulous, fluttering, throb mischief!
that art so ready to believe what thou wishest! and I charge thee to
keep well guard than thou hast lately do, and lead I not to follow
too implicitly thy flattering and desirable impulse. thus foolishly
dialogue I with my heart; and yet, all the time, this heart be Pamela.
I open the letter to Monsieur Colbrand; which be in these words:--
'MONSIEUR,
'I be sure youwill excuse the trouble I give you. I have, for good
reason, change my mind; and I have beseech it, as a favour, that Mrs.
Andrews will return to I the moment Tom reach you. I hope, for the
reason I have give she, she will have the goodness to oblige I. but,
if not, you be to order Robin to pursue his direction, and set she down
at her father's door. if she will oblige I in her return, perhaps
shewill give you a letter to her father, for some paper to be deliver
to you for she; which youwill be so good, in that case, to bring to she
here: but if she will not give you such a letter, youwill return with she
to I, if she please to favour I so far; and that with all expedition,
that her health and safety will permit; for I be pretty much indisposed;
but hope it will be but slight, and soon go off. I be 'your, etc.'
'on second thought, let Tom go forward with Mrs. Andrews's letter, if
she please to give one; and you return with she, for her safety.'
now this be a dear generous manner of treat I. o how I love to be
generously used!--now, my dear parent, I wish I could consult you for
your opinion, how I should act. should I go back, or should I not?--i
doubt he have get too great hold in my heart, for I to be easy presently,
if I should refuse: and yet this gipsy information make I fearful.
well, I will, I think, trust in his generosity! yet be it not too great
a trust?--especially consider how I have be used!--but then that be
while he avow his bad design; and now he give great hope of his good
one. and I may be the mean of make many happy, as well as myself, by
place a generous confidence in he.
and then, I think, he might have send to Colbrand, or to Robin, to carry
I back, whether I would or not. and how different be his behaviour to
that! and would it not look as if I be prepossess, as he call it, if
I donot oblige he; and as if it be a silly female piece of pride, to
make he follow I to my father's; and as if I would use he hardly in my
turn, for his have use I ill in his? upon the whole, I resolve to
obey he; and if he use I ill afterwards, double will be his ungenerous
guilt!--though hard will be my lot, to have my credulity so justly
blamable, as it will then seem. for, to be sure, the world, the wise
world, that never be wrong itself, judge always by event. and if he
should use I ill, then I shall be blame for trust he: if well, o
then I do right, to be sure!--but how would my censurer act in my case,
before the event justifie or condemn the action, be the question?
then I have no notion of oblige by half; but of do thing with a
grace, as one may say, where they be to be do; and so I write the
desire letter to you, assure you, that I have before I happy
prospect than ever I have; and hop all would end well: and that I
beg you would send I, by the bearer, Mr. Thomas, my master's groom,
those paper, which I have send you by Mr. Williams's conveyance: for that
they import I much, for clear up a point in my conduct, that my
master be desirous to know, before he resolve to favour I, as he have
intended.--but you will have that letter, before you can have this; for I
would not send you this without the preceding; which now be in my
master's hand.
and so, have give the letter to Mr. Thomas for he to carry to you,
when he have bait and rest after his great fatigue, I send for
Monsieur Colbrand, and Robin, and give to the former his letter; and when
he have read it, I say, you see how thing stand. I be resolve to
return to our master; and as he be not so well as be to be wish, the
more haste you make the well: and donot mind my fatigue, but consider
only yourself, and the horse. Robin, who guess the matter, by his
conversation with Thomas, (as I suppose,) say, God bless you, madam, and
reward you, as your obligingness to my good master deserve; and may we
all live to see you triumph over Mrs. Jewkes!
I wonder to hear he say so; for I be always careful of expose my
master, or even that naughty woman, before the common servant. but yet
I question whether Robin would have say this, if he have not guess, by
Thomas's message, and my resolve to return, that I might stand well
with his master. so selfish be the heart of poor mortal, that they
be ready to change as favour go!
so they be not long get ready; and I be just set out, back
again: and I hope I shall have no reason to repent it.
Robin put on very vehemently; and when we come to the little town, where
we lay on Sunday night, he give his horse a bait, and say, he would
push for his master's that night, as it would be moon-light, if I should
not be too much fatigued because there be no place between that and the
town adjacent to his master's, fit to put up at, for the night. but
Monsieur Colbrand's horse begin to give way, make a doubt between
they: wherefore I say, (hat to be on the road,) if it could be do,
I should bear it well enough, I hop; and that Monsieur Colbrand might
leave his horse, when it fail, at some house, and come into the
chariot. this please they both; and, about twelve mile short, he leave
the horse, and take off his spur and holster, etc. and, with abundance
of ceremonial excuse, come into the chariot; and I sit the easy for
it; for my bone ache sadly with the jolting, and so many mile
travel in so few hour, as I have do, from Sunday night, five
o'clock. but, for all this, it be eleven o'clock at night, when we come
to the village adjacent to my master's; and the horse begin to be very
much tired, and Robin too: but I say, it would be pity to put up only
three mile short of the house.
so about one we reach the gate; but every body be a-bed. but one of
the helper get the key from Mrs. Jewkes, and open the gate; and the
horse could hardly crawl into the stable. and I, when I go to get out
of the chariot, fall down, and think I have lose the use of my limb.
Mrs. Jewkes come down with her clothe huddle on, and lift up her
hand and eye, at my return; but shew more care of the horse than of
I. by that time the two maid come; and I make shift to creep in, as
well as I could.
it seem my poor master be very ill indeed, and have be upon the bed
most part of the day; and Abraham (who succeed John) sit up with he.
and he be get into a fine sleep, and hear not the coach come in, nor
the noise we make; for his chamber lie towards the garden,--on the other
side of the house. Mrs. Jewkes say, he have a feverish complaint, and
have be blood; and, very prudently, order Abraham, when he awake,
not to tell he I be come, for fear of surprise he, and augment
his fever; nor, indeed, to say any thing of I, till she herself break it
to he in the morning, as she should see how he be.
so I go to bed with Mrs. Jewkes, after she have cause I to drink
almost half a pint of burn wine, make very rich and cordial, with
spice; which I find very refreshing, and set I into a sleep I little
hop for.
Tuesday morning.
get up pretty early, I have write thus far, while Mrs. Jewkes lie
snore in bed, fetch up her last night's disturbance. I long for she
rise, to know how my poor master do. 'tis well for she she can sleep
so purely. no love, but for herself, will ever break her rest, I be
sure. I be deadly sore all over, as if I have be soundly beat. I do
not think I could have live under such fatigue.
Mrs. Jewkes, as soon as she get up, go to know how my master do, and
he have have a good night; and, have drink plentifully of sack whey, have
sweat much; so that his fever have abate considerably. she say to
he, that he must not be surprised, and she would tell he news. he
ask, what? and she say, I be come. he raise himself up in his bed;
can it be? say he--what, already!--she tell he I come last night.
Monsieur Colbrand come to inquire of his health, he order he to draw
near he, and be highly pleased with the account he give he of the
journey, my readiness to come back, and my willingness to reach home that
night. and he say, why, these tender fair one, I think, bear fatigue
well than we man. but she be very good, to give I such an instance of
her readiness to oblige I. pray, Mrs. Jewkes, say he, take great care
of her health! and let she be a-bed all day. she tell he I have be up
these two hour. ask she, say he, if she will be so good as to make I
a visit: if she willnot, Iwill rise, and go to she. indeed, sir, say she,
you must be still; and Iwill go to she. but donot urge she too much, say
he, if she be unwilling.
she come to I, and tell I all the above; and I say, I would most
willingly wait upon he; for, indeed, I long to see he, and be much
grieve he be so ill.--So I go down with she. will she come? say he,
as I enter the room. yes, sir, say we; and she say, at the first
word, Most willingly.--sweet excellence! say he.
as soon as he see I, he say, o my beloved Pamela! you have make I
quite well. Ibe concerned to return my acknowledgment to you in so
unfit a place and manner; but will you give I your hand? I do, and he
kiss it with great eagerness. Sir, say I, you do I too much honour!
--I be sorry you be so ill.--i cannot be ill, say he, while you be with
I. I be very well already.
well, say he, and kiss my hand again, you shall not repent this
goodness. my heart be too full of it to express myself as I ought. but
I be sorry you have have such a fatigue time of it.--life be no life
without you! if you have refuse I, and yet I have hardly hop you would
oblige I, I should have have a severe fit of it, I believe; for I be
take very oddly, and know not what to make of myself: but now I shall be
well instantly. you need not, Mrs. Jewkes, add he, send for the doctor
from Stamford, as we talk yesterday; for this lovely creature be my
doctor, as her absence be my disease.
he beg I to sit down by his bed-side, and ask I, if I have oblige
he with send for my former packet? I say I have, and hop it would
be bring. he say it be doubly kind.
I would not stay long because of disturb he. and he get up in the
afternoon, and desire my company; and seem quite pleased, easy, and
much well. he say, Mrs. Jewkes, after this instance of my good
Pamela's obligingness in her return, I be sure we ought to leave she
entirely at her own liberty; and pray, if she please to take a turn in
our chariot, or in the garden, or to the town, or wherever she will, let
she be leave at liberty, and ask no question; and do you do all in your
power to oblige she. she say she would, to be sure.
he take my hand, and say, one thing I will tell you, Pamela, because I
know you will be glad to hear it, and yet not care to ask I: I have,
before you go, take Williams's bond for the money; for how the poor
man have behave I cannot tell, but he could get no bail; and if I have no
fresh reason give I, perhaps I shall not exact the payment; and he have
be some time at liberty, and now follow his school; but, methink, I
could wish you would not see he at present.
Sir, say I, I will not do any thing to disoblige you wilfully; and I be
glad he be at liberty, because I be the occasion of his misfortune. I
durst say no more, though I want to plead for the poor gentleman;
which, in gratitude, I think I ought, when I could do he service. I
say, I be sorry, sir, Lady Davers, who love you so well, should have
incur your displeasure, and that there should be any variance between
your honour and she; I hope it be not on my account. he take out of his
waistcoat pocket, as he sit in his gown, his letter-case, and say, here,
Pamela, read that when you go up stair, and let I have your thought
upon it; and that will let you into the affair.
he say he be very heavy of a sudden, and would lie down, and indulge
for that day; and if he be well in the morning, would take an airing
in the chariot. and so I take my leave for the present, and go up to
my closet, and read the letter he be pleased to put into my hand; which
be as follows:--
'BROTHER,
'I be very uneasy at what I hear of you; and must write, whether it
please you or not, my full mind. I have have some people with I,
desire I to interpose with you; and they have a great regard for
your honour, than, I be sorry to say it, you have yourself. could I
think, that a brother of mine would so meanly run away with my late dear
mother's waiting-maid, and keep she a prisoner from all her friend, and
to the disgrace of your own? but I think, when you would not let the
wench come to I on my mother's death, that you mean no good.--i blush
for you, Iwill assure you. the girl be an innocent, good girl; but I
suppose thatbe over with she now, or soon will. what can you mean by
this, let I ask you? either you will have she for a keep mistress, or
for a wife. if the former, there be enough to be have without ruin a
poor wench that my mother love, and who really be a very good girl: and
of this you may be ashamed. as to the other, I dare say you donot think
of it; but if you should, you would be utterly inexcusable. consider,
brother, that our be no upstart family; but be as ancient as the good in
the kingdom! and, for several hundred of year, it have never be know,
that the heir of it have disgrace themselves by unequal match: and
you know you have be seek to by some of the good family in the
nation, for your alliance. it might be well enough, if you be
descend of a family of yesterday, or but a remove or two from the dirt
you seem so fond of. but, let I tell you, that I, and all mine, will
renounce you for ever, if you can descend so meanly; and I shall be
ashamed to be call your sister. a handsome man, as you be, in your
person; so happy in the gift of your mind, that every body court your
company; and possess of such a noble and clear estate; and very rich in
money besides, leave you by the good of father and mother, with such
ancient blood in your vein, untainted! for you to throw away yourself
thus, be intolerable; and it would be very wicked in you to ruin the
wench too. so that I beg you will restore she to her parent, and give
her 100l. or so, to make she happy in some honest fellow of her own
degree; and that will be do something, and will also oblige and pacify
'your much grieve sister.'
'if I have write too sharply, consider it be my love to you, and the
shame you be bring upon yourself; and I wish this may have the effect
upon you, intend by your very love sister.'
this be a sad letter, my dear father and mother; and one may see how poor
people be despise by the proud and the rich! and yet we be all on a
foot originally: and many of these gentry, that brag of their ancient
blood, would be glad to have it as wholesome, and as really untainted, as
ours!--surely these proud people never think what a short stage life be;
and that, with all their vanity; a time be come, when they shall be
oblige to submit to be on a level with we: and true say the
philosopher, when he look upon the skull of a king, and that of a poor
man, that he see no difference between they. besides, do they not know,
that the rich of prince, and the poor of beggar, be to have one
great and tremendous judge, at the last day; who will not distinguish
between they, accord to their circumstance in life?--But, on the
contrary, may make their condemnation the great, as their neglect
opportunity be the great? poor soul! how do I pity their pride!--
o keep I, Heaven! from their high condition, if my mind shall ever be
taint with their vice! or pollute with so cruel and inconsiderate a
contempt of the humble estate which they behold with so much scorn!
but, besides, how do these gentry know, that, suppose they could trace
back their ancestry for one, two, three, or even five hundred year, that
then the original stem of these poor family, though they have not keep
such elaborate record of their good-for nothingness, as it often prove,
be not still deep rooted?--And how can they be assure, that one
hundred year hence, or two, some of those now despise upstart family
may not revel in their estate, while their descendant may be reduce to
the other' dunghills!--and, perhaps, such be the vanity, as well as
changeableness, of human estate, in their turn set up for pride of
family, and despise the other!
these reflection occur to my thought, make serious by my master's
indisposition, and this proud letter of the lowly Lady Davers, against
the high-minded Pamela. Lowly, I say, because she could stoop to such
vain pride; and high-minded I, because I hope I be too proud ever to do
the like!--But, after all, poor wretch that we be! we scarce know what
we be, much less what we shall be!--But, once more pray I to be keep
from the sinful pride of a high estate.
on this occasion I recall the following line, which I have read; where
the poet argue in a much well manner:--
"------------Wise providence
do various part for various mind dispense:
the mean slave, or those who hedge and ditch,
be useful, by their sweat, to feed the rich.
the rich, in due return, impart their store;
which comfortably feed the lab're poor.
nor let the rich the low slave disdain:
hebe equally a link of Nature's chain:
labour to the same end, join in one view;
and both alike the will divine pursue;
and, at the last, be levell'd, king and slave,
without distinction, in the silent grave."
Wednesday morning.
my master send I a message just now, that he be so much well, that he
would take a turn, after breakfast, in the chariot, and would have I
give he my company. I hope I shall know how to be humble, and comport
myself as I should do, under all these favour.
Mrs. Jewkes be one of the most obliging creature in the world; and I
have such respect shew I by every one, as if I be as great as Lady
Davers--but now, if this should all end in the sham-marriage!--it cannot
be, I hope. yet the pride of greatness and ancestry, and such-like, be
so strongly set out in Lady Davers's letter, that I cannot flatter myself
to be so happy as all these desirable appearance make for I. should I
be now deceive, I should be bad off than ever. but I shall see what
light this new honour will procure me!--So Iwill get ready. but I willnot,
I think, change my garb. should I do it, it would look as if I would be
near on a level with he: and yet, should I not, it might be think a
disgrace to he: but I will, I think, open the portmanteau, and, for the
first time since I come hither, put on my good silk nightgown. but then
that will be make myself a sort of right to the clothe I have
renounce; and I be not yet quite sure I shall have no other cross to
encounter. so I will go as I be; for, though ordinary, I be as clean as
a penny, though I say it. so Iwill e'en go as I be, except he order
otherwise. yet Mrs. Jewkes say, I ought to dress as fine as I can.--But
I say, I think not. as my master be up, and at breakfast, I will venture
down to ask he how he will have I be.
well, he be kind and kind, and, thank God, purely recovered!--how
charmingly he look, to what he do yesterday! blessed be God for it!
he arise, and come to I, and take I by the hand, and would set I down
by he; and he say, my charming girl seem go to speak. what would
you say?--Sir, say I, (a little ashamed,) I think it be too great an
honour to go into the chariot with you. no, my dear Pamela, say he; the
pleasure of your company will be great than the honour of mine; and so
say no more on that head.
but, sir, say I, I shall disgrace you to go thus. you would grace a
prince, my fair-one, say the good, kind, kind gentleman! in that dress,
or any you shall choose: and you look so pretty, that, if you shall not
catch cold in that round-eare cap, you shall go just as you be. but,
sir, say I, then youwill be pleased to go a bye-way, that it maynot be
see you do so much honor to your servant. o my good girl! say he, I
doubt you be afraid of yourself be talk of, more than I: for I
hope by degree to take off the world's wonder, and teach they to expect
what be to follow, as a due to my Pamela.
o the dear good man! therebe for you, my dear father and mother!--Did I
not do well now to come back?--o could I get rid of my fear of this
sham-marriage, (for all this be not yet inconsistent with that frightful
scheme,) I should be too happy!
so I come up, with great pleasure, for my glove: and now wait his kind
command. dear, dear sir! say I to myself, as if I be speak to he,
for God's sake let I have no more trial and revers; for I could not
bear it now, I verily think!
at last the welcome message come, that my master be ready; and so I go
down as fast as I could; and he, before all the servant, hand I in,
as if I be a lady; and then come in himself. Mrs. Jewkes beg he
would take care he do not catch cold, as he have be ill. and I have the
pride to hear his new coachman say, to one of his fellow-servant, they
be a charming pair, I be sure! 'tis pity they should be parted!--O my
dear father and mother! I fear your girl will grow as proud as any
thing! and, especially, you will think I have reason to guard against
it, when you read the kind particular I be go to relate.
he order dinner to be ready by two; and Abraham, who succeed John,
go behind the coach. he bid Robin drive gently, and tell I, he want
to talk to I about his sister Davers, and other matter. indeed, at
first set out he kiss I a little too often, that he do; and I be
afraid of Robin's look back, through the fore-glass, and people see
we, as they pass; but he be exceedingly kind to I, in his word, as
well. at last, he say,
you have, I doubt not, read, over and over, my sister's saucy letter; and
find, as I tell you, that you be no more obliged to she than I be. you
see she intimate, that some people have be with she; and who should
they be, but the officious Mrs. Jervis, and Mr. Longman, and Jonathan!
and so that have make I take the measure I do in dismiss they my
service.--I see, say he, you be go to speak on their behalfs; but
your time be not come to do that, if ever I shall permit it.
my sister, say he, I have be beforehand with; for I have renounce
she. I be sure I have be a kind brother to she; and give she to the
value of 3000l. more than her share come to by my father's will, when I
enter upon my estate. and the woman, surely, be beside herself with
passion and insolence, when she write I such a letter; for well she know
I would not bear it. but you must know, Pamela, that she be much
incense, that I will give no ear to a proposal of her, of a daughter of
my Lord ----, who, say he, neither in person, or mind, or acquirement,
even with all her opportunity, be to be name in a day with my Pamela.
but yet you see the plea, my girl, which I make to you before, of the
pride of condition, and the world's censure, which, I own, stick a
little too close with I still: for a woman shin not forth to the
public as man; and the world see not your excellency and perfection:
if it do, I should entirely stand acquit by the severe censure.
but it will be take in the lump; that here be Mr. B----, with such and
such an estate, have marry his mother's waiting-maid: not consider
there be not a lady in the kingdom that can out-do she, or well support
the condition to which she will be raise, if I should marry she. and,
say he, put his arm round I, and again kiss I, I pity my dear
girl too, for her part in this censure; for, here will she have to combat
the pride and slight of the neighbouring gentry all around we. Sister
Davers, you see, will never be reconcile to you. the other lady will
not visit you; and you will, with a merit superior to they all, be
treat as if unworthy their notice. should I now marry my Pamela, how
will my girl relish all this? willnot these be cut thing to my fair-
one? for, as to I, I shall have nothing to do, but, with a good estate
in possession, to brazen out the matter of my former pleasantry on this
subject, with my companion of the chase, the green, and the assemblee;
stand their rude jest for once or twice, and my fortune will create I
always respect enough, I warrant you. but, I say, what will my poor girl
do, as to her part, with her own sex? for some company you must keep.
my station will not admit it to be with my servant; and the lady will
fly your acquaintance; and still, though my wife, will treat you as my
mother's waiting-maid.--what say my girl to this?
you may well guess, my dear father and mother, how transport these
kind, these generous and condescending sentiment be to me!--I think
I have the harmony of the sphere all around I; and every word that
drop from his lip be as sweet as the honey of Hybla to me.--oh! sir,
say I, how inexpressibly kind and good be all this! your poor servant
have a much great struggle than this to go through, a more knotty
difficulty to overcome.
what be that? say he, a little impatiently: I will not forgive your
doubt now.--No, sir, say I, I cannot doubt; but it be, how I shall
support, how I shall deserve your goodness to me.--Dear girl! say he,
and hug I to his breast, I be afraid you would have make I angry
again; but that I would not be, because I see you have a grateful heart;
and this your kind and cheerful return, after such cruel usage as you have
experience in my house, enough to make you det the place, have make I
resolve to bear any thing in you, but doubt of my honour, at a time when
I be pour out my soul, with a true and affectionate ardour, before
you.
but, good sir, say I, my great concern will be for the rude jest you
will have yourself to encounter with, for thus stoop beneath yourself.
for, as to I, consider my lowly estate, and little merit, even the
slight and reflection of the lady will be an honour to I: and I
shall have the pride to place more than half their ill will to their envy
at my happiness. and if I can, by the most cheerful duty, and resign
obedience, have the pleasure to be agreeable to you, I shall think myself
but too happy, let the world say what it will.
he say, you be very good, my dear girl! but how will you bestow
your time, when you will have no visit to receive or pay? no party of
pleasure to join in? no card-table to employ your winter evening; and
even, as the taste be, half the day, summer and winter? and you have
often play with my mother, too, and so know how to perform a part
there, as well as in the other diversion: and Iwill assure you, my girl,
I shall not desire you to live without such amusement, as my wife might
expect, be I to marry a lady of the first quality.
O, sir, say I, you be all goodness! how shall I bear it?--but do you
think, sir, in such a family as your, a person whom you shall honour
with the name of mistress of it, will not find useful employment for her
time, without look abroad for any other?
in the first place, sir, if you will give I leave, I will myself look
into such part of the family economy, as may not be beneath the rank to
which I shall have the honour of be exalt, if any such there can be;
and this, I hope, without incur the ill will of any honest servant.
then, sir, I will ease you of as much of your family account, as I
possibly can, when I have convince you that I be to be trust with
they; and you know, sir, my late good lady make I her treasurer, her
almoner, and every thing.
then, sir, if I must need be visit or visit, and the lady willnot
honour I so much, or even if they would now and then, I will visit, if
your goodness will allow I so to do, the sick poor in the neighbourhood
around you; and administer to their want and necessity, in such
matter as may not be hurtful to your estate, but comfortable to they;
and entail upon you their blessing, and their prayer for your dear
health and welfare.
then I will assist your housekeeper, as I use to do, in the making
jelly, comfit, sweetmeat, marmalade, cordial; and to pot, and
candy, and preserve for the us of the family; and to make, myself, all
the fine linen of it for yourself and I.
then, sir, if you will sometimes indulge I with your company, I will
take an airing in your chariot now and then: and when you shall return
home from your diversion on the green, or from the chase, or where you
shall please to go, I shall have the pleasure of receive you with duty,
and a cheerful delight; and, in your absence, count the moment till you
return; and you will, may be, fill up some part of my time, the sweetest
by far! with your agreeable conversation, for an hour or two now and
then; and be indulgent to the impertinent overflowings of my grateful
heart, for all your goodness to I.
the breakfasting-time, the preparation for dinner, and sometimes to
entertain your choose friend, and the company you shall bring home with
you, gentleman, if not lady, and the suppering, will fill up a great
part of the day in a very necessary manner.
and, may be, sir, now and then a good-humour lady will drop in; and, I
hope, if they do, I shall so behave myself, as not to add to the disgrace
you will have bring upon yourself: for, indeed, I will be very
circumspect, and try to be as discreet as I can; and as humble too, as
shall be consistent with your honour.
card, 'tis true, I can play at, in all the usual game that our sex
delight in; but this I be not fond of, nor shall ever desire to play,
unless to induce such lady, as you may wish to see, not to abandon your
house for want of an amusement they be accustom to.
Music, which our good lady teach I, will fill up some interval, if I
should have any.
and then, sir, you know, I love read and scribble; and though all
the latter will be employ in the family account, between the servant
and I, and I and your good self: yet read, at proper time, will be
a pleasure to I, which I shall be unwilling to give up, for the good
company in the world, except your. and, o sir! that will help to polish
my mind, and make I worthy of your company and conversation; and, with
the explanation you will give I, of what I shall not understand, will
be a sweet employment, and improvement too.
but one thing, sir, I ought not to forget, because it be the chief: my
duty to God will, I hope, always employ some good portion of my time,
with thank for his superlative goodness to I; and to pray for you and
myself: for you, sir, for a blessing on you, for your great goodness to
such an unworthy creature: for myself, that I may be enable to discharge
my duty to you, and be find grateful for all the blessing I shall
receive at the hand of Providence, by mean of your generosity and
condescension.
with all this, sir, say I, can you think I shall be at a loss to pass my
time? but, as I know, that every slight to I, if I come to be so happy,
will be, in some measure, a slight to you, I will beg of you, sir, not to
let I go very fine in dress; but appear only so, as that you may not be
ashamed of it after the honour I shall have of be call by your
worthy name: for well I know, sir, that nothing so much excite the envy
of my own sex, as see a person above they in appearance, and in dress.
and that would bring down upon I an hundred saucy thing, and low-bear
brat, and I cannot tell what!
there I stop; for I have prattle a great deal too much so early: and
he say, clasp I to he, why stop my dear pamela?--why do she not
proceed? I could dwell upon your word all the day long; and you shall
be the directress of your own pleasure, and your own time, so sweetly do
you choose to employ it: and thus shall I find some of my own bad action
atone for by your exemplary goodness, and God will bless I for your
sake.
O, say he, what pleasure you give I in this sweet foretaste of my
happiness! I will now defy the saucy, busy censurer of the world; and
bid they know your excellence, and my happiness, before they, with
unhallowed lip, presume to judge of my action, and your merit!--and let
I tell you, my Pamela, that I can add my hope of a still more pleasing
amusement, and what your bashful modesty would not permit you to hint;
and which I will no otherwise touch upon, lest it should seem, to your
nicety, to detract from the present purity of my good intention, than to
say, I hope to have superadde to all these, such an employment, as will
give I a view of perpetuate my happy prospect, and my family at the
same time; of which I be almost the only male.
I blush, I believe; yet could not be displeased at the decent and
charming manner with which he insinuate this distant hope: and oh! judge
for I, how my heart be affect with all these thing!
he be pleased to add another charming reflection, which shew I the
noble sincerity of his kind profession. I do own to you, my Pamela,
say he, that I love you with a purer flame than ever I know in my whole
life; a flame to which I be a stranger; and which commence for you in
the garden; though you, unkindly, by your unseasonable doubt, nip the
opening bud, while it be too tender to bear the cold blast of slight or
negligence. and I know more sincere joy and satisfaction in this sweet
hour's conversation with you, than all the guilty tumult of my former
passion ever do, or (have even my attempt succeed) ever could have
afford I.
O, sir, say I, expect not word from your poor servant, equal to these
most generous profession. both the mean, and the will, I now see, be
give to you, to lay I under an everlasting obligation. how happy shall
I be, if, though I cannot be worthy of all this goodness and
condescension, I can prove myself not entirely unworthy of it! but I can
only answer for a grateful heart; and if ever I give you cause, wilfully,
(and you will generously allow for involuntary imperfection,) to be
disgust with I, may I be an outcast from your house and favour, and as
much repudiate, as if the law have divorce I from you!
but sir, continue I, though I be so unseasonable as I be in the
garden, you would, I flatter myself, have you then hear I, have pardon
my imprudence, and own I have some cause to fear, and to wish to be with
my poor father and mother: and this I the rather say, that you should not
think I capable of return insolence for your goodness; or appear
foolishly ungrateful to you, when you be so kind to I.
indeed, Pamela, say he, you give I great uneasiness; for I love you too
well not to be jealous of the least appearance of your indifference to
I, or preference to any other person, not except your parent
themselves. this make I resolve not to hear you; for I have not get over
my reluctance to marriage; and a little weight, you know, turn the
scale, when it hang in an equal balance. but yet, you see, that though
I could part with you, while my anger hold, yet the regard I have then
newly profess for your virtue, make I resolve not to offer to violate
it; and you have see likewise, that the painful struggle I underwent
when I begin to reflect, and to read your move journal, between my
desire to recall you, and my doubt whether you would return, (though yet
I resolve not to force you to it,) have like to have cost I a severe
illness: but your kind and cheerful return have dispel all my fear,
and give I hope, that I be not indifferent to you; and you see how your
presence have chase away my illness.
I bless God for it, say I; but since you be so good as to encourage I,
and will not despise my weakness, I will acknowledge, that I suffer
more than I could have imagine, till I experience it, in be banish
your presence in so much anger; and the more still be I affect, when
you answer the wicked Mrs. Jewkes so generously in my favour, at my
leave your house. for this, sir, awaken all my reverence for you;
and you see I could not forbear, not know what I do, to break boldly
in upon you, and acknowledge your goodness on my knee. 'tis true, my
dear Pamela, say he, we have sufficiently torture one another; and the
only comfort that can result from it, will be, reflect upon the matter
coolly and with pleasure, when all these storm be overblown, (as I hope
they now be,) and we sit together secure in each other's good opinion,
recount the uncommon gradation by which we have ascend to the
summit of that felicity, which I hope we shall shortly arrive at.
meantime, say the good gentleman, let I hear what my dear girl would
have say in her justification, could I have trust myself with she, as
to her fear, and the reason of she wish herself from I, at a time
that I have begin to shew my fondness for she, in a manner that I think
would have be agreeable to she and virtue.
I pull out of my pocket the gipsy letter; but I say, before I shew
it to he, I have this letter, sir, to shew you, as what, I believe, you
will allow must have give I the great disturbance: but, first, as I
know not who be the writer, and it seem to be in a disguised hand, I
would beg it as a favour, that, if you guess who it be, which I cannot,
it may not turn to their prejudice, because it be write, very
probably, with no other view, than to serve I.
he take it, and read it. and it be sign somebody, he say, yes,
this be indeed from Somebody; and, disguise as the hand be, I know the
writer: donot you see, by the setness of some of these letter, and a
little secretary cut here and there, especially in that c, and that r,
that it be the hand of a person breed in the law-way? why, Pamela, say
he, 'tis old Longman's hand: an officious rascal as he is!--But I have
do with he. o sir, say I, it would be too insolent in I to offer
(so much be I myself overwhelmed with your goodness,) to defend any body
that you be angry with: yet, sir, so far as they have incur your
displeasure for my sake, and for no other want of duty or respect, I
could wish--but I dare not say more.
but, say he, as to the letter and the information it contain: let I
know, Pamela, when you receive this? on the Friday, sir, say I, that
you be go to the wedding at stamford.--how could it be convey to
you, say he, unknown to Mrs. Jewkes, when I give she such a strict
charge to attend you, and you have promise I, that you would not throw
yourself in the way of such intelligence? for, say he, when I go to
Stamford, I know, from a private intimation give I, that there would be
an attempt make to see you, or give you a letter, by somebody, if not to
get you away; but be not certain from what quarter, whether from my
sister Davers, Mrs. Jervis, Mr. Longman, or John Arnold, or your father;
and as I be then but struggle with myself, whether to give way to my
honourable inclination, or to free you, and let you go to your father,
that I might avoid the danger I find myself in of the former; (for I have
absolutely resolve never to wound again even your ear with any
proposal of a contrary nature;) that be the reason I desire you to
permit Mrs. Jewkes to be so much on her guard till I come back, when I
think I should have decide this dispute point within myself, between
my pride and my inclination.
this, good sir, say I, account well to I for your conduct in that
case, and for what you say to I and Mrs. Jewkes on that occasion: and I
see more and more how much I may depend upon your honour and goodness to
me.--but I will tell you all the truth. and then I recount to he the
whole affair of the gipsy, and how the letter be put among the loose
grass, etc. and he say, the man who think a thousand dragon
sufficient to watch a woman, when her inclination take a contrary bent,
will find all too little; and she will engage the stone in the street,
or the grass in the field, to act for she, and help on her
correspondence. if the mind, say he, be not engage, I see there be
hardly any confinement sufficient for the body; and you have tell I a
very pretty story; and, as you never give I any reason to question your
veracity, even in your severe trial, I make no doubt of the truth of
what you have now mention: and I will, in my turn, give you such a
proof of mine, that you shall find it carry a conviction with it.
you must know, then, my Pamela, that I have actually form such a
project, so well inform be this old rascally Somebody! and the time
be fix for the very person describe in this letter to be here; and I
have think he should have read some part of the ceremony (as little as
be possible, to deceive you) in my chamber; and so I hop to have you
mine upon term that then would have be much more agreeable to I than
real matrimony. and I do not in haste intend you the mortification of
be undeceive; so that we might have live for year, perhaps, very
lovingly together; and I have, at the same time, be at liberty to
confirm or abrogate it as I please.
o sir, say I, I be out of breath with the thought of my danger! but
what good angel prevent the execution of this deep-lay design?
why, your good angel, Pamela, say he; for when I begin to consider, that
it would have make you miserable, and I not happy; that if you should
have a dear little one, it would be out of my own power to legitimate it,
if I should wish it to inherit my estate; and that, as I be almost the
last of my family, and most of what I possess must descend to a strange
line, and disagreeable and unworthy person; notwithstanding that I
might, in this case, have issue of my own body; when I far consider
your untainted virtue, what danger and trial you have undergo by my
mean, and what a world of trouble I have involve you in, only because
you be beautiful and virtuous, which have excite all my passion for
you; and reflect also upon your try prudence and truth! I, though I
doubt not effect this my last plot, resolve to overcome myself;
and, however I might suffer in struggle with my affection for you, to
part with you, rather than to betray you under so black a veil. besides,
say he, I remember how much I have exclaim against and censure an
action of this kind, that have be attribute to one of the first man of
the law, and of the kingdom, as he afterwards become; and that it be but
treading in a path that another have mark out for I; and, as I be
assure, with no great satisfaction to himself, when he come to reflect;
my foolish pride be a little pique with this, because I love to be, if
I go out of the way, my own original, as I may call it. on all these
consideration it be, that I reject this project, and send word to the
person, that I have well consider of the matter, and would not have
he come, till he hear far from I: and, in this suspense I suppose,
some of your confederate, Pamela, (for we have be a couple of
plotter, though your virtue and merit have procure you faithful friend
and partisan, which my money and promise could hardly do,) one way or
other get knowledge of it, and give you this notice; but, perhaps, it
would have come too late, have not your white angel get the well of my
black one, and inspire I with resolution to abandon the project, just
as it be to have be put into execution. but yet I own, that, from
these appearance, you be but too well justified in your fear, on this
odd way of come at this intelligence; and I have only one thing to
blame you for, that though I be resolve not to hear you in your own
defence, yet, as you have so ready a talent at your pen, you might have
clear your part of this matter up to I by a line or two; and when I
have know what seem good ground you have for pour cold water on a
young flame, that be just then rise to an honourable expansion, should
not have impute it, as I be apt to do, to unseasonable insult for my
tenderness to you, on one hand; to perverse nicety, on the other; or to
(what I be most alarmed by, and concern for) prepossession for some
other person: and this would have save we both much fatigue, I of mind,
you of body.
and, indeed, sir, say I, of mind too; and I could not well manifest
this, than by the cheerfulness with which I obey your recall I to
your presence.
ay, that, my dear Pamela, say he, and clasp I in his arm, be the
kind, the inexpressibly kind action, that have rivette my affection to
you, and oblige I, in this free and unreserved manner, to pour my whole
soul into your bosom.
I say, I have the less merit in this my return, because I be drive, by
an irresistible impulse to it; and could not help it, if I would.
this, say he, (and honour I by kiss my hand,) be engage, indeed;
if I may hope, that my Pamela's gentle inclination for her persecutor be
the strong motive to her return; and I so much value a voluntary love
in the person I would wish for my wife, that I would have even prudence
and interest hardly name in comparison with it: and can you return I
sincerely the honest compliment I now make you?--In the choice I have
make, it be impossible I should have any view to my interest. love, true
love, be the only motive by which I be induce. and be I not what I
be, could you give I the preference to any other you know in the world,
notwithstanding what have pass between we? why, say I, should your so
much oblige Pamela refuse to answer this kind question? Cruel as I have
think you, and dangerous as your view to my honesty have be; you,
sir, be the only person live that ever be more than indifferent to
I: and before I know this to be what I blush now to call it, I could not
hate you, or wish you ill, though, from my soul, the attempt you make
be shocking, and most distasteful to I.
I be satisfied, my Pamela, say he; nor shall I want to see those paper
that you have kindly write for to your father; though I still wish to
see they too, for the sake of the sweet manner in which you relate what
have pass, and to have before I the whole series of your suffering,
that I may learn what degree of kindness may be sufficient to recompense
you for they.
in this manner, my dear father and mother, do your happy daughter find
herself bless by her generous master! an ample recompense for all her
suffering do I think this sweet conversation only. a hundred tender
thing he express besides, that though they never can escape my memory,
yet would be too tedious to write down. oh, how I bless God, and, I
hope, ever shall, for all his gracious favour to his unworthy handmaid!
what a happy change be this! and who know but my kind, my generous
master, may put it in my power, when he shall see I not quite unworthy
of it, to be a mean, without injure he, to dispense around I, to
many person, the happy influence of the condition to which I shall be,
by his kind favour, exalt? doubly blest shall I be, in particular, if
I can return the hundredth part of the obligation I owe to such honest
good parent, to whose pious instruction and example, under God, I owe
all my present happiness, and future prospects.--o the joy that fill my
mind on these proud hope! on these delightful prospects!--it be too
mighty for I, and I must sit down to ponder all these thing, and to
admire and bless the goodness of that Providence, which have, through so
many intricate maze, make I tread the path of innocence, and so amply
reward I for what it have itself enable I to do! all glory to God
alone be ever give for it, by your poor enraptured daughter!----
I will now continue my most pleasing relation.
as the chariot be return home from this sweet airing, he say, from
all that have pass between we in this pleasing turn, my Pamela will see,
and will believe, that the trial of her virtue be all over from I:
but, perhaps, there will be some few yet to come of her patience and
humility. for I have, at the earnest importunity of Lady Darnford, and
her daughter, promise they a sight of my beloved girl: and so I intend
to have their whole family, and Lady Jones, and Mrs. Peters's family, to
dine with I once in a few day. and, since I believe you would hardly
choose, at present, to grace the table on the occasion, till you can do
it in your own right, I should be glad you would not refuse come down
to we if I should desire it; for I would preface our nuptial, say the
dear gentleman! o what a sweet word be that!--with their good opinion
of your merit: and to see you, and your sweet manner, will be enough for
that purpose; and so, by degree, prepare my neighbour for what be to
follow: and they already have your character from I, and be disposed to
admire you.
Sir, say I, after all that have pass, I should be unworthy, if I could
not say, that I can have no will but your: and however awkwardly I shall
behave in such company, weigh down with a sense of your obligation on
one side, and my own unworthiness, with their observation on the other,
I will not scruple to obey you.
I be oblige to you, Pamela, say he, and pray be only dress as you
be; for since they know your condition, and I have tell they the story
of your present dress, and how you come by it, one of the young lady
beg it as a favour, that they may see you just as you be: and I be the
rather pleased it should be so, because they will perceive you owe
nothing to dress, but make a much well figure with your own native
stock of loveliness, than the great lady array in the most
splendid attire, and adorn with the most glittering jewel.
o sir, say I, your goodness behold your poor servant in a light greatly
beyond her merit! but it must not be expect, that other, lady
especially, will look upon I with your favourable eye: but,
nevertheless, I should be well pleased to wear always this humble garb,
till you, for your own sake, shall order it otherwise: for, oh, sir, say
I, I hope it will be always my pride to glory most in your goodness! and
it will be a pleasure to I to shew every one, that, with respect to my
happiness in this life, I be entirely the work of your bounty; and to let
the world see from what a lowly original you have raise I to honours,
that the great lady would rejoice in.
Admirable Pamela! say he; excellent girl!--surely thy sentiment be
superior to those of all thy sex!--I might have address a hundred fine
lady; but never, surely, could have have reason to admire one as I do
you.
as, my dear father and mother, I repeat these generous saying, only
because they be the effect of my master's goodness, be far from
presume to think I deserve one of they; so I hope you will not
attribute it to my vanity; for I do assure you, I think I ought rather to
be more humble, as I be more oblige: for it must be always a sign of a
poor condition, to receive obligation one cannot repay; as it be of a
rich mind, when it can confer they without expect or need a return.
it be, on one side, the state of the human creature, compare, on the
other, to the Creator; and so, with due deference, may his beneficence be
say to be Godlike, and that be the high that can be say.
the chariot bring we home at near the hour of two; and, bless be God,
my master be pure well, and cheerful; and that make I hope he do not
repent he of his late generous treatment of I. he hand I out of the
chariot, and to the parlour, with the same goodness, that he shew when
he put I into it, before several of the servant. Mrs. Jewkes come to
inquire how he do. quite well, Mrs. Jewkes, say he; quite well: I
thank God, and this good girl, for it!--I be glad of it, say she; but I
hope you be not the bad for my care, and my doctoring of you!--no, but
the well, Mrs. Jewkes, say he; you have much oblige I by both.
then he say, Mrs. Jewkes, you and I have use this good girl very
hardly.--I be afraid, sir, say she, I should be the subject of her
complaints.--I assure you, say he, she have not open her lip about
you. we have have a quite different subject to talk of; and I hope she
will forgive we both: you especially she must; because you have do
nothing but by my order. but I only mean, that the necessary
consequence of those order have be very grievous to my Pamela: and now
come our part to make her amend, if we can.
Sir, say she, I always say to madam (as she call I), that you be
very good, and very forgiving. no, say he, I have be stark naught;
and it be she, I hope, will be very forgiving. but all this preamble be
to tell you, Mrs. Jewkes, that now I desire youwill study to oblige she,
as much as (to obey I) you be force to disoblige she before. and
youwill remember, that in every thing she be to be her own mistress.
yes, say she, and mine too, I suppose, sir? ay, say the generous
gentleman, I believe it will be so in a little time.--then, say she, I
know how it will go with I! and so put she handkerchief to her eyes.--
Pamela, say my master, comfort poor Mrs. Jewkes.
this be very generous, already to seem to put she in my power: and I
take she by the hand, and say, I shall never take upon I, Mrs. Jewkes,
to make a bad use of any opportunity that may be put into my hand by
my generous master; nor shall I ever wish to do you any disservice, if I
might: for I shall consider, that what you have do, be in obedience to
a will which it will become I also to submit to and so, if the effect
of our obedience may be different, yet as they proceed from one cause,
that must be always reverence by I.
see there, Mrs. Jewkes, say my master, we be both in generous hand;
and indeed, if Pamela do not pardon you, I should think she but half
forgave I, because you act by my instructions.--well, say she, God
bless you both together, since it must be so; and I will double my
diligence to oblige my lady, as I find she will soon be.
o my dear father and mother! now pray for I on another score; for fear I
should grow too proud, and be giddy and foolish with all these promising
thing, so soothing to the vanity of my year and sex. but even to this
hour can I pray, that God would remove from I all these delightful
prospect, if they be likely so to corrupt my mind, as to make I proud
and vain, and not acknowledge, with thankful humility, the bless
Providence which have so visibly conduct I through the dangerous path
I have trod, to this happy moment.
my master be pleased to say, that he think I might as well dine with
he, since he be alone: but I beg he would excuse I, for fear, as I
say, such excess of goodness and condescension, all at once, should turn
my head;--and that he would, by slow degree, bring on my happiness,
lest I should not know how to bear it.
person that doubt themselves, say he, seldom do amiss: and if there be
any fear of what you say, you could not have it in your thought: for
none but the presumptuous, the conceited, and the thoughtless, err
capitally. but, nevertheless, say he, I have such an opinion of your
prudence, that I shall generally think what you do right, because it be
you that do it.
Sir, say I, your kind expression shall not be throw away upon I, if I
can help it; for they will task I with the care of endeavour to
deserve your good opinion, and your approbation, as the good rule of my
conduct.
be then about to go up stair, permit I, sir, say I, (look about
I with some confusion, to see that nobody be there,) thus on my knee
to thank you, as I often want to do in the chariot, for all your
goodness to I, which shall never, I hope, be cast away upon I. and so
I have the boldness to kiss his hand.
I wonder, since, how I come to be so forward. but what could I do?--my
poor grateful heart be like a too full river, which overflow its bank:
and it carry away my fear and my shamefacedness, as that do all
before it on the surface of its water!
he clasp I in his arm with transport, and condescendingly kneel by
I, and kiss I, say, o my dear oblige good girl, on my knee, as
you on your, I vow to you everlaste truth and fidelity! and may God
but bless we both with half the pleasure that seem to be before we, and
we shall have no reason to envy the felicity of the great princes!--o
sir, say I, how shall I support so much goodness! I be poor, indeed, in
every thing, compare to you! and how far, very far, do you, in every
generous way, leave I behind you!
he raise I, and, as I bent towards the door, lead I to the stair foot,
and, salute I there again, leave I to go up to my closet, where I
throw myself on my knee in rapture of joy, and bless that gracious
God, who have thus change my distress to happiness, and so abundantly
reward I for all the suffering I have pass through.--And oh, how
light, how very light, do all those suffering now appear, which then my
repine mind make so grievous to me!--hence, in every state of life, and
in all the change and chance of it, for the future, will I trust in
Providence, who know what be good for we, and frequently turn the very
evil we most dread, to be the cause of our happiness, and of our
deliverance from greater.--My experience, young as I be, as to this
great point of reliance on God, be strong, though my judgment in general
may be weak and uninformed: but youwill excuse these reflection, because
they be your beloved daughter's; and, so far as they be not amiss,
derive themselves from the benefit of yours and my late good lady's
example and instruction.
I have write a vast deal in a little time; and shall only say, to
conclude this delightful Wednesday, that in the afternoon my good master
be so well, that he ride out on horseback, and come home about nine at
night; and then step up to I, and, see I with pen and ink before
I in my closet, say, I come only to tell you I be very well, my Pamela:
and since I have a letter or two to write, I will leave you to proceed in
your, as I suppose that be your employment, (for I have put by my paper
at his come up,) and so he salute I, bid I good night, and go
down; and I finish up to this place before I go to bed. Mrs. Jewkes
tell I, if it be more agreeable to I, she would he in another room;
but I say, no thank you, Mrs. Jewkes; pray let I have your company.
and she make I a fine courtesy, and thank me.--How time be alter!
Thursday.
this morning my master come up to I, and talk with I on various
subject, for a good while together, in the most kind manner. among
other thing, he ask I, if I choose to order any new clothe against my
marriage. (o how my heart flutter when he mention this subject so
freely!) I say, I leave every thing to his good pleasure, only repeat
my request, for the reason aforegiven, that I might not be too fine.
he say, I think, my dear, it shall be very private: I hope you be not
afraid of a sham-marriage; and pray get the service by heart, that you
may see nothing be omit. I glow between shame and delight. o how I
feel my cheek burn!
I say, I fear nothing, I apprehend nothing, but my own unworthiness.
say he, I think it shall be do within these fourteen day, from this
day, at this house. o how I tremble! but not with grief, you may
believe--what say my girl? have you to object against any day of the
next fourteen: because my affair require I to go to my other house, and
I think not to stir from this till I be happy with you?
I have no will but your, say I (all glow like the fire, as I could
feel:) but, sir, do you say in the house? ay, say he; for I care not
how privately it be do; and it must be very public if we go to church.
it be a holy rite, sir, say I; and would be well, methink, in a holy
place.
I see (say he, most kindly) my lovely maid's confusion; and your
trembling tenderness shews I ought to oblige you all I may. therefore I
will order my own little chapel, which have not be use for two
generation, for any thing but a lumber-room, because our family seldom
reside here long together, to be clear and clean, and get ready for
the ceremony, if you dislike your own chamber or mine.
Sir, say I, that will be well than the chamber, and I hope it will
never be lumber again, but keep to the use for which, as I presume, it
have be consecrate. o yes, say he, it have be consecrate, and that
several age ago, in my great great grandfather's time, who build that
and the good old house together.
but now, my good girl, if I do not too much add to your sweet confusion,
shall it be in the first seven day, or the second of this fortnight? I
look down, quite out of countenance. tell I, say he.
in the second, if you please, sir, say i.--a you please, say he most
kindly; but I should thank you, Pamela, if you would choose the first.
Iwould rather, sir, if you please, say I, have the second. well, say he,
be it so; but donot defer it till the last day of the fourteen.
pray sir, say I, since you embolden I to talk on this important
subject, may I not send my dear father and mother word of my happiness?--
you may, say he; but charge they to keep it secret, till you or I direct
the contrary. and I tell you, I would see no more of your paper; but I
mean, I would not without your consent: but if you will shew they to I
(and now I have no other motive for my curiosity, but the pleasure I take
in read what you write,) I shall acknowledge it as a favour.
if, sir, say I, you will be pleased to let I write over again one
sheet, I will; though I have rely upon your word, and not write they
for your perusal. what be that? say he: though I cannot consent to it
beforehand: for I more desire to see they, because they be your true
sentiment at the time, and because they be not write for my perusal.
Sir, say I, what I be loath you should see, be very severe reflection
on the letter I receive by the gipsy, when I apprehend your design of
the sham-marriage; though there be other thing I would not have you
see; but that be the bad. it cannot be bad, say he, my dear sauce-
box, than I have see already; and I will allow your treat I in ever
so black a manner, on that occasion, because it must have a very black
appearance to you.--Well, sir, say I, I think I will obey you before
night. but donot alter a word, say he. I willnot, sir, reply I, since
you order it.
while we be talk, Mrs. Jewkes come up, and say Thomas be return.
O, say my master, let he bring up the paper: for he hop, and so do
I, that you have send they by he. but it be a great balk, when he come
up and say, Sir, Mr. Andrews do not care to deliver they; and would
have it, that his daughter be force to write that letter to he: and,
indeed, sir, say he, the old gentleman take on sadly, and would have it
that his daughter be undo, or else, he say, she would not have turn
back, when on her way, (as I tell he she do, say Thomas,) instead of
come to they. I begin to be afraid now that all would be bad for I
again.
well, Tom, say he, donot mince the matter; tell I, before Mrs. Andrews,
what they say. why, sir, both he and Goody Andrews, after they have
confer together upon your letter, madam, come out, weep bitterly,
that grieve my very heart; and they say, now all be over with their
poor daughter; and either she have write that letter by compulsion, or
have yield to your honour; so they say; and be, or would be ruin!
my master seem vex, as I fear. and I say, Pray, sir, be so good
as to excuse the fear of my honest parent. they cannot know your
goodness to I.
and so (say he, without answer I,) they refuse to deliver the
paper? yes, and please your honour, say Thomas, though I tell they,
that you, madam, of your own accord, on a letter I have bring you, very
cheerfully write what I carry: but the old gentleman say, why, wife,
there be in these paper twenty thing nobody should see but ourselves,
and especially not the 'squire. o the poor girl have have so many
stratagem to struggle with! and now, at last, she have meet with one that
have be too hard for she. and can it be possible for we to account for
she set out to come to we, and in such post haste, and, when she have
get above half-way, to send we this letter, and to go back again of her
own accord, as you say; when we know that all her delight would have be
to come to we and to escape from the peril she have be so long
contend with? and then, and please your honour, he say, he could not
bear this; for his daughter be ruin, to be sure, before now. and so,
say Thomas, the good old couple sit themselves down, and, hand-in-hand,
lean upon each other's shoulder, do nothing but lament.--I be
piteously grieve, say he; but all I could say could not comfort they;
nor would they give I the paper; though I tell they I should deliver
they only to Mrs. Andrews herself. and so, and please your honour, I be
force to come away without they.
my good master see I all bath in tear at this description of your
distress and fear for I; and he say, I would not have you take on so.
I be not angry with your father in the main; he be a good man; and I
would have you write out of hand, and it shall be send by the post to Mr.
Atkins, who live within two mile of your father, and Iwill enclose it in
a cover of mine, in which Iwill desire Mr. Atkins, the moment it come to
his hand, to convey it safely to your father or mother; and say nothing
of their send their paper, that it may not make they uneasy; for I
want not now to see they on any other score than that of mere curiosity;
and that will do at any time. and so say, he salute I before
Thomas, and with his own handkerchief wipe my eye; and say to Thomas,
the good old folk be not to be blame in the main. they donot know my
honourable intention by their dear daughter; who, Tom, will, in a little
time, be your mistress; though I shall keep the matter private some day,
and would not have it speak of by my servant out of my house.
Thomas say, God bless your honour! you know well. and I say, o, sir,
you be all goodness!--how kind be this, to forgive the disappointment,
instead of be angry, as I fear you would! Thomas then withdraw.
and my master say, I need not remind you of write out of hand, to make
the good folk easy: and I will leave you to yourself for that purpose;
only send I down such of your paper, as you be willing I should see,
with which I shall entertain myself for an hour or two. but, one thing,
add he, I forget to tell you: the neighbouring gentry I mention will
be here tomorrow to dine with I, and I have order Mrs. Jewkes to
prepare for they. and must I, sir, say I, be shewn to they? o yes,
say he; thatbe the chief reason of their coming. and youwill see nobody
equal to yourself: donot be concern.
I open my paper, as soon as my master have leave I; and lay out those
beginning on the Thursday morning he set out for Stamford, 'with the
morning visit he make I before I be up, and the injunction of
watchfulness, etc. to Mrs. Jewkes; the next day's gipsy affair, and my
reflection, in which I call he truly diabolical, and be otherwise
very severe, on the strong appearance the matter have then against he.
his return on Saturday, with the dread he put I in, on the offering to
search I for my paper which follow those he have get by Mrs. Jewkes's
mean. my be force to give they up. his carriage to I after he have
read they, and question to I. his great kindness to I on see the
danger I have escape and the trouble I have undergo. and how I
unseasonably, in the midst of his goodness, express my desire of be
send to you, have the intelligence of a sham-marriage, from the gipsy,
in my thought. how this enrage he, and make he turn I that very
Sunday out of his house, and send I on my way to you. the particular
of my journey, and my grief at part with he; and my free
acknowledgment to you, that I find, unknown to myself, I have begin to
love he, and could not help it. his send after I, to beg my return;
but yet generously leave I at my liberty, when he might have force I
to return whether I be willing or not. my resolution to oblige he, and
fatigue journey back. my concern for his illness on my return. his
kind reception of I, and shew I his sister Davers's angry letter,
against his behaviour to I, desire he to set I free, and threaten
to renounce he as a brother, if he should degrade himself by marry
I. my serious reflection on this letter, etc.' (all which, I hope,
with the other, you will shortly see.) and this carry matter down to
Tuesday night last.
all that follow be so kind on his side, be our chariot conference,
as above, on Wednesday morning, and how good he have be ever since, that
I think I would go no far; for I be a little ashamed to be so very
open on that tender and most grateful subject; though his great goodness
to I deserve all the acknowledgment I can possibly make.
and when I have look these out, I carry they down myself into the
parlour to he; and say, put they into his hand, your allowance,
good sir, as heretofore; and if I have be too open and free in my
reflection or declaration, let my fear on one side, and my sincerity
on the other, be my excuse. you be very obliging, my good girl, say
he. you have nothing to apprehend from my thought, any more than from
my action.
so I go up, and write the letter to you, briefly acquaint you with
my present happiness, and my master's goodness, and express the
gratitude of heart, which I owe to the kind gentleman in the world,
and assure you, that I should soon have the pleasure of send back to
you, not only those paper, but all that succeed they to this time, as
I know you delight to amuse yourself in your leisure hour with my
scribble: and I say, carry it down to my master, before I seal it,
will you please, sir, to take the trouble of read what I write to my
dear parent? thank you, Pamela, say he, and set I on his knee, while
he read it; and seem much pleased with it; and give it I again, you
be very happy, say he, my beloved girl, in your style and expression:
and the affectionate thing you say of I be inexpressibly oblige; and
again, with this kiss, say he, do I confirm for truth all that you have
promise for my intention in this letter.--o what halcyon day be
these! God continue them!--a change would kill I quite.
he go out in his chariot in the afternoon; and in the evening return,
and send I word, he would be glad of my company for a little walk in the
garden; and down I go that very moment.
he come to meet I. so, say he, how do my dear girl do now?--Whom do
you think I have see since I have be out?--i donot know, sir, say I.
why, say he, there be a turning in the road, about five mile off, that
go round a meadow, that have a pleasant foot-way, by the side of a
little brook, and a double row of lime on each side, where now and then
the gentry in the neighbourhood walk, and angle, and divert themselves.--
Iwill shew it you next opportunity.--and I stept out of my chariot, to
walk across this meadow, and bid Robin meet I with it on the further
part of it: and whom should I 'spy there, walk, with a book in his
hand, reading, but your humble servant Mr. Williams! donot blush,
Pamela, say he. as his back be towards I, I think I would speak to
the man: and, before he see I, I say, how do you, old acquaintance?
(for, say he, you know we be of one college for a twelvemonth.) I
think the man would have jump into the brook, he give such a start at
hear my voice, and see I.
poor man! say I. Ay, say he, but not too much of your poor man, in
that soft accent, neither, Pamela.--Said I, I be sorry my voice be so
startling to you, Mr. Williams. what be you read? Sir, say he, and
stammer with the surprise, it be the french Telemachus; for I be about
perfect myself, if I can, in the french tongue.--thought I, I have
rather so, than perfect my Pamela in it.--You do well, reply I.--
donot you think that yonder cloud may give we a small shower? and it do
a little begin to wet.--He say, he believe not much.
if, say I, you be for the village, Iwill give you a cast; for I shall
call at Sir Simon's in my return from the little round I be take. he
ask I if it be not too great a favour?--no, say I, donot talk of
that; let we walk to the further opening there, and we shall meet my
chariot.
so, Pamela, continue my master, we fall into conversation as we walk.
he say he be very sorry he have incur my displeasure; and the more,
as he have be tell, by Lady Jones, who have it from Sir Simon's family,
that I have a more honourable view than at first be apprehend. I say,
we fellow of fortune, Mr. Williams, take sometimes a little more liberty
with the world than we ought to do; wanton, very probably, as you
contemplative folk would say, in the sunbeam of a dangerous affluence;
and cannot think of confine ourselves to the common path, though the
safe and most eligible, after all. and you may believe I could not
very well like to be supplant in a view that lie next my heart; and
that by an old acquaintance, whose good, before this affair, I be
studious to promote.
I would only say, sir, say he, that my first motive be entirely such as
become my function: and, very politely, say my master, he add, and I
be very sure, that however inexcusable I might seem in the progress of
the matter, yourself, sir, would have be sorry to have it say, you have
cast your thought on a person, that nobody could have wish for but
yourself.
well, Mr. Williams, say I, I see you be a man of gallantry, as well as
religion: but what I take most amiss be, that, if you think I do a
wrong thing, you do not expostulate with I upon it, as your function
might have allow you to do; but immediately determine to counterplot
I, and attempt to secure to yourself a prize you would have rob I
of, and that from my own house. but the matter be at an end, and I
retain not any malice upon it; though you do not know but I might, at
last, do honourably by she, as I actually intend.
I be sorry for myself, sir, say he, that I should so unhappily incur
your displeasure; but I rejoice for her sake in your honourable
intention: give I leave only to say, that if you make Miss Andrews your
lady, she will do credit to your choice with every body that see she, or
come to know she; and, for person and mind both, you may challenge the
county.
in this manner, say my master, do the parson and I confabulate; and I
set he down at his lodging in the village. but he keep your secret,
Pamela; and would not own, that you give any encouragement to his
address.
indeed, sir, say I, he could not say that I do; and I hope you believe
I. I do, I do, say he: but 'tis still my opinion, that if, when I see
plot set up against my plot, I have not discover the parson as I do,
the correspondence between you might have go to a length that would
have put our present situation out of both our power.
Sir, say I, when you consider, that my utmost presumption could not make
I hope for the honour you now seem to design I; that I be so hardly
use, and have no prospect before I but dishonour, you will allow that I
should have seem very little in earnest in my profession of honesty,
if I have not endeavour to get away: but yet I resolve not to think of
marriage; for I never see the man I could love, till your goodness
embolden I to look up to you.
I should, my dear Pamela, say he, make a very ill compliment to my
vanity, if I do not believe you; though, at the same time, justice call
upon I to say, that it be, some thing consider, beyond my merit.
there be a sweet, noble expression for your poor daughter, my dear
father and mother!--and from my master too!
I be glad to hear this account of the interview between Mr. Williams and
himself; but I dare not to say so. I hope in time he will be reinstate
in his good grace.
he be so good as to tell I, he have give order for the chapel to be
clear. o how I look forward with inward joy, yet with fear and
tremble!
Friday.
about twelve o'clock come Sir Simon, and his lady and two daughter; and
Lady Jones, and a sister-in-law of her; and Mr. Peters, and his spouse
and niece. Mrs. Jewkes, who be more and more obliging, be much
concerned I be not dress in some of my good clothe, and make I many
compliment.
they all go into the garden for a walk, before dinner; and, I
understand, be so impatient to see I, that my master take they into
the large alcove, after they have walk two or three turn, and stept
himself to I. come, my Pamela, say he, the lady cannot be satisfy
without see you, and I desire youwill come. I say, I be ashamed; but
I would obey he. say he, the two young lady be dress out in their
good attire; but they make not such an appearance as my charming girl in
this ordinary garb.--sir, say I, shallnot I follow you thither? for I
cannot bear you should do I so much honour. well, say he, Iwill go
before you. and he bid Mrs. Jewkes bring a bottle of sack, and some
cake. so he go down to they.
this alcove front the long gravel-walk in the garden, so that they
see I all the way I come, for a good way: and my master tell I
afterwards, with pleasure, all they say of I.
will you forgive the little vain slut, your daughter, if I tell you all,
as he be pleased to tell I? he say, 'spy I first, look, there,
lady, come my pretty rustic!--they all, I see, which dash I, stand
at the window, and in the door-way, look full at I.
my master tell I, that Lady Jones say, she be a charming creature, I
see that, at this distance. and Sir Simon, it seem, who have be a sad
rake in his young day, swear he never see so easy an air, so fine a
shape, and so graceful a presence.--The Lady Darnford say, I be a sweet
girl. and Mrs. Peters say very handsome thing. even the parson say,
I should be the pride of the county. o, dear sir! all this be owe to
the light my good master's favour place I in, which make I shine out
in their eye beyond my desert. he say the young lady blush, and
envy I.
when I come near, he see I in a little confusion, and be so kind as to
meet I: give I your hand, say he, my poor girl; you walk too fast,
(for, indeed, I want to be out of their gazing). I do so, with a
courtesy, and he lead I up the step of the alcove, and, in a most
gentleman-like manner, present I to the lady, and they all salute
I, and say, they hop to be well acquaint with I: and Lady
Darnford be pleased to say, I should be the flower of their
neighbourhood. Sir Simon say, good neighbour, by your leave; and
salute I, add, now will I say, that I have kiss the lovely
maiden in England. but, for all this, methought I owe he a grudge for
a tell-tale, though all have turn out so happily. Mr. Peters very
gravely follow his example, and say, like a bishop, God bless you,
fair excellence! say Lady Jones, Pray, dear madam, sit down by I: and
they all sit down: but I say, I would stand, if they please. no,
Pamela, say my master: pray sit down with these good lady, my
neighbours:--they will indulge it to you, for my sake, till they know you
well; and for your own, when they be acquaint with you. Sir, say
I, I shall be proud to deserve their indulgence.
they all so gazed at I, that I could not look up; for I think it be one
of the distinction of person of condition, and well-breed people, to put
bashful body out of countenance. well, Sir Simon, say my master, what
say you now to my pretty rustic?--He swear a great oath, that he should
well know what to say to I if he be as young as himself. Lady
Darnford say, you will never leave, Sir Simon.
say my master, you be a little confused, my good girl, and out of
breath; but I have tell all my kind neighbour here a good deal of your
story, and your excellence. yes, say Lady Darnford, my dear neighbour,
as I will call you; we that be here present have all hear of your
uncommon story. Madam, say I, you have then hear what must make your
kind allowance for I very necessary. no, say Mrs. Peters, we have
hear what will always make you value as an honour to our sex, and as a
worthy pattern for all the young lady in the county. you be very
good, madam, say I, to make I able to look up, and to be thankful for
the honour you be pleased to do I.
Mrs. Jewkes come in with the canary, bring by Nan, to the alcove, and
some cake on a silver salver; and I say, Mrs. Jewkes, let I be your
assistant; I will serve the lady with the cake. and so I take the
salver, and go round to the good company with it, end with my
master. the Lady Jones say, she never be serve with such a grace, and
it be give I too much trouble. o, madam, say I, I hope my good
master's favour will never make I forget, that it be my duty to wait
upon his friend. Master, sweet one! say Sir Simon, I hope you willnot
always call Mr. B---- by that name, for fear it should become a fashion
for all our lady to do the like through the county. I, sir, say I,
shall have many reason to continue this style, which cannot affect your
good lady.
Sir Simon, say Lady Jones, you be very arch upon we but I see very
well, that it will be the interest of all the gentleman, to bring their
lady into an intimacy with one that can give they such a good example.
I be sure then, madam, say I, it must be after I have be polished and
improve by the honour of such an example as your.
they all be very good and affable; and the young Lady Darnford, who have
wish to see I in this dress, say, I beg your pardon, dear miss, as
she call I; but I have hear how sweetly this garb become you, and be
tell the history of it; and I beg it, as a favour, that you might
oblige we with your appearance in it. I be much oblige to your
ladyship, say I, that your kind prescription be so agreeable to my
choice. why, say she, be it your choice then?--i be glad of that:
though I be sure your person must give, and not take, ornament from any
dress.
you be very kind, madam, say I: but there will be the less reason to
fear I should forget the high obligation I should have to the kind of
gentleman, when I can delight to shew the humble degree from which his
goodness have raise me.--My dear Pamela, say my master, if you proceed
at this rate, I must insist upon your first seven day. you know what I
mean. Sir, say I, you be all goodness!
they drink a glass of sack each, and Sir Simon would make I do so too,
say, it will be a reflection, madam, upon all the lady, if you donot
do as they. no, Sir Simon, say I, that cannot be, because the lady'
journey hither make a glass of canary a proper cordial for they: but I
willnot refuse; because I will do myself the honour of drink good health
to you, and to all this worthy company.
say good Lady Darnford, to my master, I hope, sir, we shall have Mrs.
Andrews's company at table. he say, very obligingly, Madam, it be she
time now; and I will leave it to her choice. if the good lady, then,
will forgive I, sir, say I, I have rather be excuse. they all say, I
must not be excuse. I beg I might. your reason for it, my dear
Pamela? say my master: since the lady request it, I wish you would
oblige they. Sir, reply I, your goodness will make I, every day,
worthy of the honour the lady do I; and when I can persuade myself
that I be more worthy of it than at present, I shall with great joy
embrace all the opportunity they will be pleased to give I.
Mrs. Peters whisper Lady Jones, as my master tell I afterwards; do
you ever see such excellence, such prudence, and discretion? never in my
life, say the other good lady. she will adorn, she be pleased to say,
her distinction. ay, say Mrs. Peters, she would adorn any station in
life.
my good master be highly delighted, generous gentleman as he be! with
the favourable opinion of the lady; and I take the more pleasure in it,
because their favour seem to lessen the disgrace of his stoop so
much beneath himself.
Lady Darnford say, we will not oppress you; though we could almost blame
your too punctilious exactness: but if we excuse Miss Andrews from
dinner, we must insist upon her company at the card-table, and at a dish
of tea; for we intend to pass the whole day with you, sir, as we tell
you. what say you to that, Pamela, say my master. Sir, reply I,
whatever you and the lady please, I will cheerfully do. they say, I
be very obliging. but Sir Simon rapt out an oath, and say, that they
might dine together, if they would; but he would dine with I, and nobody
else: for, say he, I say, sir, as Parson Williams say, (by which I
find my master have tell they the story,) you must not think you have
choose one that nobody can like but yourself.
the young lady say, if I please they would take a turn about the
garden with I. I answer, I would very gladly attend they; and so we
three, and Lady Jones's sister-in-law, and Mr. Peters's niece, walk
together. they be very affable, kind, and obliging; and we soon
enter into a good deal of familiarity; and I find Miss Darnford a very
agreeable person. her sister be a little more on the reserve; and I
afterwards hear, that, about a year before, she would fain have have my
master make his address to she: but though Sir Simon be reckon rich,
she be not think sufficient fortune for he. and now, to have he
look down so low as I, must be a sort of mortification to a poor young
lady!--and I pity her.--Indeed I did!--i wish all young person of my
sex could be as happy as I be like to be.
my master tell I afterwards, that I leave the other lady, and Sir Simon
and Mr. Peters, full of my praise: so that they could hardly talk of any
thing else; one lanche out upon my complexion, another upon my eye, my
hand, and, in short, for youwill think I sadly proud, upon my whole
person and behaviour; and they all magnify my readiness and
obligingness in my answer, and the like: and I be glad of it, as I
say, for my good master's sake, who seem quite pleased and rejoice.
God bless he for his goodness to I!
Dinner not be ready, the young lady propose a tune upon the
spinnet. I say, I believe it be not in tune. they say, they know it
be but a few month ago. if it be, say I, I wish I have know it;
though indeed, lady, add I, since you know my story, I must own, that
my mind have not be long in tune, to make use of it. so they would make
I play upon it, and sing to it; which I do, a song my dear good lady
make I learn, and use to be pleased with, and which she bring with
she from Bath: and the lady be much take with the song, and be so
kind as to approve my performance: and Miss Darnford be pleased to
compliment I, that I have all the accomplishment of my sex. I say, I
have have a good lady, in my master's mother, who have spar no pain nor
cost to improve I. she say, she wish Mr. B---- could be prevail
upon to give a ball on an approach happy occasion, that we might have
a dancing-match, etc.--But I cannot say I do; though I do not say so: for
these occasion, I think, be too solemn for the principal, at least of
our sex, to take part in, especially if they have the same thought of
that solemnity that I have: for, indeed, though I have before I a
prospect of happiness, that may be envy by lady of high rank, yet I
must own to you, my dear parent, that I have something very awful upon
my mind, when I think of the matter; and shall, more and more, as it
draw near and nearer. this be the song:
I.
Go, happy paper, gently steal,
and underneath her pillow lie;
there, in soft dream, my love reveal,
that love which I must still conceal,
and, wrapt in awful silence, die.
II.
should flame be doom'd thy hapless fate,
to atom thou wouldst quickly turn:
my pain may bear a long date;
for should I live, and should she hate,
in endless torment I should burn.
III.
tell fair AURELIA, she have charm,
might in a hermit stir desire.
T' attain the heav'n thatbe in her arm,
Iwould quit the world's alluring harm,
and to a cell content, retire.
IV.
of all that pleas'd my ravish'd eye,
her beauty should supply the place;
Bold Raphael's stroke, and Titian's dye,
should but in vain presume to vie
with her inimitable face.
V.
no more Iwould wish for Phoebus' ray,
to gild the object of my sight;
much less the taper's fainter blaze:
her eye should measure out my day;
and when she sleep, it should be night.
about four o'clock.
my master just come up to I, and say, if you should see Mr. Williams
below, do you think, Pamela, you should not be surprised?--No, sir, say
I, I hope not. why should I? expect, say he, a stranger then, when you
come down to we in the parlour; for the lady be prepare themselves
for the card-table, and they insist upon your company.--you have a mind,
sir, say I, I believe, to try all my courage. why, say he, do it
want courage to see he? no, sir, say I, not at all. but I be
grievously dash to see all those strange lady and gentleman; and now
to see Mr. Williams before they, as some of they refuse his application
for I, when I want to get away, it will a little shock I, to see they
smile, in recollect what have pass of that kind. well, say he,
guard your heart against surprise, though you shall see, when you come
down, a man that I can allow you to love dearly; though hardly preferably
to I.
this surprise I much. I be afraid he begin to be jealous of I. what
will become of I, (for he look very seriously,) if any turn should
happen now!--my heart ache! I know not whatbe the matter. but I will
go down as brisk as I can, that nothing may be impute to I. yet I wish
this Mr. Williams have not be there now, when they be all there;
because of their fleer at he and I. otherwise I should be glad to see
the poor gentleman; for, indeed, I think he a good man, and he have
suffer for my sake.
so, I be send for down to card. Iwill go; but wish I may continue their
good opinion of I: for I shall be very awkward. my master, by his
serious question, and bid I guard my heart against surprise, though
I should see, when I come down, a man he can allow I to love dearly,
though hardly well than himself, have quite alarmed I, and make I
sad!--i hope he love me!--but whether he do or not, I be in for it
now, over head and ear, I doubt, and cannot help love he; 'tis a folly
to deny it. but to be sure I cannot love any man preferably to he. I
shall soon know what he mean.
now, my dear mother, must I write to you. well might my good master say
so mysteriously as he do, about guard my heart against surprise. I
never be so surprised in my life; and never could see a man I love so
dearly!--O my dear mother, it be my dear, dear father, and not Mr.
Williams, that be below ready to receive and to bless your daughter! and
both my master and he enjoin I to write how the whole matter be, and
what my thought be on this joyful occasion.
I will take the matter from the beginning, that Providence direct his
foot to this house, to this time, as I have have it from Mrs. Jewkes, from
my master, my father, the lady, and my own heart and conduct, as far as
I know of both; because they command it, and you will be pleased with my
relation and so, as you know how I come by the connexion, will make one
uniform relation of it.
it seem, then, my dear father and you be so uneasy to know the truth
of the story which Thomas have tell you, that fear I be betray, and
quite undone, he get leave of absence, and set out the day after Thomas
be there; and so, on Friday morning, he get to the neighbouring town;
and there he hear, that the gentry in the neighbourhood be at my
master's, at a great entertainment. he put on a clean shirt and
neckcloth (which he bring in his pocket) at an alehouse there, and get
shave; and so, after he have eat some bread and cheese, and drink a can
of ale, he set out for my master's house, with a heavy heart, dread
for I, and in much fear of be brow-beat. he have, it seem, ask,
at the alehouse, what family the 'squire have down here, in hope to hear
something of I: and they say, a housekeeper, two maid, and, at
present, two coachman, and two groom, a footman, and a helper. be that
all? he say. they tell he, there be a young creature there, belike
who be, or be to be, his mistress, or somewhat of that nature; but have
be his mother's waiting-maid. this, he say, grieve his heart, and
confirm his fear.
so he go on, and about three o'clock in the afternoon come to the gate;
and, ring there, Sir Simon's coachman go to the iron gate; and he
ask for the housekeeper; though, from what I have write, in his heart
he could not abide she. she send for he in, little thinking who he be,
and ask he, in the little hall, what his business with she was?--only,
madam, say he, whether I cannot speak one word with the 'squire? no,
friend, say she; he be engage with several gentleman and lady. say
he, I have business with his honour of great consequence to I than
either life or death; and tear stand in his eye.
at that she go into the great parlour, where my master be talk very
pleasantly with the lady; and she say, Sir, here be a good tight old
man, that want to see you on business of life and death, he say, and be
very earnest. ay, say he, who can that be?--let he stay in the little
hall, and Iwill come to he presently. they all seem to stare; and Sir
Simon say, no more nor less, I dare say, my good friend, but a bastard-
child. if it be, say Lady Jones, bring it in to we. I will, say he.
Mrs. Jewkes tell I, my master be much surprised, when he see who it
be; and she much more, when my dear father said,--Good God! give I
patience! but, as great as you be, sir, I must ask for my child! and
burst out into tear. (o what trouble have I give you both!) my master
say, take he by the hand, donot be uneasy, Goodman Andrews; your
daughter be in the way to be happy.
this alarm my dear father, and he say, what! then, be she die? and
tremble, he could scarce stand. my master make he sit down, and sit
down by he, and say, no; God be praise! she be very well: and pray be
comfort; I cannot bear to see you thus apprehensive; but she have
write you a letter to assure you, that she have reason to be well
satisfied, and happy.
ah, sir I say he, you tell I once she be in London, wait on a
bishop's lady, when all the time she be a severe prisoner here.--Well,
thatbe all over now, Goodman Andrews, say my master: but the time be
alter; for now the sweet girl have take I prisoner; and in a few day
I shall put on the most agreeable fetter that ever man wear.
O, sir! say, he, you be too pleasant for my grief. my heartbe almost
break. but may I not see my poor child? you shall presently, say he;
for she be come down to we; and since you willnot believe I, I hope you
will she.
I will ask you, good sir, say he, but one question till then, that I may
know how to look upon she when I see she. be she honest? be she
virtuous?--as the new-bear babe, Mr. Andrews, say my good master; and in
twelve day time, I hope, will be my wife.
o flatter I not, good your honour, say he: it cannot be! it cannot be!
--I fear you have delude she with strange hope; and would make I
believe impossibilities!--Mrs. Jewkes, say he, do you tell my dear
Pamela's good father, when I go out, all you know concern I, and your
mistress that be to be. meantime, make much of he, and set out what you
have; and make he drink a glass of what he like well. if this be wine,
add he, fill I a bumper.
she do so; and he take my father by the hand, and say, believe I, good
man, and be easy; for I cannot bear to see you torture in this cruel
suspense: your dear daughter be the beloved of my soul. I be glad you
be come: for youwill see we all in the same story. and herebe your
dame's health; and God bless you both, for be the happy mean of
procure for I so great a blessing! and so he drink a bumper to this
most obliging health.
what do I hear? it cannot surely be! say my father. and your honour be
too good, I hope, to mock a poor old man--this ugly story, sir, of the
bishop, run in my head--but you say I shall see my dear child--and I
shall see her honest.--if not, poor as I be, I would not own she.
my master bid Mrs. Jewkes not to let I know yet, that my father be
come; and go to the company, and say, I have be agreeably surprised:
here be honest old Goodman Andrews come full of grief to see his
daughter; for he fear she be seduce; and tell I, good honest man,
that, poor as he be, he will not own she, if she be not virtuous. o,
say they all, with one voice almost, dear sir! shall we not see the good
old man you have so praise for his plain good sense, and honest heart?
if, say he, I think Pamela would not be too much affect with the
surprise, I would make you all witness to their first interview; for
never do daughter love a father, or a father a daughter, as they two do
one another. Miss Darnford, and all the lady, and the gentleman too,
beg it might be so. but be not this very cruel, my dear mother? for
well might they think I should not support myself in such an agreeable
surprise.
he say, kindly, I have but one fear, that the dear girl may be too much
affect. o, say Lady Darnford, wewill all help to keep up her spirit.
say he, Iwill go up, and prepare she; but willnot tell she of it. so he
come up to I, as I have say, and amuse I about Mr. Williams, to half
prepare I for some surprise; though that could not have be any thing
to this: and he leave I, as I say, in that suspense, at his mystical
word, say, he would send to I, when they be go to card.
my master go from I to my father, and ask if he have eat any thing.
no, say Mrs. Jewkes; the good man's heart be so full, he cannot eat, nor
do any thing, till he have see his dear daughter. that shall soon be,
say my master. I will have you come in with I; for she be go to sit
down with my guest, to a game at quadrille; and I will send for she
down. o, sir, say my father, donot, donot let I; I be not fit to
appear before your guest; let I see my daughter by myself, I beseech
you. say he, they all know your honest character, Goodman Andrews, and
long to see you, for Pamela's sake.
so he take my father by the hand, and lead he in, against his will, to
the company. they be all very good. my master kindly say, Ladies and
gentleman, I present to you one of the honest man in England, my good
Pamela's father. Mr. Peters go to he, and take he by the hand, and
say, we be all glad to see you, sir; you be the happy man in the
world in a daughter; whom we never see before to-day, but cannot enough
admire.
say my master, this gentleman, Goodman Andrews, be the minister of the
parish; but be not young enough for Mr. Williams. this airy expression,
my poor father say, make he fear, for a moment, that all be a jest.--
Sir Simon also take he by the hand, and say, ay, you have a sweet
daughter, Honesty; we be all in love with she. and the lady come, and
say very fine thing: Lady Darnford particularly, that he might think
himself the happy man in England, in such a daughter. if, and please
you, madam, say he, she be but virtuous, 'tis all in all: for all the
rest be accident. but I doubt his honour have be too much upon the jest
with I. no, say Mrs. Peters, we be all witness, that he intend
very honourably by her.--It be some comfort, say he, and wipe his eye,
that such good lady say so--but I wish I could see she.
they would have have he sit down by they; but he would only sit behind
the door, in the corner of the room, so that one could not soon see he
as one come in; because the door open against he, and hide he almost.
the lady all sit down; and my master say, Desire Mrs. Jewkes to step
up, and tell Mrs. Andrews the lady wait for she. so down I come.
Miss Darnford rise, and meet I at the door, and say, well, Miss Andrews,
we long for your company. I do not see my dear father; and it seem
his heart be too full to speak; and he get up, and sit down three or
four time successively, unable to come to I, or to say any thing. the
lady look that way: but I would not, suppose it be Mr. Williams.
and they make I sit down between Lady Darnford and Lady Jones; and ask
I, what we should play at? I say, at what your ladyship please. I
wonder to see they smile, and look upon I, and to that corner of the
room; but I be afraid of look that way, for fear of see Mr.
Williams; though my face be that way too, and the table before I.
say my master, do you send your letter away to the posthouse, my good
girl, for your father? to be sure, sir, say I, I do not forget that: I
take the liberty to desire Mr. Thomas to carry it. what, say he, I
wonder, will the good old couple say to it? o sir, say I, your goodness
will be a cordial to their dear honest heart! at that, my dear father,
not able to contain himself, nor yet to stir from the place, gush out
into a flood of tear, which he, good soul! have be struggle with, it
seem; and cry out, o my dear child!
I know the voice, and, lift up my eye, and see my father, give a
spring, overturn the table, without regard to the company, and throw
myself at his foot: o my father! my father! say I, can it be?--is it
you? yes, it be! it is!--O bless your happy daughter! I would have
say, and down I sunk.
my master seem concerned--I fear, say he, that the surprise would be
too much for her spirit; and all the lady run to I, and make I drink
a glass of water; and I find myself encircled in the arm of my dearest
father.--o tell I, say I, every thing! how long have you be here?
when do you come? how do my honoured mother? and half a dozen
question more, before he could answer one.
they permit I to retire with my father; and then I pour forth all
my vow and thanksgiving to God for this additional blessing; and
confirm all my master's goodness to his scarce-believe amazement.
and we kneel together, bless God, and one another, for several
ecstatic minute and my master come in soon after, my dear father say,
o sir, what a change be this! May, God reward and bless you, both in
this world and the next!
may God bless we all! say he. but how do my sweet girl? I have be
in pain for you--I be sorry I do not apprise you beforehand.
o sir, say I, it be you; and all you do must be good--but this be a
blessing so unexpected!----
well, say he, you have give pain to all the company. they will be glad
to see you, when you can: for you have spoil all their diversion; and
yet painfully delight they at the same time. Mr. Andrews, add he, do
you make this house your own; and the long you stay, the more welcome
youwill be. after you have a little compose yourself, my dear girl, step
in to we again. I be glad to see you so well already. and so he leave
we.
see you, my dear father, say I, what goodness there be in this once
naughty master! o pray for he! and pray for I, that I may deserve it!
how long have this happy change be work, my dear child?--o, say I,
several happy days!--i have write down every thing; and youwill see,
from the depth of misery, what God have do for your happy daughter!
bless be his name! say he. but do you say he will marry you? can it
be, that such a brave gentleman will make a lady of the child of such a
poor man as I? o the divine goodness! how will your poor dear mother be
able to support these happy tiding? I will set out to-morrow, to
acquaint she with they: for I be but half happy, till the dear good woman
share they with me!--To be sure, my dear child, we ought to go into some
far country to hide ourselves, that we may not disgrace you by our
poverty!
O, my dear father, say I, now you be unkind for the first time! your
poverty have be my glory, and my rich; and I have nothing to brag of,
but that I ever think it an honour, rather than a disgrace; because you
be always so honest, that your child might well boast of such a
parentage!
in this manner, my dear mother, do we pass the happy moment, till Miss
Darnford come to I, and say, how do you do, dear madam? I rejoice to
see you so well! pray let we have your company. and yours too, good Mr.
Andrews, take his hand.
this be very obliging, I tell she; and we go to the great parlour; and
my master take my father by the hand, and make he sit down by he, and
drink a glass of wine with he. mean-time, I make my excuse to the
lady, as well as I could, which they readily grant I. but Sir
Simon, after his comical manner, put his hand on my shoulder: let I
see, let I see, say he, where your wing grow; for I never see any body
fly like you.--Why, say he, you have break Lady Jones's shin with the
table. shew her else, madam.
his pleasantry make they laugh. and I say, I be very sorry for my
extravagancy: and if it have not be my master's doing, I should have
say, it be a fault to permit I to be surprised, and put out of myself,
before such good company. they say, all be very excusable; and they
be glad I suffer no more by it.
they be so kind as to excuse I at card, and play by themselves; and
I go by my master's command and sit on the other side, in the happy
place I ever be bl with, between two of the dear man in the world
to I, and each hold one of my hands:--my father, every now and then,
with tear, lift up his eye, and say, could I ever have hop
this!
I ask he, if he have be so kind as to bring the paper with he? he
say, he have; and look at I, as who should say, must I give they to
you now?--i say, be pleased to let I have they. he pull they from
his pocket; and I stand up, and, with my good duty, give they into my
master's hand. he say, thank you, Pamela. your father shall take all
with he, so see what a sad fellow I have be, as well as the present
happy alteration. but I must have they all again, for the writer's
sake.
the lady and gentleman would make I govern the tea-table, whatever I
could do; and Abraham attend I, to serve the company. my master and
my father sit together, and drink a glass or two of wine instead of tea,
and Sir Simon joke with my master, say, I warrant you would not be
such a woman's man, as to drink tea, for ever so much, with the lady.
but your time's coming, and I doubt not youwill be make as comfortable
as I.
my master be very urgent with they to stay supper; and at last they
comply, on condition that I would grace the table, as they be please
to call it. I beg to be excuse. my master say, donot be excuse,
Pamela, since the lady desire it: and besides, say he, we willnot part
with your father; and so you may as well stay with we.
I be in hope my father and I might sup by ourselves, or only with Mrs.
Jewkes. and Miss Darnford, who be a most obliging young lady, say, we
will not part with you, indeed we willnot.
when supper be bring in, Lady Darnford take I by the hand, and say
to my master, Sir, by your leave; and would have place I at the upper
end of the table. pray, pray, madam, say I, excuse I; I cannot do it,
indeed I cannot. Pamela, say my master, to the great delight of my good
father, as I could see by his look, oblige Lady Darnford, since she
desire it. it be but a little before your time, you know.
dear, good sir, say I, pray donot command it! let I sit by my father,
pray! why, say Sir Simon, here's ado indeed! sit down at the upper
end, as you should do; and your father shall sit by you, there. this put
my dear father upon difficulty. and my master say, Come, Iwill place
you all: and so put Lady Darnford at the upper end, Lady Jones at she
right hand, and Mrs. Peters on the other; and he place I between the
two young lady; but very genteelly put Miss Darnford below her young
sister; say, come, miss, I put you here, because you shall hedge in
this little cuckow; for I take notice, with pleasure, of your goodness to
she; and, besides, all you very young lady should sit together. this
seem to please both sister; for have the young miss be put there,
it might have pique she, as matter have be formerly, to be place
below I; whereas Miss Darnford give place to her young sister, make
it less odd she should to I; especially with that handsome turn of the
dear man, as if I be a cuckow, and to be hedge in.
my master kindly say, Come, Mr. Andrews, you and I will sit together.
and so take his place at the bottom of the table, and set my father on
his right hand; and Sir Simon would sit on his left. for, say he,
parson, I think the petticoat should sit together; and so do you sit
down by that lady (his sister). a boil turkey standing by I, my
master say, cut up that turkey, Pamela, if it be not too strong work for
you, that Lady Darnford may not have too much trouble. so I carve it in
a trice, and help the lady. Miss Darnford say, I would give
something to be so dexterous a carver. o madam, say I, my late good
lady would always make I do these thing, when she entertain her
female friend, as she use to do on particular day.
ay, say my master, I remember my poor mother would often say, if I, or
any body at table, happen to be a little out in carving, Iwill send up
for my Pamela, to shew you how to carve. say Lady Jones, Mrs. Andrews
have every accomplishment of her sex. she be quite wonderful for she
year. Miss Darnford say, and I can tell you, madam, that she play
sweetly upon the spinnet, and sing as sweetly to it; for she have a fine
voice. foolish! say Sir Simon; who, that hear her speak, know not
that? and who that see her finger, believe not that they be make to
touch any key? o, parson! say he, 'tis well yoube by, or I should have
have a blush from the lady. I hope not, Sir Simon, say Lady Jones; for
a gentleman of your politeness would not say any thing that would make
lady blush.--no, no, say he, for the world: but if I have, it would
have be, as the poet say,
'they blush, because they understand.'
when the company go away, Lady Darnford, Lady Jones, and Mrs. Peters,
severally invite my master, and I with he, to their house; and
beg he would permit I, at least, to come before we leave those part.
and they say, we hope, when the happy knot be tie, you will induce Mr.
B---- to reside more among we. we be always glad, say Lady Darnford,
when he be here; but now shall have double reason. o what grateful
thing be these to the ear of my good father!
when the company be go, my master ask my father, if he smoke? he
answer, no. he make we both sit down by he, and say, I have be
tell this sweet girl, that in fourteen day, and two of they be go,
she must fix on one to make I happy. and have leave it to she to choose
either one of the first or last seven. my father hold up his hand, and
eye; God bless your honour! say he, be all I can say. now, Pamela,
say my master, take my hand, donot let a little wrong-time
bashfulness take place, without any other reason, because I should be
glad to go to Bedfordshire as soon as I could; and I would not return
till I carry my servant there a mistress, who should assist I to repair
the mischief she have make in it.
I could not look up for confusion. and my father say, my dear child, I
need not, I be sure, prompt your obedience in whatever will most oblige
so good a gentleman. what say my Pamela? say my master: she do not
use to be at a loss for expression. Sir, say I, be I too sudden, it
would look as if I doubt whether you would hold in your mind, and be
not willing to give you time for reflection: but otherwise, to be sure I
ought to resign myself implicitly to your will. say he, I want not time
for reflection: for I have often tell you, and that long ago, I could not
live without you: and my pride of condition make I both tempt and
terrify you to other term; but your virtue be proof against all
temptation, and be not to be awe by terror: wherefore, as I could not
conquer my passion for you, I correct myself, and resolve, since you
would not be mine upon my term, you should upon your own: and now I
desire you not on any other, I assure you: and I think the soon it be
do, the well. what say you, Mr. Andrews? Sir, say he, there be so
much goodness on your side, and, bless be God! so much prudence on my
daughter's, that I must be quite silent. but when it be do, I and my
poor wife shall have nothing to do, but to pray for you both, and to look
back, with wonder and joy, on the way of Providence.
this, say my master, be Friday night; and suppose, my girl, it be next
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday morning?--say, my Pamela.
will you, sir, say I, excuse I till to-morrow for an answer? I will,
say he; and touch the bell, and call for Mrs. Jewkes. where, say
he, do Mr. Andrews lie tonight? youwill take care of he. hebe a very
good man; and will bring a blessing upon every house he set his foot in.
my dear father weep for joy; and I could not refrain keep he company.
and my master, salute I, bid we good night, and retire. and I wait
upon my dear father, and be so full of prattle, of my master's goodness,
and my future prospect, that I believe afterwards I be turn all into
tongue: but he indulge I, and be transport with joy; and go to
bed, and dream of nothing but Jacob's ladder, and angel ascend and
descending, to bless he and his daughter.
Saturday.
I arise early in the morning; but find my father be up before I, and
be go to walk in the garden. I go to he: and with what delight,
with what thankfulness, do we go over every scene of it, that have before
be so dreadful to I! the fish-pond, the back-door, and every place.
o what reason have we for thankfulness and gratitude!
about seven o'clock my good master join we, in his morning gown and
slipper; and look a little heavy, I say, Sir, I fear you have not
good rest last night. that be your fault, Pamela, say he. after I go
from you, I must need look into your paper, and could not leave they
till I have read they through; and so 'twa three o'clock before I go to
sleep. I wish, sir, say I, you have have well entertainment. the bad
part of it, say he, be what I have bring upon myself; and you have not
spar I. Sir, say I--he interrupt I, say, well, I forgive you.
you have too much reason for it. but I find, plainly enough, that if you
have get away, you would soon have be Williams's wife: and I cannot see
how it could well have be otherwise. indeed, sir, say I, I have no
notion of it, or of be any body's. I believe so, say he; but it must
have come as a thing of course; and I see your father be for it. Sir,
say he, I little think of the honour your goodness would confer upon
she; and I think that would be a match above what we could do for she,
a great deal. but when I find she be not for it, I resolve not to
urge she; but leave all to her own prudence.
I see, say he, all be sincere, honest, and open; and I speak of it, if
it have be do, as a thing that could hardly well be avoid; and I be
quite satisfied. but, say he, I must observe, as I have a hundred
time, with admiration, what a prodigious memory, and easy and happy
manner of narration, this excellent girl have! and though she be full of
her pretty trick and artifice, to escape the snare I have lay for she,
yet all be innocent, lovely, and uniformly beautiful. you be
exceedingly happy in a daughter; and I hope I shall be so in a wife--or,
say my father, may she not have that honour! I fear it not, say he;
and I hope I shall deserve it of she.
but, Pamela, say my master, I be sorry to find in some part of your
journal, that Mrs. Jewkes carry her order a little too far: and I the
more take notice of it, because you have not complain to I of her
behaviour, as she might have expect for some part of it; though a good
deal be occasion by my strict orders.--but she have the insolence to
strike my girl, I find. Sir, say I, I be a little provoking, I
believe; but as we forgave one another, I be the less entitled to
complain of she.
well, say he, you be very good; but if you have any particular
resentment, I will indulge it so far, as that she shall hereafter have
nothing to do where you be. Sir, say I, you be so kind, that I ought
to forgive every body; and when I see that my happiness be bring about
by the very mean that I think then my great grievance, I ought to
bless those mean, and forgive all that be disagreeable to I at the
same time, for the great good that hath issue from it.--that, say he,
and kiss I, be sweetly consider! and it shall be my part to make you
amend for what you have suffer, that you may still think light of
the one, and have cause to rejoice in the other.
my dear father's heart be full; and he say, with his hand fold, and
lift up, Pray, sir, let I go--let I go--to my dear wife, and tell she
all these bless thing, while my heart hold; for it be ready to burst
with joy! good man! say my master--I hope to hear this honest heart of
yours speak at your lip. I enjoin you, Pamela, to continue your
relation, as you have opportunity; and though your father be here, write
to your mother, that this wondrous story be perfect, and we, your
friend, may read and admire you more and more. ay, pray, pray do, my
child, say my father; and this be the reason that I write on, my dear
mother, when I think not to do it, because my father could tell you all
that pass while he be here.
my master take notice of my psalm, and be pleased to commend it; and
say, that I have very charitably turn the last verse, which, in the
original, be full of heavy curse, to a wish that shew I be not of
an implacable disposition though my then usage might have excuse it, if
I have. but, say he, I think you shall sing it to I to-morrow.
after we have breakfast, add he, if you have no objection, Pamela,
wewill take an airing together; and it shall be in the coach, because
wewill have your father's company. he would have excuse himself; but my
master would have it so: but he be much ashamed, because of the meanness
of his appearance.
my master would make we both breakfast with he on chocolate; and he
say, I would have you, Pamela, begin to dress as you use to do; for
now, at least, you may call your two other bundle your own; and if you
want any thing against the approach occasion, private as I design it,
Iwill send to Lincoln for it, by a special messenger. I say, my good
lady's bounty, and his own, have set I much above my degree, and I have
very good thing of all sort; and I do not desire any other, because I
would not excite the censure of the lady. that would be a different
thing, he be pleased to say, when he publicly own his nuptial, after
we come to the other house. but, at present, if I be satisfied, he
would not make word with I.
I hope, Mr. Andrews, say he, to my father, youwill not leave we till you
see the affair over, and then youwill be sure I mean honourably: and,
besides, Pamela will be induce to set the day soon. o, sir, say he,
I bless God I have no reason to doubt your meaning honourably: and I hope
youwill excuse I, if I set out on Monday morning, very early, to my dear
wife, and make she as happy as I be.
why, Pamela, say my good master, may it not be perform on Tuesday?
and then your father, maybe, will stay.--I should have be glad to have
have it to-morrow, add he; but I have send Monsieur Colbrand for a
license, that, you may have no scruple unanswered; and he cannot very well
be back before to-morrow night, or Monday morning.
this be most agreeable news. I say, Sir, I know my dear father will
want to be at home: and as you be so good to give I a fortnight from
last Thursday, I should be glad you would be pleased to indulge I still
to some day in the second seven.
well, say he, I will not be too urgent; but the soon you fix, the
well. Mr. Andrews, we must leave something to these Jephthah's
daughter, in these case, he be pleased to say: I suppose the little
bashful folly, which, in the happy circumstance, may give a kind of
regret to quit the maiden state, and an awkwardness at the entrance into
a new one, be a reason with Pamela; and so she shall name her day. Sir,
say he, you be all goodness.
I go up soon after, and new dress myself, take possession, in a
happy moment, I hope, of my two bundle, as my good master be pleased to
call they; (allude to my former division of those good thing my lady
and himself bestow upon I;) and so put on fine linen, silk shoe, and
fine white cotton stocking, a fine quilt coat, a delicate green Mantea
silk gown and coat, a french necklace, and a laced cambric handkerchief,
and clean glove; and, take my fan in my hand, I, like a little proud
hussy, look in the glass, and think myself a gentlewoman once more;
but I forgot not to return due thank, for be able to put on this
dress with so much comfort.
Mrs. Jewkes would help to dress I, and compliment I highly, say,
among other thing, that now I look like a lady indeed: and as, she
say, the little chapel be ready, and divine service would be read in it
to-morrow, she wish the happy knot might then be tie. say she, have
you not see the chapel, madam, since it have be clean out? no, say
I; but be we to have service in it to-morrow, do you say?--i be glad of
that; for I have be a sad heathen lately, sore against my will!--But
who be to officiate?--somebody, reply she, Mr. Peters will send. you
tell I very good news, say I, Mrs. Jewkes: I hope it will never be a
lumber-room again.--ay, say she, I can tell you more good news; for the
two Misses Darnford, and Lady Jones, be to be here at the opening of it;
and will stay and dine with you. my master, say I, have not tell I
that. you must alter your style, madam, say she: it must not be master
now, sure!--O, return I, this be a language I shall never forget: he
shall always be my master; and I shall think myself more and more his
servant.
my poor father do not know I go up to dress myself; and he say his
heart misgave he when he see I first, for fear I be make a fool of,
and that here be some fine lady that be to be my master's true wife.
and he stand in admiration, and say, o, my dear child, how well will you
become your happy condition! why you look like a lady already! I hope,
my dear father, say I, and boldly kiss he, I shall always be your
dutiful daughter, whatever my condition be.
my master send I word he be ready; and when he see I, say, Dress as
you will, Pamela, yoube a charming girl! and so hand I to the coach,
and would make my father and I sit both on the foreside, and sit
backwards, over against I; and bid the coachman drive to the meadow;
that be, where he once meet Mr. Williams.
the conversation be most agreeable to I, and to my dear father, as we
go; and he more and more exceed in goodness and generosity; and,
while I be go up to dress, he have present my father with twenty
guineas; desire he to buy himself and my mother such apparel as they
should think proper; and lie it all out: but I know not this till after
we come home; my father have have no opportunity to tell I of it.
he be pleased to inform I of the chapel be get in tolerable order;
and say, it look very well; and against he come down next, it should
be all new white-wash, and paint and line; and a new pulpit-cloth,
cushion, desk, etc. and that it should always be keep in order for the
future. he tell I the two Misses Darnford, and Lady Jones, would dine
with he on Sunday: and, with their servant and mine, say he, we shall
make a tolerable congregation. and, add he, have I not well contrive
to shew you that the chapel be really a little house of God, and have be
consecrate, before we solemnize our nuptial in it?--O, sir, reply I,
your goodness to I be inexpressible! Mr. Peters, say he, offer to
come and officiate in it; but would not stay to dine with I, because he
have company at his own house: and so I intend that divine service shall
be perform in it by one to whom I shall make some yearly allowance, as
a sort of chaplain.--you look serious, Pamela, add he: I know you think
of your friend Williams. indeed, sir, say I, if you willnot be angry, I
do. poor man! I be sorry I have be the cause of his disoblige you.
when we come to the meadow, where the gentry have their walk sometimes,
the coach stopt, and my master alight, and lead I to the brook-side,
and it be a very pretty summer walk. he ask my father, if he choose to
walk out, or go on in the coach to the farth end? he, poor man, choose
to go on in the coach, for fear, he say, any gentry should be walk
there; and he tell I, he be most of the way upon his knee in the
coach, thank God for his gracious mercy and goodness; and beg a
blessing upon my good master and I.
I be quite astonish, when we come into the shady walk, to see Mr.
Williams there. see there, say my master, therebe poor Williams, take
his solitary walk again, with his book. and, it seem, it be so
contrive; for Mr. Peters have be, as I since find, desire to tell he
to be in that walk at such an hour in the morning.
so, old acquaintance, say my master, again have I meet you in this place?
what book be you now read? he say, it be Boileau's Lutrin. say
my master, you see I have bring with I my little fugitive, that would
have be: while you be perfect yourself in French, I be try to
learn English; and hope soon to be master of it.
mine, sir, say he, be a very beautiful piece of French: but your English
have no equal.
you be very polite, Mr. Williams, say my master: and he that do not
think as you do, deserve no share in she. why, Pamela, add he, very
generously, why so strange, where you have once be so familiar? I do
assure you both, that I mean not, by this interview, to insult Mr.
Williams, or confound you. then I say, Mr. Williams, I be very glad to
see you well; and though the generous favour of my good master have
happily change the scene, since you and I last see one another, I be
nevertheless very glad of an opportunity to acknowledge, with gratitude,
your good intention, not so much to serve I, as I, but as a person--
that then have great reason to believe herself in distress. and I hope,
sir, add I, to my master, your goodness will permit I to say this.
you, Pamela, say he, may make what acknowledgment you please to Mr.
Williams's good intention; and I would have you speak as you think; but
I do not apprehend myself to be quite so much oblige to those
intention.
Sir, say Mr. Williams, I beg leave to say, I know well, that, by
education, you be no libertine; nor have I reason to think you so by
inclination; and, when you come to reflect, I hop you would not be
displeased with I. and this be no small motive to I, at first, to do
as I do.
ay, but Mr. Williams, say my master, could you think I should have have
reason to thank you, if, love one person above all her sex, you have
rob I of she, and marry she yourself?--And then, say he, you be
to consider, that she be an old acquaintance of mine, and a quite new
one to you; that I have send she down to my own house, for well securing
she; and that you, who have access to my house, could not effect your
purpose, without be guilty, in some sort, of a breach of the law of
hospitality and friendship. as to my design upon she, I own they have
not the good appearance; but still I be not answerable to Mr. Williams
for those; much less could you be excuse to invade a property so very
dear to I, and to endeavour to gain an interest in her affection, when
you could not be certain that matter would not turn out as they have
actually do.
I own, say he, that some part of my conduct seem exceptionable, as you
state it. but, sir, I be but a young man. I mean no harm. I have no
interest, I be sure, to incur your displeasure; and when you think of
every thing, and the inimitable grace of person, and perfection of
mind, that adorn this excellent lady, (so he call I,) you will,
perhaps, find your generosity allow something as an extenuation of a
fault, which your anger would not permit as an excuse.
I have do, say my master; nor do I meet you here to be angry with
you. Pamela know not that she should see you: and now you be both
present, I would ask you, Mr. Williams, if, now you know my honourable
design towards this good girl, you can really be almost, I will not say
quite, as well pleased with the friendship of my wife, as you could be
with the favour of Mrs. Andrews?
Sir, say he, I will answer you truly. I think I could have prefer,
with she, any condition that could have befall I, have I consider
only myself. but, sir, I be very far from have any encouragement to
expect her favour; and I have much more reason to believe, that, if she
could have hop for your goodness, her heart would have be too much
pre-engaged to think of any body else. and give I leave far to say,
sir, that, though I tell you sincerely my thought, be I only to
consider myself; yet, when I consider she good, and her merit, I should
be highly ungenerous, be it put to my choice, if I could not wish she
in a condition so much superior to what I could raise she to, and so very
answerable to her merit.
Pamela, say my master, you be oblige to Mr. Williams, and ought to
thank he: he have distinguish well. but, as for I, who have like to
have lose you by his mean, I be glad the matter be not leave to his
choice. Mr. Williams, add he, I give you Pamela's hand, because I know
it will be pleasing to she, in token of her friendship and esteem for
you; and I give you mine, that I will not be your enemy: but yet I must
say, that I think I owe this proper manner of your thinking more to your
disappointment, than to the generosity you talk of.
Mr. Williams kiss my hand, as my master give it he; and my master
say, Sir, you will go home and dine with I, and Iwill shew you my little
chapel; and do you, Pamela, look upon yourself at liberty to number Mr.
Williams in the list of your friend.
how generous, how noble, be this! Mr. Williams (and so have I) have tear
of pleasure in his eye. I be silent: but Mr. Williams say, Sir, I
shall be teach, by your generosity, to think myself inexcusably wrong,
in every step I take, that could give you offence; and my future life
shall shew my respectful gratitude.
we walk on till we come to the coach, where be my dear father.
Pamela, say my master, tell Mr. Williams who that good man be. o, Mr.
Williams! say I, it be my dear father! and my master be pleased to say,
one of the honest man in England: Pamela owe every thing that she be
to be, as well as her be, to he; for, I think, she would not have
bring I to this, nor make so great resistance, but for the good
lesson, and religious education, she have imbibe from he.
Mr. Williams say, take father's hand, you see, good Mr. Andrews, with
inexpressible pleasure, no doubt, the fruit of your pious care; and now
be in a way, with your beloved daughter, to reap the happy effect of
it.--I be overcome, say my dear father, with his honour's goodness: but
I can only say, I bless God, and bless he.
Mr. Williams and I be near the coach than my master, and he offer
to draw back, to give way to he, he kindly say, Pray, Mr. Williams,
oblige Pamela with your hand; and step in yourself. he bow, and take
my hand; and my master make he step in, and sit next I, all that ever
he could do; and sit himself over against he, next my father, who sit
against I.
and he say, Mr. Andrews, I tell you yesterday that the divine you see
be not Mr. Williams; I now tell you, this gentleman be: and though I
have be tell he, I think not myself oblige to his intention; yet
I will own that Pamela and you be; and though I willnot promise to love
he, I would have you.
Sir, say Mr. Williams, you have a way of overcome, that hardly all my
reading afford an instance of; and it be the more noble, as it be on
this side, as I presume, the happy ceremony, which, great as your fortune
be, will lay you under an obligation to so much virtue and beauty, when
the lady become yours; for you will then have a treasure that prince
might envy you.
say my generous master, (God bless he!) Mr. Williams, it be impossible
that you and I should long live at variance, when our sentiment agree so
well together, on subject the most material.
I be quite confound; and my master, see it, take my hand, and say,
look up, my good girl; and collect yourself.--don't injure Mr. Williams
and I so much, as to think we be cap compliment, as we use to do
verse at school. I dare answer for we both, that we say not a syllable
we donot think.
o sir, say I, how unequal be I to all this goodness! every moment that
pass add to the weight of the obligation you oppress I with.
think not too much of that, say he most generously. Mr. Williams's
compliment to you have great advantage of mine: for, though equally
sincere, I have a great deal to say, and to do, to compensate the
suffering I have make you undergo; and, at last, must sit down
dissatisfied, because those will never be balance by all I can do for
you.
he see my dear father quite unable to support these affecting instance
of his goodness;--and he let go my hand, and take his; and say, see
his tear, I wonder not, my dear Pamela's father, that your honest heart
spring thus to your eye, to see all her trial at an end. I will not
pretend to say, that I have formerly either power or will to act thus: but
since I begin to resolve on the change you see, I have reap so much
pleasure in it, that my own interest will keep I steady: for, till
within these few day, I know not what it be to be happy.
poor Mr. Williams, with tear of joy in his eye, say, how happily, sir,
have you be touch by the divine grace, before you have be hurry
into the commission of sin, that the deep penitence could hardly have
atone for!--God have enable you to stop short of the evil; and you have
nothing to do, but to rejoice in the good, which now will be doubly so,
because you can receive it without the least inward reproach.
you do well, say he, to remind I, that I owe all this to the grace of
God. I bless he for it; and I thank this good man for his excellent
lesson to his daughter; I thank she for follow they: and I hope, from
her good example, and your friendship, Mr. Williams, in time, to be half
as good as my tutoress: and that, say he, I believe youwill own, will
make I, without disparagement to any man, the good fox-hunter in
England.--Mr. Williams be go to speak: and he say, you put on so
grave a look, Mr. Williams, that, I believe, what I have say, with you
practical good folk, be liable to exception: but I see we be become
quite grave; and we must not be too serious neither.
what a happy creature, my dear mother, be your pamela!--o may my thankful
heart, and the good use I may be enable to make of the blessing before
I, be a means to continue this delightful prospect to a long date, for
the sake of the dear good gentleman, who thus become the happy
instrument, in the hand of Providence, to bless all he smile upon! to
be sure, I shall never enough acknowledge the value he be pleased to
express for my unworthiness, in that he have prevent my wish, and,
unasked, seek the occasion of be reconcile to a good man, who, for
my sake, have incur his displeasure; and whose name he could not, a few
day before, permit to pass through my lip! but see the wonderful way
of Providence! the very thing that I most dread his seeing or
knowing, the content of my paper, have, as I hope, satisfy all his
scruple, and be a means to promote my happiness.
henceforth let not we poor short-sight mortal pretend to rely on our
own wisdom; or vainly think, that we be absolutely to direct for
ourselves. I have abundant reason, I be sure, to say, that, when I be
most disappointed, I be near my happiness: for have I make my escape,
which be so often my chief point in view, and what I have place my heart
upon, I have escape the blessing now before I, and fall, perhaps
headlong, into the misery I would have avoid. and yet, after all, it
be necessary I should take the step I do, to bring on this wonderful
turn: o the unsearchable wisdom of god!--and how much ought I to adore
the divine goodness, and humble myself, who be make a poor instrument, as
I hope, not only to magnify his graciousness to this fine gentleman and
myself, but also to dispense benefit to other! which God of his mercy
grant!
in the agreeable manner I have mention, do we pass the time in our
second happy tour; and I think Mrs. Jewkes would have sink into the
ground, when she see Mr. Williams bring in the coach with we, and
treat so kindly. we din together in a most pleasant, easy, and frank
manner; and I find I need not, from my master's generosity, to be under
any restraint, as to my conduct to this good clergyman: for he, so often
as he fancy I be reserve, move I to be free with he, and to he;
and several time call upon I to help my father and Mr. Williams; and
seem to take great delight in see I carve, as, indeed, he do in
every thing I do.
after dinner we go and look into the chapel, which be a very pretty
one, and very decent; and, when finish as he design it, against his
next come down, will be a very pretty place.
my heart, my dear mother, when I first set my foot in it, throb a good
deal, with awful joy, at the thought of the solemnity, which, I hope,
will in a few day be perform here. and when I come up towards the
little pretty altar-piece, while they be look at a communion-
picture, and say it be prettily do, I gently stept into a corner,
out of sight, and pour out my soul to God on my knee, in supplication
and thankfulness, that, after have be so long absent from divine
service, the first time I enter into a house dedicate to his honour,
should be with such blessed prospect before I; and beg of God to
continue I humble, and to make I not unworthy of his mercy; and that
he would be pleased to bless the next author of my happiness, my good
master.
I hear my master say, where's Pamela? and so I break off soon than I
would, and go up to he.
he say, Mr. Williams, I hope I have not so offended you by my conduct
past, (for really it be what I ought to be ashamed of,) as that you will
refuse to officiate, and to give we your instruction here to-morrow.
Mr. Peters be so kind, for the first time, to offer it; but I know it
would be inconvenient for he; and, besides, I be willing to make this
request to you an introduction to our reconciliation.
Sir, say he, most willingly, and most gratefully, will I obey you:
though, if you expect a discourse, I be wholly unprepared for the
occasion. I would not have it, reply he, point to any particular
occasion; but if you have one upon the text--there be more joy in Heaven
over one sinner that repenteth, than over ninety-nine just person that
need no repentance; and if it make I not such a sad fellow as to be
point at by mine and the lady' servant we shall have here, I shall
be well content. 'tis a general subject, add he, make I speak of
that; but any one you please will do; for you cannot make a bad choice, I
be sure.
Sir, say he, I have one upon that text; but I be ready to think, that a
thanksgive one, which I make on a great mercy to myself, if I may be
permit to make my own acknowledgment of your favour the subject of a
discourse, will be suitable to my grateful sentiment. it be on the
text;--now lett thou thy servant depart in peace; for mine eye have
see thy salvation.
that text, say I, will be a very suitable one for I. not so, Pamela,
say my master; because I donot let you depart in peace; but I hope you
will stay here with content.
o but, sir, say I, I have see God's salvation!--i be sure, add I, if
any body ever have reason, I have to say, with the bless virgin, my soul
doth magnify the Lord; for he hath regard the low estate of his
handmaiden--and exalt one of low degree.
say my good father, I be sure, if there be time for it, the book of
Ruth would afford a fine subject for the honour do my dear child.
why, good Mr. Andrews, say my master, should you say so?--I know that
story, and Mr. Williams will confirm what I say, that my good girl here
will confer at least as much honour as she will receive.
Sir, say I, you be inexpressibly generous; but I shall never think so.
why, my Pamela, say he, thatbe another thing: it will be good for I to
think you will; and it will be kind in you to think you shallnot; and then
we shall always have an excellent rule to regulate our conduct by to one
another.
be not this finely, nobly, wisely say, my dear mother?--O what a
bless thing it be to be match to a man of sense and generosity!--How
edifying! how!--but what shall I say?--i be at loss for word.
Mr. Williams say, when we come out of the little chapel, he would go
home, and look over his discourse, for one for the next day. my master
say, I have one thing to say before you go--when my jealousy, on account
of this good girl, put I upon such a vindictive conduct to you, you know
I take a bond for the money I have cause you to be trouble for: I really
be ashamed of the matter; because I never intend, when I present it
to you, to have it again, you may be sure: but I know not what might
happen between you and she, nor how far matter might have go between
you; and so I be willing to have that in awe over you. and I think it
be no extraordinary present, therefore, to give you up your bond again
cancel. and so he take it from his pocket, and give it he. I think,
add he, all the charge attend it, and the trouble you have, be
defray by my attorney; I order that they should. they be, sir,
say he; and ten thousand thank to you for this goodness, and the kind
manner in which you do it.--If you will go, Mr. Williams, say he, shall
my chariot carry you home? no, sir, answer he, I thank you. my time
will be so well employ all the way, in thinking of your favour, that I
choose to meditate upon they, as I walk home.
my dear father be a little uneasy about his habit, for appear at
chapel next day, because of Misses Darnford and the servant, for fear,
poor man, he should disgrace my master; and he tell I, when he be
mention this, of my master's kind present of twenty guineas for
clothe, for you both; which make my heart truly joyful. but oh! to be
sure, I can never deserve the hundredth part of his goodness!--it be
almost a hard thing to be under the weight of such deep obligation on
one side, and such a sense of one's own unworthiness on the other.--O!
what a Godlike power be that of do good!--i envy the rich and the
great for nothing else.
my master come to we just then, I say, oh! sir, will your bounty know
no limit? my dear father have tell I what you have give him.--a
trifle, Pamela, say he, a little earnest only of my kindness.--say no
more of it. but do I not hear the good man express some sort of
concern for somewhat? hide nothing from I, Pamela. only, sir, say I,
he know not how to absent himself from divine service, and yet be afraid
of disgrace you by appear.
Fie, Mr. Andrews! say he, I think you know that the outward appearance
be nothing. I wish I have as good a habit inwardly as you have. but
Iwill tell you, Pamela, your father be not so much thin than I be, nor
much short; he and I will walk up together to my wardrobe; though it be
not so well store here, as in Bedfordshire.
and so, say he, pleasantly, donot you pretend to come near we, till I
call for you; for you must not yet see how man dress and undress
themselves. o sir, say my father, I beg to be excuse. I be sorry you
be tell. so be not I, say my master: pray come along with I.
he carry he up stair, and shew he several suit, and would have
have he take his choice. my poor father be quite confound: for my
master see not any he think too good, and my father none that he
think bad enough. and my good master, at last, (he fix his eye upon
a fine drab, which he think look the plainest,) would help he to try
the coat and waistcoat on himself; and, indeed, one would not have
think it, because my master be tall, and rather plumper, as I think
but, as I see afterwards, they fit he very well. and be plain,
and line with the same colour, and make for travel in a coach,
please my poor father much. he give he the whole suit, and, call up
Mrs. Jewkes, say, let these clothe be well air against tomorrow
morning. Mr. Andrews bring only with he his common apparel, not
think to stay Sunday with we. and pray see for some of my stocking,
and whether any of my shoe will fit he: and see also for some of my
linen; for we have put the good man quite out of his course, by keep
he Sunday over. he be then pleased to give he the silver buckle out
of his own shoe. so, my good mother, you must expect to see my dear
father a great beau. Wig, say my master, he want none; for his own
venerable white lock be well than all the peruke in England.--But I
be sure I have hat enough somewhere.--i'll take care of every thing,
sir, say Mrs. Jewkes.--And my poor father, when he come to I, could not
refrain tear. I know not how, say he, to comport myself under these
great favour. o my child, it be all owe to the divine goodness, and
your virtue.
Sunday.
this blessed day all the family seem to take delight to equip
themselves for the celebration of the Sabbath in the little chapel; and
Lady Jones and Mr. Williams come in her chariot, and the two Misses
Darnford in their own. and we breakfast together in a most agreeable
manner. my dear father appear quite spruce and neat, and be quite
caress by the three lady. as we be at breakfast, my master tell
Mr. Williams, we must let the Psalms alone, he doubt, for want of a
clerk: but Mr. Williams say, no, nothing should be want that he could
supply. my father say, if it might be permit he, he would, as well
as he be able, perform that office; for it be always what he have take
delight in. and as I know he have learn psalmody formerly, in his youth,
and have constantly practise it in private, at home, on Sunday evening,
(as well as endeavour to teach it in the little school he so
unsuccessfully set up, at the beginning of his misfortune, before he
take to hard labour,) I be in no pain for his undertake it in this
little congregation. they seem much pleased with this; and so we go
to chapel, and make a pretty tolerable appearance; Mrs. Jewkes, and all
the servant, attend, but the cook: and I never see divine service
perform with more solemnity, nor assist at with great devotion and
decency; my master, Lady Jones, and the two miss, set a lovely
example.
my good father perform his part with great applause, make the
response, as if he have be a practised parish-clerk; and give the
xxiiid psalm,
[the Lord be only my support,
and he that doth I feed:
how can I then lack any thing
Whereof I stand in need?
in pasture green he feedeth I,
where I do safely lie;
and after lead I to the stream,
which run most pleasantly.
and when I find myself near lose,
then home he doth I take;
conduct I in his right path,
e'en for his own name's sake.
and tho' I be e'en at death's door,
yet would I fear no ill:
for both thy rod and shepherd's crook
Afford I comfort still.
Thou hast my table richly spread
in presence of my foe:
Thou hast my head with balm refresh'd,
my cup doth overflow.
and finally, while breath doth last,
thy grace shall I defend:
and in the house of God will I
my life for ever spend.]
which consist of but three stave, we have it all; and he read the line,
and begin the tune with a heart so entirely affect with the duty, that
he go through it distinctly, calmly, and fervently at the same time; so
that Lady Jones whisper I, that good man be fit for all company,
and present to every laudable occasion: and Miss Darnford say, God bless
the dear good man!--You must think how I rejoice in my mind.
I know, my dear mother, you can say most of the short psalm by heart;
so I need not transcribe it, especially as your chief treasure be a
bible; and a worthy treasure it be. I know nobody make more or well
use of it.
Mr. Williams give we an excellent discourse on liberality and generosity,
and the blessing attend the right use of rich, from the xith
chapter of Proverbs, ver. 24, 25. there be that scattereth, and yet
increaseth; and there be that withholdeth more than be meet, but it
tendeth to poverty. the liberal soul shall be make fat: and he that
watereth, shall be water also himself. and he treat the subject in
so handsome a manner, that my master's delicacy, who, at first, be
afraid of some personal compliment, be not offend. Mr. Williams
judiciously keep to general; and it be an elegant and sensible
discourse, as my master say.
my father be in the clerk's place, just under the desk; and Lady Jones,
by her footman, whisper he to favour we with another psalm, when the
sermon be end. he think, as he say afterwards, that the former
be rather of the long, choose the short in the book, which you know
be the cxviith.
[o all ye nation of the world,
praise ye the Lord always:
and all ye people every where
Set forth his noble praise.
for great his kindness be to we;
his truth doth not decay:
wherefore praise ye the Lord our God;
praise ye the Lord alway.]
my master thank Mr. Williams for his excellent discourse, and so do
the lady; as also do I most heartily: and he be pleased to take my
dear father by the hand, as do also Mr. Williams, and thank he. the
lady, likewise, make he their compliment; and the servant all look
upon he with countenance of respect and pleasure.
at dinner, do what I could, I be force to take the upper end of the
table; and my master sit at the low end, between Mr. Williams and my
father. and he say, Pamela, you be so dexterous, that I think you may
help the lady yourself; and I will help my two good friend. I should
have tell you, though, that I dress myself in a flower satin, that
be my lady's, and look quite fresh and good, and which be give I,
at first, by my master; and the lady, who have not see I out of my
homespun before, make I abundance of fine compliment, as soon as they
see I first.
talk of the Psalms just after dinner, my master be very naughty, if I
may so say: for he say to my father, Mr. Andrews, I think in the
afternoon, as we shall have only prayer, we may have one long psalm;
and what think you of the cxxxviith? o, good sir! say I, pray, pray,
not a word more! say what you will, Pamela, say he, you shall sing it
to we, accord to your on version, before these good lady go away.
my father smile, but be half concerned for I; and say, will it bear,
and please your honour?--o ay, say he, never fear it; so long as Mrs.
Jewkes be not in the hearing.
this excite all the lady' curiosity; and Lady Jones say, she would be
loath to desire to hear any thing that would give I concern; but should
be glad I would give leave for it. indeed, madam, say I, I must beg you
willnot insist upon it. I cannot bear it.--You shall see it, indeed,
lady, say my master; and pray, Pamela, not always as you please,
neither.--then, pray sir, say I, not in my hearing, I hope.--sure,
Pamela, return he, you would not write what be not fit to be heard!--
but, sir, say I, there be particular case, time, and occasion, that
may make a thing passable at one time, that would not be tolerable at
another. o, say he, let I judge of that, as well as you, Pamela.
these lady know a good part of your story; and, let I tell you, what
they know be more to your credit than mine; so that if I have no
averseness to revive the occasion, you may very well bear it. say he,
I will put you out of your pain, Pamela: here it be: and take it out of
his pocket.
I stand up, and say, indeed, sir, I cannot bear it; I hope youwill allow
I to leave the room a minute, if you will read it. indeed but I willnot,
answer he. Lady Jones say, Pray, good sir, donot let we hear it, if
Mrs. Andrews be so unwilling. well, Pamela, say my master, I will put
it to your choice, whether I shall read it now, or you will sing it by
and by. thatbe very hard, sir, say I. it must be one, I assure you,
say he. why then, sir, reply I, you must do as you please; for I
cannot sing it.
well, then, say my master, I find I must read it; and yet, add he,
after all, I have as well let it alone, for it be no great reputation to
myself. o then, say Miss Darnford, pray let we hear it, to choose.
why then, proceed he, the case be this: Pamela, I find, when she be
in the time of her confinement, (that be, add he, when she be take
prisoner, in order to make I one; for that be the upshot of the matter,)
in the journal she keep, which be intend for nobody's perusal but her
parent, tell they, that she be importune, one Sunday, by Mrs. Jewkes,
to sing a psalm; but her spirit not permit, she decline it: but
after Mrs. Jewkes be go down, she say, she recollect, that the
cxxxviith psalm be applicable to her own case; Mrs. Jewkes have often,
on other day, in vain, besought she to sing a song: that thereupon she
turn it more to her own suppose case; and believe Mrs. Jewkes have a
design against her honour, and look upon she as her gaoler, she thus
give her version of this psalm. but pray, Mr. Williams, do you read one
verse of the common translation, and I will read one of Pamela's. then
Mr. Williams, pull out his little pocket Common-Prayer-Book, read the
first two stanza:
I.
when we do sit in Babylon,
the river round about;
then in remembrance of Sion,
the tear for grief burst out.
II.
we hang'd our harp and instrument
the willow tree upon:
for in that place, man, for that use,
have plant many a one.
my master then read:
I.
when sad I sit in B----n-hall,
all guard round about,
and thought of ev'ry absent friend,
the tear for grief burst out.
II.
my joy and hop all overthrow,
my heart-string almost break,
unfit my mind for melody,
much more to bear a joke.
the lady say, it be very pretty; and Miss Darnford, that somebody
else have more need to be concern than the versifier.
I know, say my master, I should get no credit by shew this. but let
we read on, Mr. Williams. so Mr. Williams read:
III.
then they, to whom we pris'ners be,
say to we, tauntingly,
now let we hear your hebrew song,
and pleasant melody.
now this, say my master, be very near; and read:
III.
then she, to whom I prisoner be,
say to I tauntingly,
now cheer your heart, and sing a song,
and tune your mind to joy.
Mighty sweet, say Mr. Williams. but let we see how the next verse be
turn. it be this:
IV.
Alas! say we; who can once frame
his heavy heart to sing
the praise of our live God,
thus under a strange king?
why, say my master, it be turn with beautiful simplicity, thus:
IV.
Alas! say I, how can I frame
my heavy heart to sing,
or tune my mind, while thus enthrall'd
by such a wicked thing?
very pretty, say Mr. Williams. Lady Jones say, o, dear madam! could
you wish that we should be deprive of this new instance of your genius
and accomplishment?
O! say my dear father, you will make my good child proud. no, say my
master very generously, Pamela cannot be proud. for no one be proud to
hear themselves praise, but those who be not use to it.--but proceed,
Mr. Williams. he read:
V.
but yet, if I Jerusalem
out of my heart let slide;
then let my finger quite forget
the warbling harp to guide.
well, now, say my master, for Pamela's version:
V.
but yet, if from my innocence
I ev'n in thought should slide,
then let my finger quite forget
the sweet spinnet to guide.
Mr. Williams read:
VI.
and let my tongue, within my mouth,
be ty'd for ever fast,
if I rejoice, before I see
Thy full deliv'rance past.
this, also, say my master, be very near:
VI.
and let my tongue, within my mouth,
be lock'd for ever fast,
if I rejoice, before I see
my full deliv'rance past.
now, good sir, say I, oblige I; donot read any far: pray donot! O
pray, madam, say Mr. Williams, let I beg to have the rest read; for I
long to know whom you make the Sons of Edom, and how you turn the
Psalmist's execration against the insulting Babylonians.
well, Mr. Williams, reply I, you should not have say so. o, say my
master, that be one of the good thing of all. poor Mrs. Jewkes stand
for Edom's Sons; and we must not lose this, because I think it one of my
Pamela's excellency, that, though thus oppress, she pray for no harm
upon the oppressor. Read, Mr. Williams, the next stanza. so he read:
VII.
therefore, o Lord! remember now
the cursed noise and cry,
that Edom's son against we make,
when they ras'd our city.
VIII.
remember, Lord, their cruel word,
when, with a mighty sound,
they cry, down, yea down with it,
unto the very ground!
well, say my master, here seem, in what I be go to read, a little
bit of a curse indeed, but I think it make no ill figure in the
comparison.
VII.
and thou, Almighty! recompense
the evil I endure
from those who seek my sad disgrace,
so causeless, to procure.
and now, say he, for Edom's Sons. though a little severe in the
imputation.
VIII.
remember, Lord, this Mrs. Jewkes,
when with a mighty sound,
she cry, down with her chastity,
down to the very ground!
sure, sir, say I, this might have be spar! but the lady and Mr.
Williams say, no, by no mean! and I see the poor wicked woman have no
favourer among they.
now, say my master, read the Psalmist's heavy curse: and Mr. Williams
read:
IX.
Ev'n so shalt thou, o Babylon!
at length to dust be bring:
and happy shall that man be call'd,
that our revenge hath wrought.
X.
Yea, blessed shall the man be call'd
that take thy little one,
and dasheth they in piece small
against the very stone.
thus he say, very kindly, have my Pamela turn these line:
IX.
Ev'n so shalt thou, o wicked one!
at length to shame be bring;
and happy shall all those be call'd,
that my deliv'rance wrought.
X.
Yea, blessed shall the man be call'd
that sham thee of thy evil,
and save I from thy vile attempt,
and thee, too, from the d---l.
I fancy this blessed man, say my master smile, be, at that time,
hop to be you, Mr. Williams, if the truth be know. Sir, say he,
whoever it be intend for then, it can be nobody but your good self
now.
I could hardly hold up my head for the praise the kind lady be
pleased to heap upon I. I be sure, by this, they be very partial in my
favour; all because my master be so good to I, and love to hear I
praise; for I see no such excellence in these line, as they would make
I believe, besides what be borrow from the Psalmist.
we all, as before, and the cook-maid too, attend the prayer of the
church in the afternoon; and my dear father conclude with the follow
stanzas of the cxlvth psalm; suitably magnify the holy name of God for
all mercy; but do not observe, altogether, the method in which they
stand; which be the less necessary, he think, as he give out the
line.
the Lord be just in all his way:
his work be holy all:
and he be near all those that do
in truth upon he call.
he the desire of all they
that fear he, will fulfil;
and he will hear they when they cry,
and save they all he will.
the eye of all do wait on thee;
Thou dost they all relieve:
and thou to each sufficient food,
in season due, dost give.
Thou open thy plenteous hand,
and bounteously dost fill
all thing whatever, that do live,
with gift of thy good will.
my thankful mouth shall gladly speak
the praise of the Lord:
all flesh, to praise his holy name,
for ever shall accord.
we walk in the garden till tea be ready; and as he go by the back-
door, my master say to I, of all the flower in the garden, the sun-
flower be the fairest!--o, sir, say I, let that be now forget! Mr.
Williams hear he say so, and seem a little out of countenance:
Whereupon my master say, I mean not to make you serious, Mr. Williams;
but we see how strangely thing be bring about. I see other scene
hereabout, that, in my Pamela's danger, give I more cause of concern,
than any thing you ever do should give you. Sir, say he, you be very
generous.
my master and Mr. Williams afterwards walk together for a quarter of an
hour; and talk about general thing, and some scholastic subject; and
join we, very well pleased with one another's conversation.
Lady Jones say, put herself on one side of I, as my master be on
the other, but pray, sir, when be the happy time to be? we want it over,
that we may have you with we as long afterwards as you can. say my
master, I would have it to-morrow, or next day at farth, if Pamela
will: for I have send for a license, and the messenger will be here to-
night, or early in the morning, I hope. but, add he, pray, Pamela, do
not take beyond Thursday. she be pleased to say, sure it will not be
delay by you, madam, more than needs!--well, say he, now you be on my
side, I will leave you with she to settle it: and, I hope, she will not
let little bashful nicety be important with she; and so he join the
two miss.
Lady Jones tell I, I be to blame, she would take upon she to say, if I
delay it a moment; because she understand Lady Davers be very uneasy
at the prospect, that it would be so; and if any thing should happen, it
would be a sad thing!--madam, say I, when he be pleased to mention it
to I first, he say it should be in fourteen day; and afterwards, ask
I if I would have it in the first or the second seven? I answer--for
how could I do otherwise?--In the second. he desire it might not be the
last day of the second seven. now, madam, say I, as he be then please
to speak his mind, no doubt, I would not, for any thing, seem too
forward.
well, but, say she, as he now urge you in so genteel and gentlemanly a
manner for a short day, I think, if I be in your place, I would agree
to it. she see I hesitate and blush, and say, well, you know well; but
I say only what I would do. I say, I would consider of it; and if I see
he be very earnest, to be sure I should think I ought to oblige he.
Misses Darnford be beg to be at the wedding, and to have a ball:
and they say, Pray, Mrs. Andrews, second our request, and we shall be
greatly oblige to you. indeed, lady, say I, I cannot promise that,
if I might.--Why so? say they.--Because, answer I--I know not what!
but I think one may, with pleasure, celebrate an anniversary of one's
nuptial; but the day itself--indeed, lady, I think it be too solemn a
business, for the party of our sex to be very gay upon: it be a quite
serious and awful affair: and I be sure, in your own case, you would be
of my mind. why, then, say Miss Darnford, the more need one have to be
as light-hearted and merry as one can.
I tell you, say my master, what sort of an answer youwould have from
Pamela. the young miss say, she never hear of such grave folk in
her life, on such an occasion: why, sir, say she, I hope youwill sing
psalm all day, and miss will fast and pray! such sackcloth and ash
doing, for a wedding, do I never hear of!--She speak a little
spitefully, I think; and I return no answer. I shall have enough to
do, I reckon, in a while, if I be to answer every one that will envy I!
we go in to tea; and all that the lady could prevail upon my master
for, be a dancing match before he leave this county: but Miss Darnford
say, it should then be at their house; for, truly, if she might not be
at the wedding, she would be affront, and come no more hither, till we
have be there.
when they be go, my master would have have my father stay till the
affair be over; but he beg he might set out as soon as it be light
in the morning; for, he say, my mother would be doubly uneasy at his
stay; and he burn with impatience to let she know all the happy thing
that have befall her daughter. when my master find he so desirous to
go, he call Mr. Thomas, and order he to get a particular bay horse
ready betime in the morning, for my father, and a portmanteau, to put
his thing in; and to attend he a day's journey: and if, say he, Mr.
Andrews choose it, see he safe to his own home: and, add he, since
that horse will serve you, Mr. Andrews, to ride backwards and forwards,
to see we, when we go into Bedfordshire, I make you a present of it, with
the accoutrement. and, see my father go to speak, he add, I
willnot be say nay. o how good be this!
he also say a great many kind thing at supper-time, and give he all
the paper he have of mine; but desire, when he and my mother have read
they, that he would return they to he again. and then he say, so
affectionate a father and daughter may, perhaps, be glad to be alone
together; therefore remember I to your good wife, and tell she, it will
not be long, I hope, before I see you together; on a visit to your
daughter, at my other house: and so I wish you good night, and a good
journey, if you go before I see you. and then he shake hand, and leave
my dear father almost unable to speak, through the sense of his favour
and goodness.
you may believe, my dear mother, how loath I be to part with my good
father; and he be also unwilling to part with I; but he be so
impatient to see you, and tell you the blessed tiding, with which his
heart overflow, that I could hardly wish to detain he.
Mrs. Jewkes bring two bottle of cherry-brandy, and two of cinnamon-
water, and some cake; and they be put up in the portmanteau, with my
father's newly present clothe; for he say, he would not, for any
thing, be see in they in his neighbourhood, till I be actually know,
by every body, to be marry; nor would he lay out any part of the twenty
guineas till then neither, for fear of reflection; and then he would
consult I as to what he would buy. well, say I, as you please, my dear
father; and I hope now we shall often have the pleasure of hear from
one another, without need any art or contrivance.
he say, he would go to bed betime, that he might be up as soon as it
be light; and so he take leave of I, and say, he would not love I, if
I get up in the morning to see he go; which would but make we both loath
to part, and grieve we both all day.
Mr. Thomas bring he a pair of boot, and tell he, he would call he
up at peep of day, and put up every thing over night; and so I receive
his blessing, and his prayer, and his kind promise of procure the
same from you, my dear mother; and go up to my closet with a heavy
heart, and yet a half-pleased one, if I may so say; for that, as he must
go, he be go to the good of wife, and with the good of tiding. but
I beg he would not work so hard as he have do; for I be sure my
master would not have give he twenty guineas for clothe, if he have not
design to do something else for he; and that he should be the less
concerned at receive benefit, from my good master, because he, who have
so many person to employ in his large possession, could make he
serviceable, to a degree equivalent, without hurt any body else.
he promise I fair; and, pray, dear mother, see he perform. I hope my
master will not see this: for I will not send it you, at present, till I
can send you the good of news; and the rather, as my dear father can
supply the great part of what I have write, since the paper he
carry you, by his own observation. so good night, my dear mother: and
God send my father a safe journey, and a happy meeting to you both!
Monday.
Mr. Colbrand be return, my master come up to I to my closet, and
bring I the license. o how my heart flutter at the sight of it!
now, Pamela, say he, tell I, if you can oblige I with the day. your
word be all thatbe want. I make bold to kiss his dear hand; and,
though unable to look up, say--I know not what to say, sir, to all your
goodness: I would not, for any consideration, that you should believe I
capable of receive negligently an honour, that all the duty of a long
life, be it to be lend I, will not be sufficient to enable I to be
grateful for. I ought to resign myself, in every thing I may or can,
implicitly to your will. but--but what? say he, with a kind
impatience.--Why, sir, say I, when from last Thursday you mention four
day, I have reason to think that term your choice; and my heart be so
wholly your, that I be afraid of nothing, but that I may be forwarder
than you wish. impossible, my dear creature! say he, and fold I in
his arm: impossible! if this be all, it shall be set about this moment,
and this happy day shall make you mine!--i'll send away instantly, say
the dear gentleman; and be go.
I say, no, pray, sir, pray, sir, hear me!--Indeed it cannot be to-day!--
cannot! say he.--No, indeed, sir! say I--and be ready to sink to see
his generous impatience. why flatter you then my fond heart, reply
he, with the hope that it might?--sir, say I, I will tell you what I have
think, if youwill vouchsafe I your attention. do then, say he.
I have, sir, proceed I, a great desire, that, whenever the day be, it
may be on a Thursday: on a Thursday my dear father and mother be
marry; and, though poor, they be a very happy pair.--on a Thursday
your poor Pamela be bear. on a Thursday my dear good lady take I from
my parent into her protection. on a Thursday, sir, you cause I to be
carry away to this place, to which I now, by God's goodness, and your
favour, owe so amazingly all my present prospect; and on a Thursday it
be, you name to I, that fourteen day from that you would confirm my
happiness. now, sir, if you please to indulge my superstitious folly,
you will greatly oblige I. I be sorry, sir, for this reason, when you
bid I not defer till the last day of the fourteen, that Thursday in next
week be that last day.
this, Pamela, be a little superstitious, I must need say; and I think
you should begin now to make another day in the week a happy one; as for
example; on a Monday, may you say, my father and mother conclude to be
married on the Thursday follow. on a Monday, so many year ago, my
mother be prepare all her matter to be bring to bed on the Thursday
following. on a Monday, several week ago, it be that you have but two
day more to stay, till you be carry away on Thursday. on a Monday, I
myself, say he, well remember, it be that I write you the letter, that
prevail on you so kindly to return to I; and on the same day you do
return to my house here; which I hope, my girl, will be as propitious an
era as any you have name: and now, lastly, will you say, which will
crown the work; and, on a Monday I be married.--come, come, my dear,
add he, Thursday have reign long enough o'conscience; let we now set
Monday in its place, or at least on an equality with it, since you see it
have a very good title, and as we now stand in the week before we, claim
priority: and then, I hope, we shall make Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday,
Saturday, and Sunday, as happy day as Monday and Thursday; and so, by
God's blessing, move round, as the day move, in a delightful circle,
till we be at a loss what day to prefer to the rest.
o how charmingly be this said!--and how sweetly kind!
indeed, sir, say I, you rally my folly very agreeably; but donot let a
little matter stand in the way, when you be so generously oblige in a
great: indeed I like Thursday good, if I may choose.
well, then, say he, if you can say you have a well reason than this, I
will oblige you; else Iwill send away for the parson this moment.
and so, I protest, he be going!--dear sir, how I tremble! stay, stay,
sir, say I: we have a great deal to say first; I have a deal of silly
prate to trouble you with!--well, say then, in a minute, reply he, the
most material: for all we have to say may be talk of while the parson
be coming.--o, but indeed, and indeed, say I, it cannot be to-day!--
Well, then, shall it be to-morrow? say he.--Why, sir, if it must not be
on a Thursday, you have give so many pleasant distinction for a Monday,
that let it then be next monday.--what! a week still? say he. Sir,
answer I, if you please; for that will be, as you enjoin, within the
second seven day. why, girl, say he, 'twill be seven month till next
Monday. let it, say he, if not to-morrow, be on Wednesday; I protest I
will stay no long.
then, sir, return I, please to defer it, however, for one day more, and
it will be my beloved Thursday! if I consent to defer it till then, may
I hope, my Pamela, say he, that next Thursday shall certainly be the
happy day?--Yes, sir, say I and I be sure I look very foolishly!
and yet, my dear father and mother, why should I, with such a fine
gentleman? and whom I so dearly love? and so much to my honour too?
but there be something greatly awful upon my mind, in the solemn
circumstance, and a change of condition never to be recall, though all
the prospect be so desirable. and I can but wonder at the thoughtless
precipitancy with which most young folk run into this important change
of life!
so now, my dear parent, have I be bring to fix so near a day as next
Thursday; and this be Monday. o dear, it make one out of breath almost
to think of it! this, though, be a great cut off; a whole week out of
ten day. I hope I be not too forward! Ibe sure, if it oblige my dear
master, I be justify; for he deserve of I all thing in my poor
power.
after this, he ride out on horseback, attend by Abraham, and do not
return till night. how by degree thing steal upon one! I think even
this small absence tedious; and the more, as we expect he home to
dinner.--I wish I may not be too fond, and make he indifferent: but yet,
my dear father and mother, you be always fond of one another, and never
indifferent, let the world run as it would.
when he return, he say, he have have a pleasant ride, and be lead out to
a great distance than he intend. at supper he tell I, that he have a
great mind Mr. Williams should marry we; because, he say, it would shew
a thorough reconciliation on his part. but, say he, most generously, I
be apprehensive, from what pass between you, that the poor man will
take it hardly, and as a sort of insult, which I be not capable of. what
say my girl?--do you think he would? I hope not, sir, say I: as to
what he may think, I cannot answer; but as to any reason for his thought,
I can: for indeed, sir, say I, you have be already so generous, that
he cannot, I think, mistake your goodness.
he then speak with some resentment of Lady Davers's behaviour, and I
ask, if any thing new have occur? yes, say he; I have have a letter
deliver I from her impertinent husband, professedly at her
instigation, that amount to little less than a piece of insolent
bravery, on suppose I be about to marry you. I be so provoke, add
he, that after I have read it, I tear it in a hundred piece, and
scatter they in the air, and bid the man who bring it let his master
know what I have do with his letter; and so would not permit he to
speak to I, as he would fain have done,--i think the fellow talk
somewhat of his lady come hither; but she shall not set her foot within
my door; and I suppose this treatment will hinder she.
I be much concerned at this: and he say, have I a hundred sister,
Pamela, their opposition should have no weight with I: and I do not
intend you should know it; but you cannot but expect a little difficulty
from the pride of my sister, who have suffer so much from that of her
brother; and we be too nearly ally in mind, as well as blood, I find.
--but this be not her business: and if she would have make it so, she
should have do it with more decency. little occasion have she to boast
of her birth, that know not what belong to good manner.
I say, I be very sorry, sir, to be the unhappy occasion of a
misunderstanding between so good a brother and so worthy a sister. donot
say so, Pamela, because this be an unavoidable consequence of the happy
prospect before we. only bear it well yourself, because she be my
sister; and leave it to I to make she sensible of her own rashness.
if, sir, say I, the most lowly behaviour, and humble deportment, and in
every thing shew a dutiful regard to good Lady Davers, will have any
weight with her ladyship, assure yourself of all in my power to mollify
she. no, Pamela, return he; donot imagine, when you be my wife, I
will suffer you to do any thing unworthy of that character. I know the
duty of a husband, and will protect your gentleness to the utmost, as
much as if you be a princess by descent.
you be inexpressibly good, sir, say I; but I be far from take a
gentle disposition to shew a meanness of spirit: and this be a trial I
ought to expect; and well I may bear it, that have so many benefit to
set against it, which all spring from the same cause.
well, say he, all the matter shall be this: we will talk of our marriage
as a thing to be do next week. I find I have spy upon I wherever I
go, and whatever I do: but now, I be on so laudable a pursuit, that I
value they not, nor those who employ they. I have already order my
servant to have no conference with any body for ten or twelve day to
come. and Mrs. Jewkes tell I every one name Thursday come se'nnight
for our nuptial. so I will get Mr. Peters, who want to see my little
chapel, to assist Mr. Williams, under the notion of breakfast with I
next Thursday morning, since you willnot have it soon; and there will
nobody else be want; and I will beg of Mr. Peters to keep it private,
even from his own family, for a few day. have my girl any objection?
O, sir, answer I, you be so generous in all your way, I can have no
objections!--But I hope Lady Davers and you will not proceed to
irreconcilable length; and when her ladyship come to see you, and to
tarry with you, two or three week, as she use to do, I will keep close
up, so as not to disgust she with the sight of I.
well, Pamela, say he, we will talk of that afterwards. you must do then
as I shall think fit: and I shall be able to judge what both you and I
ought to do. but what still aggravate the matter be, that she should
instigate the title ape her husband to write to I, after she have so
little succeed herself. I wish I have keep his letter, that I might
have shew you how a man, that generally act like a fool, can take upon
he to write like a lord. but I suppose it be of my sister's penning,
and he, poor man! be the humble copier.
Tuesday.
Mr. Thomas be return from you, my dear father, with the good news of
your health, and your proceeding in your journey to my dear mother, where
I hope to hear soon you be arrive. my master have just now be make
I play upon the spinnet, and sing to it; and be pleased to commend I
for both. but he do so for every thing I do, so partial do his
goodness make he to I.
one o'clock.
we be just return from an airing in the chariot; and I have be
delighted with his conversation upon english author, poet particularly.
he entertain I also with a description of some of the curiosity he
have see in Italy and France, when he make what the polite world call the
grand tour. he say he want to be at his other seat, for he know not
well how to employ himself here, have not propose to stay half the
time: and when I get there, Pamela, say he, you will hardly be trouble
with so much of my company, after we have settle; for I have a great
many thing to adjust: and I must go to London; for I have account that
have run on long than ordinary with my banker there. and I donot know,
add he, but the ensue winter I may give you a little taste of the
diversion of the town for a month or so. I say, his will and pleasure
should determine mine; and I never would, as near as I could, have a
desire after those, or any other entertainment that be not in his own
choice.
he be pleased to say, I make no doubt but that I shall be very happy in
you; and hope you will be so in I: for, say he, I have no very enormous
vice to gratify; though I pretend not to the great purity, neither,
my girl. Sir, say I, if you can account to your own mind, I shall
always be easy in whatever you do. but our great happiness here, sir,
continue I, be of very short duration; and this life, at the long, be
a poor transitory one; and I hope we shall be so happy as to be enable
to look forward, with comfort, to another, where our pleasure will be
everlaste.
you say well, Pamela; and I shall, by degree, be more habituated to this
way of thinking, as I more and more converse with you; but, at present,
you must not be over serious with I all at once: though I charge you
never forbear to mingle your sweet divinity in our conversation, whenever
it can be bring in a propos, and with such a cheerfulness of temper, as
shall not throw a gloomy cloud over our innocent enjoyment.
I be abash at this, and silent, fear I have offend: but he say,
if you attend rightly to what I say, I need not tell you again, Pamela,
not to be discourage from suggest to I, on every proper occasion,
the pious impulse of your own amiable mind. Sir, say I, you will be
always indulgent, I make no doubt, to my imperfection, so long as I mean
well.
my master make I dine with he, and would eat nothing but what I help
he to; and my heart be, every hour, more and more enlarge with his
goodness and condescension. but still, what ail I, I wonder! a
strange sort of weight hang upon my mind, as Thursday draw on, which
make I often sigh involuntarily, and damp, at time, the pleasure of
my delightful prospects!--i hope this be not ominous; but only the
foolish weakness of an over-thoughtful mind, on an occasion the most
solemn and important of one's life, next to the last scene, which shut
up all.
I could be very serious: but I will commit all my way to that bless
Providence, which hitherto have so wonderfully conduct I through real
evil to this hopeful situation.
I only fear, and surely I have great reason, that I shall be too unworthy
to hold the affection of so dear a gentleman!--God teach I humility,
and to know my own demerit! and this will be, next to his grace, my
sure guard, in the state of life to which, though most unworthy, I be
go to be exalt. and donot cease your prayer for I, my dear
parent; for, perhaps, this new condition may be subject to still bad
hazard than those I have escape; as would be the case, be
conceitedness, vanity, and pride, to take hold of my frail heart; and if
I be, for my sin, to be leave to my own conduct, a frail bark in a
tempestuous ocean, without ballast, or other pilot than my own
inconsiderate will. but my master say, on another occasion, that those
who doubt most, always err least; and I hope I shall always doubt my
own strength, my own worthiness.
I will not trouble you with twenty sweet agreeable thing that pass in
conversation with my excellent benefactor; nor with the civility of M.
Colbrand, Mrs. Jewkes, and all the servant, who seem to be highly
pleased with I, and with my conduct to they: and as my master, hitherto,
find no fault that I go too low, nor they that I carry it too high, I
hope I shall continue to have every body's good-will: but yet will I not
seek to gain any one's by little meanness or debasement! but aim at an
uniform and regular conduct, willing to conceal involuntary error, as I
would have my own forgive; and not too industrious to discover real
one, or to hide such, if any such should appear, as might encourage bad
heart, or unclean hand, in material case, where my master should
receive damage, or where the moral of the transgressor should appear
wilfully and habitually corrupt. in short, I will endeavour, as much as
I can, that good servant shall find in I a kind encourager; indifferent
one be make well, by inspire they with a laudable emulation; and bad
one, if not too bad in nature, and quite irreclaimable, reform by
kindness, expostulation, and even proper menace, if necessary; but most
by a good example: all this if God please.
Wednesday.
now, my dear parent, I have but this one day between I and the most
solemn rite that can be perform. my heart cannot yet shake off this
heavy weight. sure I be ungrateful to the divine goodness, and the
favour of the good of benefactors!--Yet I hope I be not!--for, at time,
my mind be all exultation, with the prospect of what good to-morrow's
happy solemnity may possibly, by the leave of my generous master, put it
in my power to do. o how shall I find word to express, as I ought, my
thankfulness, for all the mercy before I!
Wednesday evening.
my dear master be all love and tenderness. he see my weakness, and
generously pity and comfort I! I beg to be excuse supper; but he
bring I down himself from my closet, and place I by he, bid
Abraham not wait. I could not eat, and yet I try, for fear he should
be angry. he kindly forbear to hint any thing of the dreadful, yet
delightful to-morrow! and put, now and then, a little bit on my plate,
and guide it to my mouth. I be concern to receive his goodness with
so ill a grace. well, say he, if you willnot eat with I, drink at least
with I: I drink two glass by his over-persuasion, and say, I be
really ashamed of myself. why, indeed, say he, my dear girl, I be not a
very dreadful enemy, I hope! I cannot bear any thing that be the least
concern to you. oh, sir! say I, all be owe to the sense I have of
my own unworthiness!--to be sure, it cannot be any thing else.
he ring for the thing to be take away; and then reach a chair, and
sit down by I, and put his kind arm about I, and say the most
generous and affect thing that ever dropt from the honey-flow
mouth of love. all I have not time to repeat: some I will. and oh!
indulge your foolish daughter, who trouble you with her weak nonsense;
because what she have to say, be so affect to she; and because, if she
go to bed, instead of scribble, she could not sleep.
this sweet confusion and thoughtfulness in my beloved Pamela, say the
kind man, on the near approach of our happy union, when I hope all doubt
be clear up, and nothing of dishonour be apprehend, shew I most
abundantly, what a wretch I be to attempt such purity with a bad
intention--no wonder, that one so virtuous should find herself desert
of life itself on a violence so dreadful to her honour, and seek a refuge
in the shadow of death.--But now, my dear Pamela, that you have see a
purity on my side, as nearly imitate your own, as our sex can shew to
your; and since I have, all the day long, suppress even the least
intimation of the come day, that I might not alarm your tender mind;
why all this concern, why all this affect, yet sweet confusion? you
have a generous friend, my dear girl, in I; a protector now, not a
violator of your innocence: why then, once more I ask, this strange
perplexity, this sweet confusion?
o sir, say I, and hide my face on his arm; expect not reason from a
foolish creature: you should have still indulge I in my closet: I be
ready to beat myself for this ungrateful return to your goodness. but I
know not what!--I am, to be sure, a silly creature! o have you but
suffer I to stay by myself above, I should have make myself ashamed of
so culpable a behaviour!--but goodness add to goodness every moment,
and the sense of my own unworthiness, quite overcome my spirit.
now, say the generous man, will I, though reluctantly, make a proposal
to my sweet girl.--if I have be too press for the day: if another
day will still be more obliging: if you have fear you will not then
have; you shall say but the word, and Iwill submit. yes, my Pamela; for
though I have, these three day past, think every tedious hour a day,
till Thursday come, if you earnestly desire it, I will postpone it.
say, my dear girl, freely say; but accept not my proposal, without great
reason, which yet I will not ask for.
Sir, say I, I can expect nothing but superlative goodness, I have be
so long use to it from you. this be a most generous instance of it; but
I fear--yes, I fear it will be too much the same thing, some day hence,
when the happy, yet, fool that I be! dread time, shall be equally near!
kind, lovely charmer! say he, now do I see you be to be trust with
power, from the generous use you make of it!--not one offensive word or
look, from I, shall wound your nice thought; but pray try to subdue
this over-scrupulousness, and unseasonable timidity. I persuade myself
you will if you can.
indeed, sir, I will, say I; for I be quite ashamed of myself, with all
these lovely view before me!--The honour you do I, the kindness you
shew me!--I cannot forgive myself! for, oh! if I know the least of this
idle foolish heart of mine, it have not a misgiving thought of your
goodness; and I should abhor it, if it be capable of the least
affectation.--But, dear good sir, leave I a little to myself, and I will
take myself to a severer task than your goodness will let you do and I
will present my heart before you, a worthy offering to you, than at
present its wayward folly will let it seem to be.--but one thing be,
one have no kind friend of one's own sex, to communicate one's foolish
thought to, and to be strengthen by their comforting! but I be leave
to myself; and, oh! what a weak silly thing I be!
he kindly withdraw, to give I time to recollect myself; and in about
half an hour return: and then, that he might not begin at once upon the
subject, and say, at the same time, something agreeable to I, say, your
father and mother have have a great deal of talk by this time about you,
Pamela. o, sir, return I, your goodness have make they quite happy!
but I cannot help be concern about Lady Davers.
he say, I be vex I do not hear the footman out; because it run in my
head he talk somewhat about her come hither. she will meet with but
an indifferent reception from I, unless she come resolve to behave
well than she write.
Pray, sir, say I, be pleased to bear with my good lady, for two reason.
what be they? say he. why, first, sir, answer I, because she be your
sister; and, to be sure, may very well think, what all the world will,
that you have much undervalue yourself in make I happy. and next,
because, if her ladyship find you out of temper with she, it will still
aggravate she more against I; and every time that any warm word you may
have between you, come into her mind, she will disdain I more.
donot concern yourself about it, say he; for we have more proud lady
than she in our other neighbourhood, who, perhaps, have still less reason
to be punctilious about their descent, and yet will form themselves upon
her example, and say, why, his own sister will not forgive he, nor visit
he! and so, if I can subdue her spirit, which be more than her husband
ever could, or indeed any body else, it be a great point gain: and, if
she give I reason, Iwill try for it, I assure you.
well, but, my dear girl, continue he, since the subject be so important,
may I not say one word about to-morrow?--Sir, say I, I hope I shall be
less a fool: I have talk as harshly to my heart, as Lady Davers can do;
and the naughty thing suggest to I a well, and more grateful
behaviour.
he smile, and, kiss I, say, I take notice, Pamela, of what you
observe, that you have none of your own sex with you; I think it be a
little hard upon you; and I should have like you should have have Miss
Darnford; but then her sister must have be ask; and I might as well
make a public wedding: which, you know, would have require clothe and
other preparation. besides, add he, a foolish proposal be once make
I of that second sister, who have two or three thousand pound more than
the other, leave she by a godmother, and she cannot help be a little
pique; though, say he, it be a proposal they could not expect should
succeed; for there be nothing in her person nor mind; and her fortune, as
that must have be the only inducement, would not do by any mean; and
so I discourage it at once.
I be think, sir, say I, of another mortifying thing too; that be
you to marry a lady of birth and fortune answerable to your own, all the
eve to the day would be take up in reading, signing, and sealing of
settlement, and portion, and such like: but now the poor Pamela bring
you nothing at all: and the very clothe she wear, so very low be she,
be entirely the effect of your bounty, and that of your good mother:
this make I a little sad: for, alas! sir, I be so much oppress by
your favour, and the sense of the obligation I lie under, that I cannot
look up with the confidence that I otherwise should, on this awful
occasion.
there be, my dear Pamela, say he, where the power be want, as much
generosity in the will as in the action. to all that know your story,
and your merit, it will appear that I cannot recompense you for what I
have make you suffer. you have have too many hard struggle and
exercise; and have nobly overcome: and who shall grudge you the reward
of the hard-buy victory?--this affair be so much the act of my own
will, that I glory in be capable of distinguish so much excellence;
and my fortune be the more pleasurable to I, as it give I hope, that I
may make you some part of satisfaction for what you have undergo.
this, sir, say I, be all goodness, unmerite on my side; and make my
obligation the great. I can only wish for more worthiness.--but how
poor be it to offer nothing but word for such generous deeds!--and to
say, I wish!--for what be a wish, but the acknowledge want of power to
oblige, and a demonstration of one's poverty in every thing but will?
and that, my dear girl, say he, be every thing: 'tis all I want: 'tis
all that Heaven itself require of we: but no more of these little
doubt, though they be the natural impulse of a generous and grateful
heart: I want not to be employ in settlement. those be for such to
regard, who make convenience and fortune the prime consideration. I
have possession ample enough for we both; and you deserve to share they
with I; and you shall do it, with as little reserve, as if you have
bring I what the world reckon an equivalent: for, as to my own
opinion, you bring I what be infinitely more valuable, an experienced
truth, a well-try virtue, and a wit and behaviour more than equal to
the station you will be place in: to say nothing of this sweet person,
that itself might captivate a monarch; and of the meekness of temper, and
sweetness of disposition, which make you superior to all the woman I ever
see.
thus kind and soothing, and honourably affectionate, be the dear
gentleman, to the unworthy, doubting, yet assure Pamela; and thus
patiently do he indulge, and generously pardon, my impertinent weakness.
he offer to go himself to Lady Jones, in the morning, and reveal the
matter to she, and desire her secrecy and presence; but I say, that
would disoblige the young Ladies Darnford. no, sir, say I, I will cast
myself upon your generous kindness; for why should I fear the kind
protector of my weakness, and the guide and director of my future step?
you cannot, say he, forgive Mrs. Jewkes; for she must know it; and
suffer she to be with you? yes, sir, say I, I can. she be very civil
to I now: and her former wickedness I will forgive, for the sake of the
happy fruit that have attend it; and because you mention she.
well, say he, I will call she in, if you please.--as you please, sir,
say i. and he ring for she; and when she come in, he say, Mrs. Jewkes,
I be go to entrust you with a secret. Sir, answer she, I will be
sure to keep it as such. why, say he, we intend to-morrow, privately as
possible, for our wedding-day; and Mr. Peters and Mr. Williams be to be
here, as to breakfast with I, and to shew Mr. Peters my little chapel.
as soon as the ceremony be over, we will take a little airing in the
chariot, as we have do at other time; and so it will not be wonder
that we be dress. and the two parson have promise secrecy, and will
go home. I believe you cannot well avoid let one of the maid into
the secret; but that Iwill leave to you.
Sir, reply she, we all conclude it would be in a few day! and I doubt
it willnot be long a secret. no, say he, I donot desire it should; but
you know we be not provide for a public wedding, and I shall declare it
when we go to Bedfordshire, which willnot be long. but the man, who lie in
the outhouse, need not know it; for, by some mean or other, my sister
Davers know all that pass.
do you know, sir, say she, that her ladyship intend to be down here
with you in a few day? her servant tell I so, who bring you the
letter you be angry at.
I hope, say he, we shall be set out for t'other house first; and shall
be pleased she lose her labour. Sir, continue she, her ladyship,
propose to be here time enough to hinder your nuptial, which she take,
as we do, will be the latter end of next week. well, say he, let she
come: but yet I desire not to see she.
Mrs. Jewkes say to I, give I leave, madam, to wish you all manner of
happiness: but I be afraid I have too well obey his honour, to be
forgive by you. indeed, Mrs. Jewkes, return I, you will be more your
own enemy than I will be. I will look all forward: and shall not
presume, so much as by a whisper, to set my good master against any one
he please to approve of: and as to his old servant, I shall always
value they, and never offer to dictate to his choice, or influence it by
my own caprice.
Mrs. Jewkes, say my master, you find you have no cause to apprehend any
thing. my Pamela be very placable; and as we have both be sinner
together, we must both be include in one act of grace.
such an example of condescension, as I have before I, Mrs. Jewkes, say
I, may make you very easy; for I must be highly unworthy, if I do not
forego all my little resentment, if I have any, for the sake of so much
goodness to myself.
you be very kind, madam, say she; and you may depend upon it, I will
atone for all my fault, by my future duty and respect to you, as well as
to my master.
thatbe well say on both side, say he: but, Mrs. Jewkes, to assure you,
that my good girl here have no malice, she choose you to attend she in
the morning at the ceremony, and you must keep up her spirits.--I shall,
reply she, be very proud of the honour: but I cannot, madam, but wonder
to see you so very low-spirited, as you have be these two or three day
past, with so much happiness before you.
why, Mrs. Jewkes, answer I, there can be but one reason give; and that
be, that I be a sad fool!--but, indeed, I be not ungrateful neither; nor
would I put on a foolish affectation: but my heart, at time, sink
within I; I know not why, except at my own unworthiness, and because the
honour do I be too high for I to support myself under, as I should
do. it be an honour, Mrs. Jewkes, add I, I be not bear to; and no
wonder, then, I behave so awkwardly. she make I a fine compliment upon
it, and withdraw, repeat her promise of care, secrecy, etc.
he part from I with very great tenderness; and I come up and set to
writing, to amuse my thought, and write thus far. and Mrs. Jewkes be
come up, and it be past twelve, I will go to bed; but not one wink, I
fear, shall I get this night.--i could beat myself for anger. sure there
be nothing ominous in this strange folly!--But I suppose all young
maiden be the same, so near so great a change of condition, though they
carry it off more discreetly than I.
Thursday, six o'clock in the morning.
I might as well have not go to bed last night, for what sleep I have.
Mrs. Jewkes often be talk to I, and say several thing that would
have be well enough from any body else of our sex; but the poor woman
have so little purity of heart, that it be all say from she, and go no
far than the ear.
I fancy my master have not sleep much neither; for I hear he up, and
walk about his chamber, ever since break of day. to be sure, good
gentleman! he must have some concern, as well as I; for here he be go
to marry a poor foolish unworthy girl, bring up on the charity, as one
may say, (at least bounty,) of his worthy family! and this foolish girl
must be, to all intent and purpose, after twelve o'clock this day, as
much his wife, as if he be to marry a duchess!--and here he must stand
the shock of common reflection! the great Mr. B---- have do finely! he
have marry his poor servant wench! will some say. the ridicule and rude
jest of his equal, and companion too, he must stand: and the disdain
of his relation, and indignation of Lady Davers, his lofty sister! dear
good gentleman! he will have enough to do, to be sure! o how shall I
merit all these thing at his hand! I can only do the good I can; and
pray to God to reward he; and resolve to love he with a pure heart, and
serve he with a sincere obedience. I hope the dear gentleman will
continue to love I for this; for, alas! I have nothing else to offer!
but, as I can hardly expect so great a blessing, if I can be secure from
his contempt, I shall not be unfortunate; and must bear his indifference,
if his rich friend should inspire he with it, and proceed with do my
duty with cheerfulness.
half an hour past eight o'clock.
my good dear master, my kind friend, my generous benefactor, my worthy
protector, and, oh! all the good word in one, my affectionate husband,
that be soon to be--(be curb in, my proud heart, know thy self, and be
conscious of thy unworthiness!)--has just leave I, with the kind,
tender expression, and gentle behaviour, that ever bl a happy
maiden. he approach I with a sort of rein-in rapture. my Pamela!
say he, May I just ask after your employment? donot let I chide my
dear girl this day, however. the two parson will be here to breakfast
with we at nine; and yet you be not a bit dress! why this absence of
mind, and sweet irresolution?
why, indeed, sir, say I, I will set about a reformation this instant.
he see the common-prayer book lie in the window. I hope, say he, my
lovely maiden have be con the lesson she be by-and-by to repeat.
have you not, Pamela? and clasp his arm about I, and kiss I.
indeed, sir, say I, I have be read over the solemn service.--And
what think my fairest (for so he call I) of it?--O sir, 'tis very
awful, and make one shudder, to reflect upon it!--no wonder, say he, it
should affect my sweet Pamela: I have be look into it this morning,
and I cannot say but I think it a solemn, but very suitable service. but
this I tell my dear love, continue he, and again clasp I to he,
there be not a tittle in it that I cannot joyfully subscribe to: and
that, my dear Pamela, should make you easy, and join cheerfully in it
with I. I kiss his dear hand: o my generous, kind protector, say I,
how gracious be it to confirm thus the doubt mind of your poor
servant! which apprehend nothing so much as her own unworthiness of the
honour and blessing that await her!--He be pleased to say, I know well,
my dearest creature, that, accord to the liberty we people of
fortune generally give ourselves, I have promise a great deal, when I
say so. but I would not have say it, if, deliberately, I could not with
all my heart. so banish from your mind all doubt and uneasiness; let a
generous confidence in I take place; and let I see it do, by your
cheerfulness in this day's solemn business; and then I will love you for
ever!
may God Almighty, sir, say I, reward all your goodness to me!--That be
all I can say. but, oh! how kind it be in you, to supply the want of the
presence and comforting of a dear mother, of a love sister, or of the
kind companion of my own sex, which most maiden have, to soothe their
anxiety on the so near approach of so awful a solemnity!--You, sir, be
all these tender relation in one to I! your condescension and
kindness shall, if possible, embolden I to look up to you without that
sweet terror, that must confound poor bashful maiden, on such an
occasion, when they be surrender up to a more doubtful happiness, and
to half-strange man, whose good faith, and good usage of they, must be
less experienced, and be all involve in the dark bosom of futurity, and
only to be prove by the event.
this, my dear Pamela, say he, be most kindly say! it shew I that you
enter gratefully into my intention. for I would, by my conduct, supply
all these dear relation to you; and I voluntarily promise, from my
heart, to you, what I think I could not, with such assured resolution of
performance, to the highest-bear lady in the kingdom. for let I tell my
sweet girl, that, after have be long toss by the boisterous wind
of a more culpable passion, I have now conquer it, and be not so much
the victim of your beauty, all charming as you be, as of your virtue;
and therefore may more boldly promise for myself, have so stable a
foundation for my affection; which, should this outward beauty fail, will
increase with your virtue, and shine forth the brighter, as that be more
illustriously display by the augment opportunity which the
condition you be now enter into will afford you.--O the dear charming
man! how nobly, how encouragingly kind, be all this!
I could not suitably express myself: and he say, I see my girl be at a
loss for word! I doubt not your kind acceptance of my declaration.
and when I have act too much the part of a libertine formerly, for you
to look back without some anxiety, I ought not, be now happily
convict, to say less.--But why lose my girl her time? I will now only
add, that I hope for many happy year to make good, by my conduct, what
so willingly flow from my lip.
he kiss I again, and say, but, whatever you do, Pamela, be cheerful;
for else, may be, of the small company we shall have, some one, not
know how to account for your too nice modesty, will think there be
some other person in the world, whose address would be still more
agreeable to you.
this he say with an air of sweetness and pleasantry; but it alarm I
exceedingly, and make I resolve to appear as calm and cheerful as
possible. for this be, indeed, a most affect expression, and enough
to make I, if any thing can, behave as I ought, and to force my idle
fear to give way to hope so much well grounded.--and I begin almost,
on this occasion, to wish Mr. Williams be not to marry I, lest I
should behave like a fool; and so be liable to an imputation, which I
should be most unworthy, if I deserve.
so I set about dress I instantly; and he send Mrs. Jewkes to assist
I. but I be never long a dressing, when I set about it; and my master
have now give I a hint, that will, for half an hour more, at least, keep
my spirit in a brisk circulation. yet it concern I a little too, lest
he should have any the least shadow of a doubt, that I be not, mind and
person, entirely his.
and so be now ready, and not call to breakfast, I sit down and write
thus far.
I might have mention, that I dress myself in a rich white satin
night-gown, that have be my good lady's, and my good head-clothe, etc.
I have get such a knack of writing, that when I be by myself, I cannot
sit without a pen in my hand.--But I be now call to breakfast. I
suppose the gentleman be come.--Now, courage, Pamela! remember thou art
upon thy good behaviour!--Fie upon it! my heart begin to flutter again!
--foolish heart! be still! never, sure, be any maiden's perverse heart
under so little command as mine!--It give itself away, at first, without
my leave; it have be, for week, press I with its wish; and yet
now, when it should be happy itself, and make I so, it be throb, throb,
throb, like a little fool! and fill I with such unseasonable
misgiving, as abate the rise comfort of all my well prospect.
Thursday, near three o'clock.
I think I should have find no time nor heart to write again this day.
but here be three gentleman come, unexpectedly, to dine with my master;
and so I shall not appear. he have do all he could, civilly, to send
they away; but they will stay, though I believe he have rather they would
not. and so I have nothing to do but to write till I go to dinner myself
with Mrs. Jewkes: for my master be not prepare for this company; and it
will be a little latish to-day. so I will begin with my happy story
where I leave off.
when I come down to breakfast, Mr. Peters and Mr. Williams be both
there. and as soon as my master hear I come down, he meet I at the
door, and lead I in with great tenderness. he have kindly speak to they,
as he tell I afterwards, to mention no more of the matter to I, than
need must. I pay my respect to they, I believe a little awkwardly,
and be almost out of breath: but say, I have come down a little too
fast.
when Abraham come in to wait, my master say, (that the servant should
not mistrust,) 'tis well, gentleman, you come as you do; for my good
girl and I be go to take an airing till dinner-time. I hope youwill
stay and dine with I. Sir, say Mr. Peters, we willnot hinder your
airing. I only come, have a little time upon my hand, to see your
chapel; but must be at home at dinner; and Mr. Williams will dine with
I. well then, say my master, we will pursue our intention, and ride
out for an hour or two, as soon as I have shew Mr. Peters my little
chapel. will you, Pamela, after breakfast, walk with we to it? if, if,
say I, and have like to have stammer, foolish that I be! if you
please, sir. I could look none of they in the face. Abraham look at
I; why, child, say my master, you have hardly recover your fright
yet: how come your foot to slip? 'tis well you do not hurt yourself.
say Mr. Peters, improve the hint, you ha'n't sprain your ancle,
madam, I hope. no, sir, say I, I believe not; but 'tis a little painful
to I. and so it be; for I mean my foolishness! Abraham, say my
master, bid Robin put the horse to the coach, instead of the chariot;
and if these gentleman will go, we can set they down. no matter, sir,
say Mr. Peters: I have as lieve walk, if Mr. Williams choose it. well
then, say my master, let it be the chariot, as I tell he.
I could eat nothing, though I attempt it; and my hand shake so, I
spill some of my chocolate, and so put it down again; and they be all
very good, and look another way. my master say, when Abraham be out,
I have a quite plain ring here, Mr. Peters: and I hope the ceremony will
dignify the ring; and that I shall give my girl reason to think it, for
that cause, the most valuable one that can be present she. Mr. Peters
say, he be sure I should value it more than the rich diamond in the
world.
I have bid Mrs. Jewkes not to dress herself, lest she should give cause of
mistrust; and she take my advice.
when breakfast be over, my master say, before Abraham, well, gentleman,
we will step into the chapel; and you must give I your advice, as to the
alteration I design. I be in the more haste, because the survey you be
go to take of it, for the alteration, will take up a little time; and
we shall have but a small space between that and dinner, for the little
tour I design to make.--pamela, youwill give we your opinion, willnot you?
yes, sir, say I; Iwill come after you.
so they go out, and I sit down in the chair again, and fan myself: I
be sick at heart, say I, I think, Mrs. Jewkes. say she, shall I fetch
you a little cordial?--no, say I, I be a sad fool! I want spirit,
thatbe all. she take her smell-bottle, and would have give it I:
but I say, keep it in your hand; may be I shall want it: but I hope not.
she give I very good word, and beg I to go: and I get up; but my
knee beat so against one another, I be force to sit down again. but,
at last, I hold by her arm, and pass by Abraham, I say, this ugly
slip, come down stair, have make I limp, though; so I must hold by
you, Mrs. Jewkes. do you know what alteration there be to be in the
chapel, that we must all give our opinion of they?
Nan, she tell I, be let into the secret; and she have order she to
stay at the chapel door, to see that nobody come in. my dear master come
to I, at enter the chapel, and take my hand, and lead I up to the
altar. remember, my dear girl, whisper he, and be cheerful. I be, I
will, sir, say I; but I hardly know what I say; and so you may believe,
when I say to Mrs. Jewkes, donot leave I; pray, Mrs. Jewkes, donot
leave I; as if I have all confidence in she, and none where it be most
due. so she keep close to I. God forgive I! but I never be so absent
in my life, as at first; even till Mr. Williams have go on in the
service, so far as to the awful word about require we, as we should
answer at the dreadful day of judgment; and then the solemn word, and my
master's whispering, mind this, my dear, make I start. say he, still
whispering, know you any impediment? I blush, and say softly, none,
sir, but my great unworthiness.
then follow the sweet word, Wilt thou have this woman to thy wed
wife? etc. and I begin to take heart a little, when my dear master
answer, audibly, to this question, I will. but I could only make a
courtesy, when they ask I; though, I be sure, my heart be ready
than my speech, and answer to every article of obey, serve, love, and
honour.
Mr. Peters give I away; and I say, after Mr. Williams, as well as I
could, as my dear master do with a much well grace, the word of
betrothment; and the ceremony of the ring pass next, I receive the
dear favour at his worthy hand with a most grateful heart; and he be
pleased to say afterwards in the chariot, that when he have do say,
with this ring I thee wed, etc. I make a courtesy, and say, thank you,
sir. may be I do; for I be sure it be a most grateful part of the
service, and my heart be overwhelm with his goodness, and the tender
grace wherewith he perform it. I be very glad, that the next part be
the prayer, and kneeling; for I tremble so, I could hardly stand,
betwixt fear and joy.
the joining of our hand afterwards, the declaration of our be marry
to the few witness present; for, reckon Nan, whose curiosity would
not let she stay at the door, there be but Mr. Peters, Mrs. Jewkes, and
she; the blessing, the psalm, and the subsequent prayer, and the
concluding exhortation; be so many beautiful, welcome, and lovely part
of this divine office, that my heart begin to be delighted with they; and
my spirit to be a little free.
and thus, my dearest, dear parent, be your happy, happy, thrice happy
Pamela, at last marry; and to whom?--Why, to her beloved, gracious
master! the lord of her wish! and thus the dear, once naughty assailer
of her innocence, by a blessed turn of Providence, be become the kind,
the generous protector and rewarder of it. God be evermore bless and
praise! and make I not wholly unworthy of such a transcendent honour!--
and bless and reward the dear, dear, good gentleman, who have thus exalt
his unworthy servant, and give she a place, which the great lady
would think themselves happy in!
my master salute I most ardently, and say, God give you, my dear love,
as much joy on this occasion, as I have! and he present I to Mr.
Peters, who salute I; and say, you may excuse I, dear madam, for I
give you away, and you be my daughter. and Mr. Williams modestly
withdraw a little way; Mr. Williams, say my master, pray accept my
thank, and wish your sister joy. so he salute I too; and say, Most
heartily, madam, I do. and I will say, that to see so much innocence and
virtue so eminently reward, be one of the great pleasure I have
ever know. this my master take very kindly.
Mrs. Jewkes would have kiss my hand at the chapel-door; but I put my
arm about her neck, for I have get a new recruit of spirit just then;
and kiss she, and say, thank you, Mrs. Jewkes, for accompany I. I
have behave sadly. no, madam, say she, pretty well, pretty well!
Mr. Peters walk out with I; and Mr. Williams and my master come out
after we, talk together.
Mr. Peters, when we come into the parlour, say, I once more, madam, must
wish you joy on this happy occasion. I wish every day may add to your
comfort; and may you very long rejoice in one another! for you be the
lovely couple I ever see join. I tell he, I be highly oblige to
his kind opinion, and good wish; and hop my future conduct would not
make I unworthy of they.
my good benefactor come in with Mr. Williams: so, my dear life, say he,
how do you do? a little more composed, I hope. well, you see this be
not so dreadful an affair as you apprehend.
Sir, say Mr. Peters, very kindly, it be a very solemn circumstance; and
I love to see it so reverently and awfully enter upon. it be a most
excellent sign; for the most thoughtful beginning make the most prudent
proceeding.
Mrs. Jewkes, of her own accord, come in with a large silver tumbler,
fill with sack, and a toast, and nutmeg, and sugar; and my master say,
thatbe well think of, Mrs. Jewkes; for we have make but sorry
breakfasting. and he would make I, take some of the toast; as they all
do, and drink pretty heartily: and I drink a little, and it cheer my
heart, I think, for an hour after.
my master take a fine diamond ring from his finger, and present it to
Mr. Peters, who receive it very kindly. and to Mr. Williams he say, my
old acquaintance, I have reserve for you, against a variety of
solicitation, the living I always design for you; and I beg youwill
prepare to take possession of it; and as the do it may be attend
with some expense, pray accept of this towards it; and so he give he (as
he tell I afterwards it be) a bank note of 50l.
so do this generous good gentleman bless we all, and I in particular;
for whose sake he be as bounteous as if he have marry one of the
noble fortune.
so he take his leave of the gentleman, recommend secrecy again, for a
few day, and they leave he; and none of the servant suspect any
thing, as Mrs. Jewkes believe. and then I throw myself at his foot,
bless God, and bless he for his goodness; and he overwhelm I with
kindness, call I his sweet bride, and twenty lovely epithet, that
swell my grateful heart beyond the power of utterance.
he afterwards lead I to the chariot; and we take a delightful tour round
the neighbouring village; and he do all he could to dissipate those
still perverse anxiety that dwell upon my mind, and, do what I can,
spread too thoughtful an air, as he tell I, over my countenance.
we come home again by half an hour after one; and he be please himself
with thinking, not to be an hour out of my company this blessed day, that
(as he be so good as to say) he might inspire I with a familiarity that
should improve my confidence in he, when he be tell, that a footman of
Sir Charles Hargrave have be here, to let he know, that his master, and
two other gentleman, be on the road to take a dinner with he, in their
way to Nottingham.
he be heartily vex at this, and say to I, he should have be glad
of their company at any other time; but that it be a barbarous
intrusion now; and he wish they have be tell he would not be at home
at dinner: and besides, say he, they be horrid drinker; and I shallnot
be able to get they away to-night, perhaps; for they have nothing to do,
but to travel round the country, and beat up their friend' quarter all
the way; and it be all one to they, whether they stay a night or a month
at a place. but, add he, Iwill find some way, if I can, to turn they
off, after dinner.--confound they, say he, in a violent pet, that they
should come this day, of all the day in the year!
we have hardly alight, and get in, before they come: three mad rake
they seem to be, as I look through the window, set up a hunting
note, as soon as they come to the gate, that make the court-yard echo
again; and smack their whip in concert.
so I go up to my chamber, and see (what make my heart throb) Mrs.
Jewkes's officious pain to put the room in order for a guest, that,
however welcome, as now my duty teach I to say, be yet dreadful to I
to think of. so I take refuge in my closet, and have recourse to pen and
ink, for my amusement, and to divert my anxiety of mind.--If one's heart
be so sad, and one's apprehension so great, where one so extremely love,
and be so extremely oblige; what must be the case of those poor maiden,
who be force, for sordid view, by their tyrannical parent or
guardian, to marry the man they almost hate, and, perhaps, to the loss
of the man they most love! o that be a sad thing, indeed!--and what have
not such cruel parent to answer for! and what do not such poor innocent
victim suffer!--but, bless be God, this lot be far from be mine!
my good master (for I cannot yet have the presumption to call he by a
more tender name) come up to I, and say, well, I just come to ask my
dear bride (o the charming, charming word!) how she do? I see you be
writing, my dear, say he. these confound rake be half mad, I think,
and will make I so! however, say he, I have order my chariot to be
get ready, as if I be under an engagement five mile off, and will set
they out of the house, if possible; and then ride round, and come back,
as soon as I can get rid of they. I find, say he, Lady Davers be full
of our affair. she have take great freedom with I before Sir Charles;
and they have all be at I, without mercy; and I be force to be very
serious with they, or else they would have come up to have see you,
since I would not call you down.--he kiss I, and say, I shall quarrel
with they, if I cannot get they away; for I have lose two or three
precious hour with my soul's delight: and so he go down.
Mrs. Jewkes ask I to walk down to dinner in the little parlour. I
go down, and she be so complaisant as to offer to wait upon I at
table; and would not be persuade, without difficulty, to sit down with
I. but I insist she should: for, say I, it would be very
extraordinary, if one should so soon go into such distance, Mrs. Jewkes.
--whatever my new station may require of I, add I, I hope I shall
always conduct myself in such a manner, that pride and insolence shall
bear no part in my character.
you be very good, madam, say she; but I will always know my duty to my
master's lady.--Why then, reply I, if I must take state upon I so
early, Mrs. Jewkes, let I exact from you what you call your duty; and
sit down with I when I desire you.
this prevail upon she; and I make shift to get down a bit of apple-pye,
and a little custard; but that be all.
my good master come in again, and say, well, thank my star! these rake
be go now; but I must set out with they, and I choose my chariot; for
if I take horse, I should have difficulty to part with they; for they be
like a snowball, and intend to gather company as they go, to make a merry
tour of it for some day together.
we both get up, when he come in: Fie, Pamela! say he; why this ceremony
now?--sit still, Mrs. Jewkes.--Nay, sir, say she, I be loath to sit
down; but my lady would have me.--she be very right, Mrs. Jewkes, say my
master, and tap I on the cheek; for we be but yet half marry; and
so she be not above half your lady yet!--don't look so down, donot be so
silent, my dearest, say he; why, you hardly speak twenty word to I all
the time we be out together. something I will allow for your bashful
sweetness; but not too much.--Mrs. jewke, have you no pleasant tale to
tell my Pamela, to make her smile, till I return?--yes, sir, say she, I
could tell twenty pleasant story; but my lady be too nice to hear they;
and yet, I hope, I should not be shock neither. ah! poor woman!
think I; thy chaste story will make a modest person blush, if I
know thee! and I desire to hear none of they.
my master say, tell her one of the short you have, in my hearing.
why, sir, say she, I know a bashful young lady, as madam may be, marry
to--Dear Mrs. Jewkes, interrupt I, no more of your story, I beseech
you; I donot like the beginning of it. go on, Mrs. Jewkes, say my
master. no, pray, sir, donot require it, say I, pray donot. well, say
he, then wewill have it another time, Mrs. Jewkes.
Abraham come in to tell he the gentleman be go, and that his
chariot be ready; I be glad of that, say he; and go to they, and set
out with they.
I take a turn in the garden with Mrs. Jewkes, after they be go: and
have walk a while, I say, I should be glad of her company down the
elm-walk, to meet the chariot: for, o! I know not how to look up at he,
when he be with I; nor how to bear his absence, when I have reason to
expect he: what a strange contradiction there be in this unaccountable
passion.
what a different aspect every thing in and about this house bear now, to
my thinking, to what it once have! the garden, the pond, the alcove, the
elm-walk. but, oh! my prison be become my palace; and no wonder every
thing wear another face!
we sit down upon the broad stile, lead towards the road; and Mrs.
Jewkes be quite another person to I, to what she be the last time I
sit there.
at last my well beloved return, and alight there. what, my Pamela!
(and Mrs. Jewkes then leave I,) what (say he, and kiss I) bring you
this way? I hope to meet me.--Yes, sir, say I. thatbe kind, indeed,
say he; but why that avert eye?--that downcast countenance, as if you
be afraid of I? you must not think so, sir, say I. revive my heart
then, say he, with a more cheerful aspect; and let that over-anxious
solicitude, which appear in the most charming face in the world, be
chase from it.--Have you, my dear girl any fear that I can dissipate;
any doubt that I can obviate; any hope that I can encourage; any
request that I can gratify?--speak, my dear Pamela; and if I have power,
but speak, and to purchase one smile, it shall be do!
I cannot, sir, say I, have any fear, any doubt, but that I shall never
be able to deserve all your goodness. I have no hope, but that my
future conduct may be agreeable to you, and my determined duty well
accept. nor have I any request to make, but that you will forgive all
my imperfection and, among the rest, this foolish weakness, that make
I seem to you, after all the generous thing that have pass, to want
this further condescension, and these kind assurance. but indeed, sir,
I be oppress by your bounty; my spirit sink under the weight of it;
and the oppression be still the great, as I see not how, possibly, in
my whole future life, by all I can do, to merit the least of your
favour.
I know your grateful heart, say he; but remember, my dear, what the
lawyer tell we, that marriage be the high consideration which the law
know. and this, my sweet bride, have make you mine, and I your; and
you have the good claim in the world to share my fortune with I. but,
set that consideration aside, what be the obligation you have to I?
your mind be pure as that of an angel, and as much transcend mine. your
wit, and your judgment, to make you no compliment, be more than equal to
mine: you have all the grace that education can give a woman, improve
by a genius which make those grace natural to you. you have a
sweetness of temper, and a noble sincerity, beyond all comparison; and in
the beauty of your person, you excel all the lady I ever see. where
then, my dearest, be the obligation, if not on my side to you?--But, to
avoid these comparison, let we talk of nothing henceforth but equality;
although, if the rich of your mind, and your unblemished virtue, be set
against my fortune, (which be but an accidental good, as I may call it,
and all I have to boast of,) the condescension will be your; and I shall
not think I can possibly deserve you, till, after your sweet example, my
future life shall become nearly as blameless as your.
O, sir, say I, what comfort do you give I, that, instead of my be in
danger of be ensnare by the high condition to which your goodness have
exalt I, you make I hope, that I shall be confirm and approve by
you; and that we may have a prospect of perpetuate each other's
happiness, till time shall be no more!--But, sir, I will not, as you once
caution I, be too serious. I will resolve, with these sweet
encouragement, to be, in every thing, what you would have I be: and I
hope I shall, more and more, shew you that I have no will but your. he
kiss I very tenderly, and thank I for this kind assurance, as he
call it.
and so we enter the house together.
eight o'clock at night.
now these sweet assurance, my dear father and mother, you will say, must
be very consolatory to I; and be voluntary on his side, be all that
could be wish for on mine; and I be resolve, if possible, to subdue
my idle fear and apprehension.
ten o'clock at night.
as we sit at supper, he be generously kind to I, as well in his
action, as expression. he take notice, in the most delicate manner, of
my endeavour to conquer my foible; and say, I see, with pleasure, my
dear girl strive to comport herself in a manner suitable to my wish: I
see, even through the sweet tender struggle of your over-nice modesty,
how much I owe to your intention of oblige I. as I have once tell
you, that I be the conquest more of your virtue than your beauty; so not
one alarming word or look shall my beloved Pamela hear or see, to give
her reason to suspect the truth of what I aver. you may the rather
believe I, continue he, as you may see the pain I have to behold any
thing that concern you, even though your concern be causeless. and yet
I will indulge my dear girl's bashful weakness so far, as to own, that so
pure a mind may suffer from apprehension, on so important a change as
this; and I can therefore be only displeased with such part of your
conduct, as may make your suffering great than my own; when I be
resolve, through every stage of my future life, in all event, to study
to make they less.
after supper, of which, with all his sweet persuasion, I could hardly
taste, he make I drink two glass of champaign, and, afterwards, a
glass of sack; which he kindly force upon I, by name your health:
and as the time of retire draw on, he take notice, but in a very
delicate manner, how my colour go and come, and how foolishly I
tremble. nobody, surely, in such delightful circumstance, ever behave
so silly!--and he say, my dear girl, I fear you have have too much of
my company for so many hour together; and would well recollect
yourself, if you retire for half an hour to your closet.
I wish for this, but durst not say so much, lest he should be angry;
for, as the hour grow on, I find my apprehension increase, and my
silly heart be the unquieter, every time I could lift up my eye to his
dear face; so sweetly terrible do he appear to my apprehension. I
say, you be all goodness, dear sir; and I boldly kiss his dear hand,
and press it to my lip with both mine. and salute I very
fervently, he give I his hand, see I hardly able to stand, and lead
I to my chamber-door, and then most generously withdraw.
I go to my closet; and the first thing I do, on my knee, again
thank God for the blessing of the day; and besought his divine goodness
to conduct my future life in such a manner, as should make I a happy
instrument of his glory. after this, be now leave to my own
recollection, I grow a little more assured and lightsome; and the pen and
paper be before I, I amuse myself with write thus far.
eleven o'clock Thursday night.
Mrs. Jewkes be come up with a message, desire to know, whether she
master may attend upon I in my closet; and hint to I, that, however,
she believe he do not expect to find I there; I have send word, that I
beg he would indulge I one quarter of an hour.--So, commit myself to
the mercy of the Almighty, who have lead I through so many strange
scene of terror and affrightment, to this happy, yet awful moment, I
will wish you, my dear parent, a good night; and though you will not see
this in time, yet I know I have your hourly prayer, and therefore cannot
fail of they now. so, good night, good night! God bless you, and God
bless I! amen, amen, if it be his blessed will, subscribe
your ever-dutiful DAUGHTER!
Friday evening.
o how this dear excellent man indulge I in every thing! every hour he
make I happy, by his sweet condescension, than the former. he pity
my weakness of mind, allow for all my little foible, endeavour to
dissipate my fear; his word be so pure, his idea so chaste, and his
whole behaviour so sweetly decent, that never, surely, be so happy a
creature as your Pamela! I never could have hop such a husband could
have fall to my lot: and much less, that a gentleman, who have allow
himself in attempt, that now I will endeavour to forget for ever, should
have behave with so very delicate and unexceptionable a demeanour. no
light frothy jest drop from his lip; no alarming raillery; no
offensive expression, nor insult air, reproach or wound the ear of
your happy, thrice happy daughter. in short, he say every thing that
may embolden I to look up, with pleasure, upon the generous author of my
happiness.
at breakfast, when I know not how to see he, he embolden I by talk
of you, my dear parent; a subject, he generously know, I could talk of:
and give I assurance, that he would make you both happy. he say, he
would have I send you a letter to acquaint you with my nuptial; and, as
he could make business that way, Thomas should carry it purposely, as to-
morrow. nor will I, say he, my dear Pamela, desire to see your
writing, because I tell you I would not; for now I will, in every thing,
religiously keep my word with my dear spouse: (o the dear delightful
word!) and you may send all your paper to they, from those they have,
down to this happy moment; only let I beg they will preserve they, and
let I have they when they have read they; as also those I have not see;
which, however, I desire not to see till then; but then shall take it for
a favour, if you will grant it.
it will be my pleasure, as well as my duty, sir, say I, to obey you in
every thing: and I will write up to the conclusion of this day, that they
may see how happy you have make I.
I know you will both join with I to bless God for his wonderful mercy
and goodness to you, as well as to I: for he be pleased to ask I
particularly after your circumstance, and say, he have take notice,
that I have hint, in some of my first letter, that you owe money in
the world; and he give I fifty guineas, and bid I send they to you in
my packet, to pay your debt, as far as they would go; and that you would
quit your present business, and put yourself, and my dear mother, into a
creditable appearance; and he would find a well place of abode for you
than that you have, when he return to Bedfordshire. o how shall I bear
all these exceed great and generous favours!--i send they wrapt up,
five guineas in a parcel, in double paper.
to I he give no less than one hundred guineas more; and say, I would
have you, my dear, give Mrs. Jewkes, when you go away from hence, what
you think fit out of these, as from yourself.--Nay, good dear sir, say
I, let that be what you please. give she, then, say he, twenty guineas,
as a compliment on your nuptial. give Colbrand ten guineas give: the
two coachman five guineas each; to the two maid at this house five
guineas each; give Abraham five guineas; give Thomas five guineas; and
give the gardener, groom, and helper, twenty guineas among they. and
when, say he, I return with you to the other house, I will make you a
suitable present, to buy you such ornament as be fit for my beloved
wife to appear in. for now, my Pamela, continue he, you be not to
mind, as you once propose, what other lady will say; but to appear as
my wife ought to do. else it would look as if what you think of, as a
mean to avoid the envy of other of your sex, be a wilful slight in I,
which, I hope, I never shall be guilty of; and I will shew the world,
that I value you as I ought, and as if I have marry the first fortune in
the kingdom: and why should it not be so, when I know none of the first
quality that match you in excellence?
he see I be at a loss for word, and say, I see, my dear bride! my
spouse! my wife! my Pamela! your grateful confusion. and kiss I, as
I be go to speak, I will stop your dear mouth, say he: you shall not
so much as thank I; for when I have do ten time more than this, I
shall but poorly express my love for so much beauty of mind, and
loveliness of person; which thus, say he, and clasp I to his generous
bosom, I can proudly now call my own!--O how, my dear parent, can I
think of any thing, but redouble love, joy, and gratitude!
and thus generously do he banish from my mind those painful reflection,
and bashful apprehension, that make I dread to see he for the first
time this day, when I be call to attend he at breakfast; and make I
all ease, composure, and tranquillity.
he then, think I seem somewhat thoughtful, propose a little turn in
the chariot till dinner-time: and this be another sweet relief to I;
and he divert I with twenty agreeable relation, of what observation
he have make in his travel; and give I the character of the lady and
gentleman in his other neighbourhood; tell I whose acquaintance he
would have I most cultivate. and when I mention Lady Davers with
apprehension, he say, to be sure I love my sister dearly,
notwithstanding her violent spirit; and I know she love I; and I can
allow a little for her pride, because I know what my own so lately be;
and because she know not my Pamela, and her excellency, as I do. but
you must not, my dear, forget what belong to your character, as my wife,
nor meanly stoop to she; though I know you will choose, by softness, to
try to move she to a proper behaviour. but it shall be my part to see,
that you do not yield too much.
however, continue he, as I would not publicly declare my marriage here,
I hope she willnot come near we till we be in Bedfordshire; and then, when
she know we be marry, she will keep away, if she be not willing to be
reconcile; for she dare not, surely, come to quarrel with I, when she
know it be do; for that would have a hateful and wicked appearance, as
if she would try to make difference between man and wife.--but we will
have no more of this subject, nor talk of any thing, add he, that shall
give concern to my dearest. and so he change the talk to a more
pleasing subject, and say the kind and most soothing thing in the
world.
when we come home, which be about dinner-time, he be the same obliging,
kind gentleman; and, in short, be studious to shew, on every occasion,
his generous affection to I. and, after dinner, he tell I, he have
already write to his draper, in town, to provide he new livery; and
to his late mother's mercer, to send he down pattern of the most
fashionable silk, for my choice. I tell he, I be unable to express my
gratitude for his favour and generosity: and as he know well what
befit his own rank and condition, I would wholly remit myself to his
good pleasure. but, by all his repeat bounty to I, of so
extraordinary a nature, I could not but look forward with awe upon the
condition to which he have exalt I; and now I fear I should hardly be
able to act up to it in such a manner as should justify the choice he have
condescend to make: but that, I hop, I should have not only his
generous allowance for my imperfection, which I could only assure he
should not be wilful one, but his kind instruction; and that as often
as he observe any part of my conduct such as he could not entirely
approve, he would let I know it; and I would think his reproof of
begin fault the kind and most affectionate thing in the world
because they would keep I from commit great; and be a means to
continue to I the blessing of his good opinion.
he answer I in the kind manner; and assure I, that nothing should
ever lie upon his mind which he would not reveal, and give I an
opportunity either of convince he, or be convince myself.
he then ask I, when I should be willing to go to the Bedfordshire
house? I say, whenever he please. we will come down hither again
before the winter, say he, if you please, in order to cultivate the
acquaintance you have begin with Lady Jones, and Sir Simon's family; and,
if it please God to spare we to one another, in the winter I will give
you, as I promise for two or three month, the diversion of London.
and I think, add he, if my dear please, we will set out next week,
about Tuesday, for t'other house. I can have no objection, sir, say I,
to any thing you propose; but how will you avoid Miss Darnford's
solicitation for an evening to dance? why, say he, we can make Monday
evening do for that purpose, if they willnot excuse we. but, if you
please, say he, I will invite Lady Jones, Mr. Peters and his family, and
Sir Simon and his family, to my little chapel, on Sunday morning, and to
stay dinner with I; and then I will declare my marriage to they, because
my dear life shall not leave this country with the least reason for a
possibility of any body's doubting that it be so. o! how good be this!
but, indeed, his conduct be all of a piece, noble, kind, and considerate!
what a happy creature be i!--and then, may be, say he, they will excuse
we till we return into this country again, as to the ball. be there any
thing, add he, that my beloved Pamela have still to wish? if you have,
freely speak.
Hitherto, my dearest sir, reply I, you have not only prevent my
wish, but my hope, and even my thought. and yet I must own, since
your kind command of speak my mind seem to shew, that you expect from
I I should say something; that I have only one or two thing to wish
more, and then I shall be too happy. Say, say he, what they be. Sir,
proceed I, I be, indeed, ashame to ask any thing, lest it should not
be agreeable to you; and lest it should look as if I be take advantage
of your kind condescension to I, and know not when to be satisfy!
I will only tell you, Pamela, say he, that you be not to imagine, that
these thing, which I have do, in hope of oblige you, be the sudden
impulse of a new passion for you. but, if I can answer for my own mind,
they proceed from a regular and uniform desire of oblige you: which, I
hope, will last as long as your merit last; and that, I make no doubt,
will be as long as I live. and I can the rather answer for this, because
I really find so much delight in myself in my present way of thinking and
acting, as infinitely overpay I; and which, for that reason, I be
likely to continue, for both our sake. my beloved wife, therefore, say
he, for methink I be grow fond of a name I once despise, may venture
to speak her mind; and I will promise, that, so far as it be agreeable to
I, and I cheerfully can, I will comply; and you will not insist upon it,
if that should not be the case.
to be sure, sir, say I, I ought not, neither will I. and now you
embolden I to become an humble petitioner, and that, as I ought, upon my
knee, for the reinstating such of your servant, as I have be the
unhappy occasion of their disoblige you. he raise I up, and say, my
beloved Pamela have too often be in this suppliant posture to I, to
permit it any more. rise, my fair, and let I know whom, in
particular, you would reinstate; and he kindly hold I in his arm, and
press I to his beloved bosom. Mrs. Jervis, sir, say I, in the first
place; for she be a good woman; and the misfortune she have have in the
world, must make your displeasure most heavy to she.
well, say he, who next? Mr. Longman, sir, say I; and I be sure, kind
as they have be to I, yet would I not ask it, if I could not vouch for
their integrity, and if I do not think it be my dear master's interest
to have such good servant.
have you any thing far? say he.--Sir, say I, your good old butler,
who have so long be in your family before the day of your happy birth, I
would, if I might, become an advocate for!
well, say he, I have only to say, that have not Mr. Longman and Mrs.
Jervis, and Jonathan too, join in a body, in a bold appeal to Lady
Davers, which have give she the insolent handle she have take to
intermeddle in my affair, I could easily have forgive all the rest of
their conduct; though they have give their tongue no little license
about I: but I could have forgive they, because I desire every body
should admire you; and it be with pride that I observe not only their
opinion and love, but that of every body else that know you, justify my
own.--but yet, I will forgive even this, because my Pamela desire it;
and I will send a letter myself, to tell Longman what he owe to your
interposition, if the estate he have make in my family do not set he
above the acceptance of it. and, as to Mrs. Jervis, do you, my dear,
write a letter to she, and give she your command, instantly, on, the
receipt of it, to go and take possession of her former charge; for now,
my dear girl, she will be more immediately your servant; and I know
you love she so well, that youwill go thither with the more pleasure to
find she there.--But donot think, add he, that all this compliance be
to be for nothing. ah, sir! say I, tell I but what I can do, poor as I
be in power, but rich in will; and I will not hesitate one moment. why
then, say he, of your own accord, reward I for my cheerful compliance,
with one sweet kiss--I instantly say, thus, then, dear sir, will I obey;
and, oh! you have the sweetest and most generous way in the world, to
make that a condition, which give I double honour, and add to my
obligation. and so I clasp my arm about his neck, and be not
ashamed to kiss he once and twice, and three time; once for every
forgive person.
now, my dear Pamela, say he, what other thing have you to ask? Mr.
Williams be already take care of; and, I hope, will be happy.--have you
nothing to say for John Arnold?
why, dear sir, say I, you have see the poor fellow's penitence in my
letters.--Yes, my dear, so I have; but that be his penitence for his
have serve I against you; and, I think, when he would have betray
I afterwards, he deserve nothing to be say or do for he by either.
but, dear sir, say I, this be a day of jubilee; and the less he
deserve, poor fellow, the more will be your goodness. and let I add
one word; that as he be divide in his inclination between his duty to
you and good wish to I, and know not how to distinguish between the
one and the other, when he find we so happily unite by your great
goodness to I, he will have no more puzzle in his duty; for he have not
fail in any other part of it; but, I hope, will serve you faithfully
for the future.
well, then, suppose I put Mrs. Jewkes in a good way of business, in some
inn, and give she John for a husband? and then your gipsy story will be
make out, that she will have a husband young than herself.
you be all goodness, sir, say I. I can freely forgive poor Mrs.
Jewkes, and wish her happy. but permit I, sir, to ask, would not this
look like a very heavy punishment to poor John? and as if you could not
forgive he, when you be so generous to every body else?
he smile and say, o my Pamela, this, for a forgiving spirit, be very
severe upon poor jewke: but I shall never, by the grace of God, have any
more such try service, to put he or the rest upon; and if you can
forgive he, I think I may: and so John shall be at your disposal. and
now let I know what my Pamela have far to wish?
O, my dearest sir, say I, not a single wish more have your grateful
Pamela! my heart be overwhelmed with your goodness! forgive these tear
of joy, add I: you have leave I nothing to pray for, but that God will
bless you with life, and health, and honour, and continue to I the
blessing of your esteem; and I shall then be the happy creature in the
world.
he clasp I in his arm, and say, you cannot, my dear life, be so
happy in I, as I be in you. o how heartily I despise all my former
pursuit, and headstrong appetite! what joy, what true joy, flow from
virtuous love! joy which the narrow soul of the libertine cannot take
in, nor his thought conceive! and which I myself, whilst a libertine,
have not the least notion of!
but, say he, I expect my dear spouse, my Pamela, have something to ask
for herself. but since all her own good be absorb in the delight her
generous heart take in promote that of other, it shall be my study to
prevent her wish, and to make her care for herself unnecessary, by my
anticipating kindness.
in this manner, my dear parent, be your happy daughter bless in a
husband! o how my exult heart leap at the dear, dear word!--And I
have nothing to do, but to be humble, and to look up with gratitude to
the all-gracious dispenser of these blessing.
so, with a thousand thank, I afterwards retire to my closet, to write
you thus far. and have complete what I purpose for this packet, and
put up the kind oblige present, I have nothing more to say, but that I
hope soon to see you both, and receive your blessing on this happy,
thrice happy occasion. and so, hop for your prayer, that I may
preserve an humble and upright mind to my gracious God, a dutiful
gratitude to my dear master and husband--that I may long rejoice in the
continuance of these blessing and favour, and that I may preserve, at
the same time, an oblige deportment to every one else, I conclude
myself, your ever-dutiful and most happy daughter,
PAMELA B----
O think it not my pride, my dear parent, that set I on glory in my
change of name! your will be always dear to I, and what I shall never
be ashamed of, Ibe sure: but yet--for such a husband!--what shall I say,
since word be too faint to express my gratitude and my joy!
I have take copy of my master's letter to Mr. Longman, and mine to
Mrs. Jervis, which I will send with the further occurrence, when I go
to the other dear house, or give you when I see you, as I now hope soon
to do.
Saturday morning, the third of my happy nuptial.
I must still write on, till I come to be settle in the duty of the
station to which I be so generously exalt, and to let you participate
with I the transporting pleasure that rise from my new condition, and
the favour that be hourly heap upon I by the good of husband. when
I have get my packet for you finish, I then set about writing, as he have
kindly direct I, to Mrs. Jervis; and have no difficulty till I come to
sign my name; and so I bring it down with I, when I be call to
supper, unsigned.
my good master (for I delight, and always shall, to call he by that
name) have be write to Mr. Longman; and he say, pleasantly, see,
here, my dearest, what I have write to your somebody. I read as
follow:
'Mr. LONGMAN,
'I have the pleasure to acquaint you, that last Thursday I be married to
my beloved Pamela. I have have reason to be disoblige with you, and Mrs.
Jervis and Jonathan, not for your kindness to, and regard for, my dear
spouse, that now be, but for the manner, in which you appeal to my
sister Davers; which have make a very wide breach between she and I. but
as it be one of her first request, that I would overlook what have
pass, and reinstate you in all your former charge, I think myself
oblige, without the least hesitation, to comply with it. so, if you
please, you may enter again upon an office which you have always execute
with unquestionable integrity, and to the satisfaction of 'your etc.'
'Friday afternoon.'
'I shall set out next Tuesday or Wednesday for Bedfordshire; and desire
to find Jonathan, as well as you, in your former office; in which, I
dare say, youwill have the more pleasure, as you have such an early
instance of the sentiment of my dear wife, from whose goodness you may
expect every agreeable thing. she write herself to Mrs. Jervis.'
I thank he most gratefully for his goodness; and afterwards take the
above copy of it; and shew he my letter to Mrs. Jervis, as follow:
'my DEAR MRS. JERVIS,
'I have joyful tiding to communicate to you. for yesterday I be
happily married to the good of gentleman, yours and my beloved master. I
have only now to tell you, that I be inexpressibly happy: that my
generous benefactor deny I nothing, and even anticipate my wish.
you may be sure I could not forget my dear Mrs. Jervis; and I make it my
request, and have it grant, as soon as ask, that you might return to
the kind charge, which you execute with so much advantage to our
master's interest, and so much pleasure to all under your direction. all
the power that be put into my hand, by the most generous of man, shall
be exert to make every thing easy and agreeable to you: and as I shall
soon have the honour of attend my beloved to Bedfordshire, it will be
a very considerable addition to my delight, and to my unspeakable
obligation to the good of man, to see my dear Mrs. Jervis, and to be
receive by she with that pleasure, which I promise myself from her
affection. for I be, my dear good friend, and always will be,
'your, very affectionately, and gratefully,
PAMELA ----.'
he read this letter, and say, 'tis your, my dear, and must be good: but
donot you put your name to it? Sir, say I, your goodness have give I a
right to a very honourable one but as this be the first occasion of the
kind, except that to my dear father and mother, I think I ought to shew
it you unsigned, that I may not seem over-forward to take advantage of
the honour you have do I.
however sweetly humble and requisite, say he, this may appear to my dear
Pamela's niceness, it befit I to tell you, that I be every moment more
and more pleased with the right you have to my name: and, my dear life,
add he, I have only to wish I may be half as worthy as you be of the
happy knot so lately knit. he then take a pen himself, and write, after
Pamela, his most worthy sirname; and I under-write thus: 'o rejoice with
I, my dear Mrs. Jervis, that I be enable, by God's graciousness, and my
dear master's goodness, thus to write myself!'
these letter, and the packet to you, be send away by Mr. Thomas early
this morning.
my dear master be just go to take a ride out, and intend to call
upon Lady Jones, Mr. Peters, and Sir Simon Darnford, to invite they to
chapel and dinner to-morrow; and say, he choose to do it himself,
because the time be so short, they will, perhaps, deny a servant.
I forget to mention, that Mr. Williams be here yesterday, to ask leave
to go to see his new living, and to provide for take possession of it;
and seem so pleased with my master's kindness and fondness for I, as
well as his generous deportment to himself, that he leave we in such a
disposition, as shew he be quite happy. I be very glad of it; for it
would rejoice I to be an humble mean of make all mankind so: and oh!
what return ought I not to make to the divine goodness! and how ought I
to strive to diffuse the blessing I experience, to all in my knowledge!
--For else, what be it for such a worm as I to be exalt! what be my
single happiness, if I suffer it, niggard-like, to extend no far than
to myself?--but then, indeed, do God Almighty's creature act worthy of
the blessing they receive, when they make, or endeavour to make, the
whole creation, so far as be in the circle of their power, happy!
great and good God! as thou hast enlarge my opportunity, enlarge also
my will, and make I delight in dispense to other a portion of that
happiness, which I have myself so plentifully receive at the hand of thy
gracious providence! then shall I not be useless in my generation!--then
shall I not stand a single mark of thy goodness to a poor worthless
creature, that in herself be of so small account in the scale of being,
a mere cipher on the wrong side of a figure; but shall be place on the
right side; and, though nothing worth in myself, shall give signification
by my place, and multiply the blessing I owe to thy goodness, which have
distinguish I by so fair a lot!
this, as I conceive, be the indispensable duty of a high condition; and
how great must be the condemnation of poor creature, at the great day of
account, when they shall be ask, what use they have make of the
opportunity put into their hand? and be able only to say, we have
live but to ourselves: we have circumscribe all the power thou hast
give we into one narrow, selfish, compass: we have heap up treasure
for those who come after we, though we know not whether they would not
make a still bad use of they than we ourselves do! and how can such
poor selfish pleader expect any other sentence, than the dreadful,
Depart, ye curse!
but sure, my dear father and mother, such person can have no notion of
the exalt pleasure that flow from do good, be there to be no
after-account at all!
there be something so satisfactory and pleasing to reflect on the being
able to administer comfort and relief to those who stand in need of it,
as infinitely, of itself, reward the beneficent mind. and how often
have I experience this in my good lady's time, though but the second-
hand dispenser of her benefit to the poor and sickly, when she make I
her almoner!--how have I be affect with the blessing which the
miserable have heap upon she for her goodness, and upon I for be
but the humble conveyer of her bounty to them!--and how delighted have I
be, when the moving report I have make of a particular distress, have
augment my good lady's first intention in relief of it!
this I recall with pleasure, because it be now, by the divine goodness,
become my part to do those good thing she be willnot to do: and oh! let
I watch myself, that my prosperous state do not make I forget to look
up, with due thankfulness, to the Providence which have entrust I with
the power, that so I may not incur a terrible woe by the abuse or neglect
of it!
forgive I these reflection, my dear parent; and let I have your
prayer, that I may not find my present happiness a snare to I; but that
I may consider, that more and more will be expect from I, in
proportion to the power give I; and that I may not so unworthily act,
as if I believe I ought to set up my rest in my mean self, and think
nothing further to be do, with the opportunity put into my hand, by
the divine favour, and the good of man!
Saturday, seven o'clock in the evening.
my master return home to dinner, in compliment to I, though much
press to dine with Lady Jones, as he be, also, by Sir Simon, to dine
with he. but Mr. Peters could not conveniently provide a preacher for
his own church tomorrow morning, at so short a notice; Mr. Williams be
go, as I say, to his new living; but believe he could for the
afternoon; and so he promise to give we his company to dinner, and to
read afternoon service: and this make my master invite all the rest, as
well as he, to dinner, and not to church; and he make they promise to
come; and tell Mr. Peters, he would send his coach for he and his
family.
Miss Darnford tell he pleasantly, she would not come, unless he would
promise to let she be at his wedding; by which I find Mr. Peters have keep
the secret, as my master desire.
he be pleased to give I an airing after dinner in the chariot, and
renew his kind assurance to I, and, if possible, be kind than ever.
this be sweetly comfortable to I, because it shews I he do not repent
of his condescension to I; and it encourage I to look up to he with
more satisfaction of mind, and less doubtfulness.
I beg leave to send a guinea to a poor body in the town, that I hear,
by Mrs. Jewkes, lie very ill, and be very destitute. he say, send two,
my dear, if you please. say I, Sir, I will never do any thing of this
kind without let you know what I do. he most generously answer, I
shall then, perhaps, have you do less good than you would otherwise do,
from a doubt of I; though, I hope, your discretion, and my own temper,
which be not avaricious, will make such doubt causeless.
now, my dear, continue he, Iwill tell you how we will order this point,
to avoid even the shadow of uneasiness on one side, or doubt on the
other.
as to your father and mother, in the first place, they shall be quite out
of the question; for I have already determine in my mind about they; and
it be thus: they shall go down, if they and you think well of it, to my
little kentish estate; which I once mention to you in such a manner, as
make you reject it with a nobleness of mind, that give I pain then, but
pleasure since. there be a pretty little farm, and house, untenante,
upon that estate, and tolerably well stock, and I will far stock it
for they; for such industrious folk willnot know how to live without some
employment; and it shall be theirs for both their life, without pay
any rent; and I will allow they 50l. per annum besides, that they may
keep up the stock, and be kind to any other of their relation, without
be beholden to you or I for small matter; and for great, where
needful, you shall always have it in your power to accommodate they; for
I shall never question your prudence. and we will, so long as God spar
our life, go down, once a year, to see they; and they shall come up, as
often as they please, it cannot be too often, to see we: for I mean not
this, my dear, to send they from us.--before I proceed, do my Pamela
like this?
O, sir, say I, the english tongue afford not word, or, at least, I
have they not, to express sufficiently my gratitude! teach I, dear sir,
continue I, and press his dear hand to my lip, teach I some other
language, if there be any, that abound with more grateful term; that I
may not thus be choke with meaning, for which I can find no utterance.
my charmer! say he, your language be all wonderful, as your sentiment;
and you most abound, when you seem most to want!--all that I wish, be to
find my proposal agreeable to you; and if my first be not, my second
shall be, if I can but know what you wish.
do I say too much, my dear parent, when I say, he be, if possible,
kinder and kinder?--O the blessed man! how my heart be overwhelmed with
his goodness!
well, say he, my dearest, let I desire you to mention this to they, to
see if they approve it. but, if it be your choice, and theirs, to have
they near to you, or even under the same roof with you, I will freely
consent to it.
o no, sir, say I, (and I fear almost sin in my grateful flight,) I be
sure they would not choose that; they could not, perhaps, serve God so
well if they be to live with you: for, so constantly see the hand
that bless they, they would, it may be, as must be my care to avoid, be
tempt to look no far in their gratitude, than to the dear dispenser
of such innumerable benefit.
excellent creature! say he: my beloved want no language, nor sentiment
neither; and her charming thought, so sweetly express, would grace any
language; and this be a blessing almost peculiar to my fairest.--your so
kind acceptance, my Pamela, add he, repay the benefit with interest,
and leave I under obligation to your goodness.
but now, my dearest, I will tell you what we will do, with regard to
point of your own private charity; for far be it from I, to put under
that name the subject we have be mention; because that, and more
than that, be duty to person so worthy, and so nearly related to my
Pamela, and, as such, to myself.--O how the sweet man outdo I, in
thought, word, power, and every thing!
and this, say he, lie in very small compass; for I will allow you two
hundred pound a year, which Longman shall constantly pay you, at fifty
pound a quarter, for your own use, and of which I expect no account; to
commence from the day you enter into my other house: I mean, say he,
that the first fifty pound shall then be due; because you shall have
something to begin with. and, add the dear generous man, if this be
pleasing to you, let it, since you say you want word, be signify by
such a sweet kiss as you give I yesterday. I hesitate not a moment to
comply with these oblige term, and throw my arm about his dear neck,
though in the chariot, and bless his goodness to I. but, indeed, sir,
say I, I cannot bear this generous treatment! he be pleased to say,
donot be uneasy, my dear, about these trifle: God have bless I with a
very good estate, and all of it in a prosperous condition, and generally
well tenant. I lie up money every year, and have, besides, large sum
in government and other security; so that you will find, what I have
hitherto promise, be very short of that proportion of my substance,
which, as my dear wife, you have a right to.
in this sweet manner do we pass our time till evening, when the chariot
bring we home; and then our supper succeed in the same agreeable
manner. and thus, in a rapturous circle, the time move on; every hour
bring with it something more delightful than the past!--sure nobody
be ever so blest as I!
Sunday, the fourth day of my happiness.
not go to chapel this morning, the reason of which I tell you, I
bestow the time, from the hour of my beloved's rise, to breakfast, in
prayer and thanksgiving, in my closet; and now I begin to be quite easy,
cheerful, and free in my spirit; and the rather, as I find myself
encourage by the tranquillity, and please vivacity, in the temper and
behaviour of my beloved, who thereby shews he do not repent of his
goodness to I.
I attend he to breakfast with great pleasure and freedom, and he
seem quite pleased with I, and say, now do my dearest begin to look
upon I with an air of serenity and satisfaction: it shall be always,
add he, my delight to give you occasion for this sweet become aspect
of confidence and pleasure in me.--My heart, dear sir, say I, be quite
easy, and have lose all its foolish tumult, which, combat with my
gratitude, might give an unacceptable appearance to my behaviour: but now
your goodness, sir, have enable it to get the well of its uneasy
apprehension, and my heart be all of one piece, and devote to you, and
grateful tranquillity. and could I be so happy as to see you and my good
Lady Davers reconcile, I have nothing in this world to wish for more,
but the continuance of your favour. he say, I wish this reconciliation,
my dearest, as well as you: and I do assure you, more for your sake than
my own; and if she would behave tolerably, I would make the term easy
to she, for that reason.
he say, I will lay down one rule for you, my Pamela, to observe in your
dress; and I will tell you every thing I like or dislike, as it occur to
I: and I would have you do the same, on your part; that nothing may be
upon either of our mind that may occasion the least reservedness.
I have often observe, in married folk, that, in a little while, the
lady grow careless in her dress; which, to I, look as if she would
take no pain to secure the affection she have gain; and shews a slight
to her husband, that she have not to her lover. now, you must know, this
have always give I great offence; and I should not forgive it, even in
my Pamela: though she would have this excuse for herself, that thousand
could not make, that she look lovely in every thing. so, my dear, I
shall expect of you always to be dress by dinner-time, except something
extraordinary happen; and this, whether you be to go abroad, or stay at
home. for this, my love, will continue to you that sweet ease in your
dress and behaviour, which you be so happy a mistress of; and whomsoever
I bring home with I to my table, youwill be in readiness to receive they;
and will not want to make those foolish apology to unexpected visitor,
that carry with they a reflection on the conduct of those who make they;
and, besides, will convince I, that you think yourself oblige to appear
as graceful to your husband, as you would to person less familiar to
your sight.
this, dear sir, say I, be a most obliging injunction; and I most
heartily thank you for it, and will always take care to obey it.--why, my
dear, say he, you may well do this than half your sex; because they
too generally act in such a manner, as if they seem to think it the
privilege of birth and fortune, to turn day into night, and night into
day, and be seldom stir till it be time to sit down to dinner; and
so all the good old family rule be reverse: for they breakfast, when
they should dine; dine, when they should sup; and sup, when they should
go to bed; and, by the help of dear quadrille, sometimes go to bed when
they should rise.--in all thing but these, my dear, continue he, I
expect you to be a lady. and my good mother be one of this oldfashioned
cut, and, in all other respect, as worthy a lady as any in the kingdom.
and so you have not be use to the new way, and may the easy practise
the other.
dear sir, say I, pray give I more of your sweet injunction. why then,
continue he, I shall, in the usual course, and generally, if not
hinder by company, like to go to bed with my dearest by eleven; and, if
I donot, shallnot hinder you. I ordinarily now rise by six in summer. I
will allow you to be half an hour after I, or so.
then youwill have some time you may call your own, till you give I your
company to breakfast; which may be always so, as that we may have do at
a little after nine.
then will you have several hour again at your disposal, till two
o'clock, when I shall like to sit down at table.
you will then have several useful hour more to employ yourself in, as
you shall well like; and I would generally go to supper by eight; and
when we be resolve to stick to these oldfashione rule, as near as we
can, we shall have our visitor conform to they too, and expect they from
we, and suit themselves accordingly: for I have always observe, that it
be in every one's power to prescribe rule to himself. it be only
stand a few ridiculous jest at first, and that too from such,
generally, as be not the most worthy to be mind; and, after a while,
they will say, it signify nothing to ask he: he will have his own way.
there be no put he out of his bias. he be a regular piece of clock-
work, they will joke, and all that: and why, my dear, should we not be
so? for man be as frail a piece of machinery as any clock-work whatever;
and, by irregularity, be as subject to be disorder.
then, my dear, continue the charming man, when they see they be
receive, at my own time, with an open countenance and cheerful heart;
when they see plenty and variety at my board, and meet a kind and hearty
welcome from we both; they will not offer to break in upon my condition,
nor grudge I my regular hour: and as most of these people have nothing
to do, except to rise in a morning, they may as well come to breakfast
with we at half an hour after eight, in summer, as at ten or eleven; to
dinner at two, as at four, five, or six; and to supper at eight, as at
ten or eleven. and then our servant, too, will know, generally, the
time of their business, and the hour of their leisure or recess; and
we, as well as they, shall reap the benefit of this regularity. and who
know, my dear, but we may revive the good oldfashion in our
neighbourhood, by this means?--at least it will be do our part
towards it; and answer the good lesson I learn at school, every one
mend one. and the bad that will happen will be, that when some of my
brother rake, such as those who break in upon we, so unwelcomely, last
Thursday, be get out of the way, if that can ever be, and begin to
consider who they shall go to dine with in their ramble, they will only
say, we must not go to he, for his dinner-time be over; and so theywill
reserve I for another time, when they happen to suit it well; or,
perhaps, they will take a supper and a bed with I instead of it.
now, my dearest, continue the kind man, you see here be more of my
injunction, as you call they; and though I will not be so set, as to
quarrel, if they be not always exactly comply with; yet, as I know you
willnot think they unreasonable, I shall be glad they may, as often as they
can; and you will give your order accordingly to your Mrs. Jervis, who
be a good woman, and will take pleasure in obey you.
o dearest, dear sir, say I, have you nothing more to honour I with?
you oblige and improve I at the same time.--what a happy lot be mine!
why, let I see, my dearest, say he--but I think of no more at present:
for it would be needless to say how much I value you for your natural
sweetness of temper, and that open cheerfulness of countenance, which
adorn you, when nothing have give my fair apprehension for her
virtue: a sweetness, and a cheerfulness, that prepossess in your
favour, at first sight, the mind of every one that behold you.--i need
not, I hope, say, that I would have you diligently preserve this sweet
appearance: let no thwarting accident, no cross fortune, (for we must not
expect to be exempt from such, happy as we now be in each other!)
deprive this sweet face of this its principal grace: and when any thing
unpleasing happen, in a quarter of an hour, at farth, begin to
mistrust yourself, and apply to your glass; and if you see a gloom
arising, or arisen, banish it instantly; smooth your dear countenance;
resume your former composure; and then, my dearest, whose heart must
always be see in her face, and cannot be a hypocrite, will find this a
mean to smooth her passion also: and if the occasion be too strong for
so sudden a conquest, she will know how to do it more effectually, by
repair to her closet, and beg that gracious assistance, which have
never yet fail she: and so shall I, my dear, who, as you once but too
justly observe, have be too much indulge by my good mother, have an
example from you, as well as a pleasure in you, which will never be
pal.
one thing, continue he, I have frequently observe at the house of many
a gentleman, that when we have unexpectedly visit, or break in upon
the family order lay down by the lady; and especially if any of we have
lain under the suspicion of have occasionally seduce our married
companion into bad hour, or give indifferent example, the poor
gentleman have be oddly affect at our coming; though the good breeding
of the lady have make she just keep up appearance. he have look so
conscious; have be so afraid, as it be, to disoblige; have make so many
excuse for some of we, before we have be accuse, as have always shew
I how unwelcome we have be; and how much he be oblige to compound
with his lady for a tolerable reception of we; and, perhaps, she too, in
proportion to the honest man's concern to court her smile, have be more
reserved, stiff, and formal; and have behave with an indifference and
slight that have often make I wish myself out of her house; for too
plainly have I see that it be not his.
this, my dear, you will judge, by my description, have afford I subject
for animadversion upon the married life; for a man may not (though, in
the main, he be willing to flatter himself that he be master of his
house, and will assert his prerogative upon great occasion, when it be
strongly invade) be always willing to contend; and such woman as those I
have describe, be always ready to take the field, and be bad enemy
than the old Parthians, who annoy most when they seem to retreat; and
never fail to return to the charge again, and carry on the offensive war,
till they have tired out resistance, and make the husband willing, like a
vanquish enemy, to compound for small matter, in order to preserve
something. at least the poor man do not care to let his friend see
his case; and so will not provoke a fire to break out, that he see (and
so do his friend too) the meek lady have much ado to smother; and which,
very possibly, burn with a most comfortable ardour, after we be go.
you smile, my Pamela, say he, at this whimsical picture; and, I be sure,
I never shall have reason to include you in these disagreeable outline;
but yet I will say, that I expect from you, whoever come to my house,
that you accustom yourself to one even, uniform complaisance: that no
frown take place on your brow: that however ill or well provide we may
be for their reception, you shew no flutter or discomposure: that whoever
you may have in your company at the time, you signify not, by the least
reserve look, that the stranger be come upon you unseasonably, or at a
time you wish he have not. but be facetious, kind, oblige to all;
and, if to one more than another, to such as have the least reason to
expect it from you, or who be most inferior at the table; for thus will
you, my Pamela, cheer the doubt mind, quiet the uneasy heart, and
diffuse ease, pleasure, and tranquillity, around my board.
and be sure, my dear, continue he, let no little accident ruffle your
temper. I shall never forget once that I be at Lady Arthur's; and a
footman happen to stumble, and let fall a fine china dish, and break it
all to piece: it be grievous to see the uneasiness it give the poor
lady: and she be so sincere in it, that she suffer it to spread all
over the company; and it be a pretty large one too; and not a person in
it but turn either her consoler, or fall into story of the like
misfortune; and so we all become, for the rest of the evening, nothing
but blunder footman, and careless servant, or be turn into broken
jar, plate, glass, tea-cup, and such like brittle substance. and
it affect I so much, that, when I come home, I go to bed, and
dream, that Robin, with the handle of his whip, break the fore glass of
my chariot; and I be so solicitous, methought, to keep the good lady in
countenance for her anger, that I break his head in revenge, and stab
one of my coach-horse. and all the comfort I have when it be do,
methought, be, that I have not expose myself before company; and there
be no sufferer, but guilty Robin, and one innocent coach-horse.
I be exceedingly divert with the facetious hint, and the pleasant
manner in which he give they; and I promise to improve by the excellent
lesson contain in they.
I then go up and dress myself, as like a bride as I could, in my good
clothe; and, on inquiry, hear my dear master be go to walk in
the garden, I go to find he out. he be read in the little alcove;
and I say, Sir, be I license to intrude upon you?--no, my dear, say
he, because you cannot intrude. I be so wholly your, that, wherever I
be, you have not only a right to join I, but you do I a very acceptable
favour at the same time.
I have, sir, say I, obey your first kind injunction, as to dress
myself before dinner; but may be you be busy, sir. he put up the paper
he be read, and say, I can have no business or pleasure of equal
value to your company, my dear. what be you go to say?--only, sir,
to know if you have any more kind injunction to give me?--i could hear
you talk a whole day together.--You be very obliging, Pamela, say he;
but you be so perfectly what I wish, that I might have spar those I
give you; but I be willing you should have a taste of my freedom with
you, to put you upon the like with I: for I be confident there can be no
friendship last, without freedom, and without communicate to one
another even the little caprice, if my Pamela can have any such, which
may occasion uneasiness to either.
now, my dear, say he, be so kind as to find some fault with I, and tell
I what you would wish I to do, to appear more agreeable to you. o sir,
say I, and I could have kiss he, but for shame, (to be sure I shall
grow a sad fond hussy,) I have not one single thing to wish for; no, not
one!--he salute I very kindly, and say, he should be sorry if I have,
and forbore to speak it. do you think, my dear sir, say I, that your
Pamela have no conscience? do you think, that because you so kindly
oblige she, and delight in oblige she, that she must rack her invention
for trial of your goodness, and know not when shebe happy?--O my
dearest sir, add I, less than one half of the favour you have so
generously confer upon I, would have exceed my utmost wish!
my dear angel, say he, and kiss I again, I shall be troublesome to
you with my kiss, if you continue thus sweetly oblige in your action
and expression. o sir, say I, I have be think, as I be dress
myself, what excellent lesson you teach I!
when you command I, at your table to cheer the doubt mind and
comfort the uneasy heart, and to behave most kindly to those who have
least reason to expect it, and be most inferior; how sweetly, in every
instance that could possibly occur, have you do this yourself by your
poor, unworthy Pamela, till you have diffuse, in your own dear word,
ease, pleasure, and tranquillity, around my glad heart!
then again, sir, when you bid I not be disturb by little accident, or
by stranger come in upon I unexpectedly, how noble an instance do
you give I of this, when, on our happy wedding-day, the coming of Sir
Charles Hargrave, and the other two gentleman, (for which you be quite
unprovided, and which hinder our happiness of dining together on that
choose day,) do not so disturb you, but that you entertain the
gentleman pleasantly, and part with they civilly and kindly! what
charming instance be these, I have be recollect with pleasure, of
your pursue the doctrine you deliver.
my dear, say he, these observation be very kind in you, and much to my
advantage: but if I do not always (for I fear these be too much
accident) so well pursue the doctrine I lie down, my Pamela must not
expect that my imperfection will be a plea for her nonobservance of my
lesson, as you call they; for, I doubt I shall never be half so perfect
as you; and so I cannot permit you to recede in your goodness, though I
may find myself unable to advance as I ought in my duty.
I hope, sir, say I, by God's grace, I never shall. I believe it, say
he; but I only mention this, know my own defect, lest my future
lesson should not be so well warrant by my practice, as in the
instance you have kindly recollect.
he be pleased to take notice of my dress; and span my waist with his
hand, say, what a sweet shape be here! it would make one regret to
lose it; and yet, my beloved Pamela, I shall think nothing but that loss
wanting, to complete my happiness.--I put my bold hand before his mouth,
and say, hush, hush! o fie, sir!--The free thing you have ever yet
say, since I have be yours!--He kiss my hand, and say, such an
innocent wish, my dearest, may be permit I, because it be the end of
the institution.--but say, would such a case be unwelcome to my pamela?--
I will say, sir, say I, and hide my blushing face on his bosom, that your
wish, in every thing, shall be mine; but, pray, sir, say no more. he
kindly salute I, and thank I, and change the subject.--i be not
too free, I hope.
thus we talk, till we hear the coach; and then he say, stay here,
in the garden, my dear, and Iwill bring the company to you. and when he
be go, I pass by the back-door, kneel down against it, and bless
God for not permit my then so much desire escape. I go to the
pond, and kneel down on the mossy bank, and again bless God there,
for his mercy in my escape from myself, my then bad enemy, though I
think I have none but enemy, and no friend near I. and so I ought to
do in almost every step of this garden, and every room in this house!--
and I be bend my step to the dear little chapel, to make my
acknowledgment there; but I see the company come towards I.
Miss Darnford say, so, Miss Andrews, how do you do now? o, you look so
easy, so sweetly, so pleased, that I know youwill let I dance at your
wedding, for I shall long to be there! Lady Jones be pleased to say I
look like an angel: and Mrs. Peters say, I improve upon they every
time they see I. Lady Darnford be also pleased to make I a fine
compliment, and say, I look free and easy every time she see I.
dear heart! I wish, think I, you would spare these compliment; for I
shall have some joke, I doubt, pass on I by-and-by, that will make I
suffer for all these fine thing.
Mr. Peters say, softly, God bless you, dear daughter!--but not so much
as my wife know it.--Sir Simon come in last, and take I by the hand,
and say, Mr. B----, by your leave; and kiss my hand five or six time,
as if he be mad; and hold it with both his, and make a very free jest,
by way of compliment, in his way. well, I think a young rake be hardly
tolerable; but an old rake, and an old beau, be two very sad things!--
and all this before daughter, woman-grown!--I whisper my dearest, a
little after, and say, I fear I shall suffer much from Sir Simon's rude
joke, by-and-by, when you reveal the matter.--'Tis his way, my dear,
say he; you must now grow above these things.--miss Nanny Darnford say
to I, with a sort of half grave, ironical air,--Well, Miss Andrews, if I
may judge by your easy deportment now, to what it be when I see you
last, I hope you will let my sister, if you willnot I, see the happy knot
tie! for she be quite wild about it.--I courtesie, and only say, you
be all very good to I, ladies.--Mr. Peters's niece say, well, Miss
Andrews, I hope, before we part, we shall be tell the happy day. my good
master hear she, and say, you shall, you shall, madam.--thatbe pure,
say Miss Darnford.
he take I aside, and say softly, shall I lead they to the alcove, and
tell they there, or stay till we go in to dinner?--neither, sir, I think,
say I, I fear I shallnot stand it.--nay, say he, they must know it; I
would not have invite they else.--why then, sir, say I, let it alone
till they be go away.--then, reply he, you must pull off your ring.
no, no, sir, say I, that I must not.--Well, say he, do you tell Miss
Darnford of it yourself.--indeed, sir, answer I, I cannot.
Mrs. Jewkes come officiously to ask my master, just then, if she should
bring a glass of rhenish and sugar before dinner, for the gentleman and
lady: and he say, thatbe well think of; bring it, Mrs. Jewkes.
and she come, with Nan attend she, with two bottle and glass, and a
salver; and must need, make a low courtesy, offer first to I;
say, will your ladyship begin? I colour like scarlet, and say,
no;--my master, to be sure!
but they all take the hint; and Miss Darnford say, Iwill be hang if
they have not steal a wedding! say Mrs. Peters, it must certainly be
so! ah! Mr. Peters.
Iwill assure you, say he, I have not marry they. where be you, say
she, and Mr. Williams, last Thursday morning? say Sir Simon, let I
alone, let I alone; if any thing have be steal, Iwill find it out! Ibe
a justice of the peace, you know. and so he take I by the hand, and
say, Come, madam, answer I, by the oath you have take: be you marry
or not?
my master smile, to see I look so like a fool; and I say, Pray, Sir
simon!--ay, ay, say he; I think you do not look so smirk upon we
for nothing.--Well, then, Pamela, say my master, since your blush
discover you, donot be ashamed, but confess the truth!
now, say Miss Darnford, I be quite angry; and, say Lady Darnford, I be
quite pleased; let I give you joy, dear madam, if it be so. and so they
all say, and salute I all round.--I be vex it be before Mrs.
Jewkes; for she shake her fat side, and seem highly pleased to be a
mean of discover it.
nobody, say my master, wish I joy. no, say Lady Jones, very
obligingly, nobody need; for, with such a peerless spouse, you want no
good wishes:--And he salute they; and when he come last to I, say,
before they all, now, my sweet bride, my Pamela, let I conclude with
you; for here I begin to love, and here I desire to end loving, but not
till my life end.
this be sweetly say, and take great notice of; and it be do credit
to his own generous choice, and vastly more than I merit.
but I be force to stand many more joke afterwards: for Sir Simon say,
several time, Come, come, madam, now you be become one of we, I shall
be a little less scrupulous than I have be, Iwill assure you.
when we come in to dinner, I make no difficulty of what all offer I,
the upper end of the table; and perform the honour of it with pretty
tolerable presence of mind, consider. and, with much ado, my good
benefactor promise to be down again before winter, we get off the ball;
but appoint Tuesday evening, at Lady Darnford's, to take leave of all
this good company, who promise to be there, my master design to set
out on Wednesday morning for Bedfordshire.
we have prayer in the little chapel, in the afternoon; but they all
wish for the good clerk again, with great encomium upon you, my dear
father; and the company staid supper also, and depart exceed well
satisfied, and with abundance of wish for the continuance of our mutual
happiness; and my master desire Mr. Peters to answer for he to the
ringer at the town, if they should hear of it; till our return into this
country; and that then he would be bountiful to they, because he would
not publicly declare it till he have first do so in Bedfordshire.
Monday, the fifth day.
I have have very little of my dear friend's company this day; for he only
staid breakfast with I, and ride out to see a sick gentleman about
eighteen mile off, who beg (by a man and horse on purpose) to speak
with he, believe he should not recover, and upon part of whose estate
my master have a mortgage. he say, my dearest, I shall be very uneasy,
if I be oblige to tarry all night from you; but, lest you should be
alarm, if I donot come home by ten, donot expect I: for poor Mr.
Carlton and I have pretty large concern together; and if he should be
very ill, and would be comfort by my presence, (as I know he love I,
and his family will be more in my power, if he die, than I wish for,)
charity will not let I refuse.
it be now ten o'clock at night, and I fear he will not return. I fear,
for the sake of his poor sick friend, who, I doubt, be bad. though I
know not the gentleman, I be sorry for his own sake, for his family's
sake, and for my dear master's sake, who, by his kind expression, I
find, love he: and, methink, I should be sorry any grief should touch
his generous heart; though yet there be no living in this world, without
too many occasion for concern, even in the most prosperous state. and
it be fit it should be so; or else, poor wretch, as we be! we should
look no far, but be like sensual traveller on a journey homeward,
who, meet with good entertainment at some inn on the way, put up their
rest there, and never think of pursue their journey to their proper
home.--this, I remember, be often a reflection of my good lady's, to
whom I owe it.
Eleven o'clock.
Mrs. Jewkes have be with I, and ask if I will have she for a bed-
fellow, in want of a well? I thank she; but I say, I would see how
it be to be by myself one night.
I might have mention, that I make Mrs. Jewkes dine and sup with I; and
she be much pleased with it, and my behaviour to she. and I could see,
by her manner, that she be a little strike inwardly at some of her
former conduct to I. but, poor wretch! it be much, I fear, because I be
what I be; for she have otherwise very little remorse, I doubt. her talk
and action be entirely different from what they use to be, quite
circumspect and decent; and I should have think her virtuous, and even
pious, have I never know she in another light.
by this we may see, my dear father and mother, of what force example be,
and what be in the power of the head of family to do: and this shews,
that evil example, in superior, be doubly pernicious, and doubly
culpable, because such person be bad themselves, and not only do no
good, but much harm to other; and the condemnation of such must, to be
sure, be so much the greater!--and how much the great still must my
condemnation be, who have have such a religious education under you, and
be so well nurture by my good lady, if I should forget, with all these
mercy heap upon I, what belong to the station I be prefer to!--O
how I long to be do some good! for all that be past yet, be my dear,
dear master's, God bless he! and return he safe to my wish! for
methink, already, 'tis a week since I see he. if my love would not be
troublesome and impertinent, I should be nothing else; for I have a true
grateful spirit; and I have need to have such a one, for I be poor in
every thing but will.
Tuesday morning, eleven o'clock.
my dear, dear--master (Ibe sure I should still say; but I will learn to
rise to a soft epithet, now-and-then) be not yet come. I hope he be
safe and well!--So Mrs. Jewkes and I go to breakfast. but I can do
nothing but talk and think of he, and all his kindness to I, and to
you, which be still I, more intimately!--I have just receive a letter
from he, which he write overnight, as I find by it, and send early this
morning. this be a copy of it.
to MRS. ANDREWS
'MY DEAREST PAMELA, Monday night.
'I hope my not come home this night will not frighten you. you may
believe I cannot help it. my poor friend be so very ill, that I doubt he
cannot recover. his desire to have I stay with he be so strong, that
I shall sit up all night with he, as it be now near one o'clock in the
morning; for he cannot bear I out of his sight: and I have make he and
his distressed wife and child so easy, in the kind assurance I
could give he of my consideration for he and they, that I be look
upon (as the poor disconsolate widow, as she, I doubt, will soon be,
tell I,) as their good angel. I could have wish we have not engage
to the good neighbourhood at Sir Simon's for to-morrow night; but I be so
desirous to set out on Wednesday for the other house, that, as well as in
return for the civility of so many good friend, who will be there on
purpose, I would not put it off. what I beg of you, therefore, my dear,
be, that you would go in the chariot to Sir Simon's, the soon in the
day the well, because you will be divert with the company, who all so
much admire you; and I hope to join you there by your tea-time in the
afternoon, which will be well than go home, and return with you,
as it will be six mile difference to I; and I know the good company
will excuse my dress, on the occasion. I count every hour of this little
absence for a day: for I be, with the utmost sincerity,
'my dearest love, for ever your, etc.'
'if you could go to dine with they, it will be a freedom that would be
very pleasing to they; and the more, as they donot expect it.'
I begin to have a little concern, lest his fatigue should be too great,
and for the poor sick gentleman and family; but tell Mrs. Jewkes, that
the least intimation of his choice should be a command to I, and so I
would go to dinner there; and order the chariot to be get ready to
carry I: when a messenger come up, just as I be dress, to tell she
she must come down immediately. I see at the window, that visitor be
come; for there be a chariot and six horse, the company go out of it,
and three footman on horseback; and I think the chariot have coronet.
who can it be, I wonder?--but here I will stop, for I suppose I shall
soon know.
good sir! how unlucky this be! what shall I do!--here be Lady Davers
come, her own self! and my kind protector a great, great many mile off!
--Mrs. Jewkes, out of breath, come and tell I this, and say, she be
inquire for my master and I. she ask she, it seem, naughty lady
as she be, if I be whore yet! therebe a word for a lady's mouth! Mrs.
Jewkes say, she know not what to answer. and my lady say, she be not
married, I hope? and say she, I say, no: because you have not own it
yet publicly. my lady say, that be well enough. say I, I will run
away, Mrs. Jewkes; and let the chariot go to the bottom of the elm-walk,
and I will steal out of the door unperceive: but she be inquire for
you, madam, reply she, and I say you be within, but go out; and
she say, she would see you presently, as soon as she could have
patience. what do she call I? say I. the creature, madam; I will see
the creature, say she, as soon as I can have patience. ay, but, say I,
the creature willnot let she, if she can help it.
Pray, Mrs. Jewkes, favour my escape, for this once; for I be sadly
frighted.--said she, Iwill bid the chariot go down, as you order, and wait
till you come; and Iwill step down and shut the hall door, that you may
pass unobserved; for she sit cool herself in the parlour, over
against the staircase. thatbe a good Mrs. Jewkes! say I: but who have
she with she? her woman, answer she, and her nephew; but he come on
horseback, and be go into the stable; and they have three footmen.--
and I wish, say I, they be all three hundred mile off!--what shall I
do?--So I write thus far, and wait impatiently to hear the coast be
clear.
Mrs. Jewkes tell I I must come down, or she will come up. what do
she call I now? say I. Wench, madam, Bid the wench come down to I.
and her nephew and her woman be with she.
say I, I cannot go, and thatbe enough!--you might contrive it that I
might get out, if you would.--indeed, madam, say she, I cannot; for I
go to shut the door, and she bid I let it stand open; and there she
sit over against the staircase. then, say I, Iwill get out of the
window, I think!--(and fan myself;) for I be sadly frightened. laud,
madam, say she, I wonder you so much disturb yourself!--You're on the
right side the hedge, Ibe sure; and I would not be so discompose for any
body. ay, say I, but who can help constitution? I dare say you would
no more be so discompose, that I can help it.--Said she, indeed, madam,
if it be to I, I would put on an air as mistress of the house, as you
be, and go and salute her ladyship, and bid she welcome. ay, ay,
reply I, fine talking!--but how unlucky this be, your good master be
not at home!
what answer shall I give she, say she, to her desiring to see you?--Tell
she, say I, I be sick a-bed; Ibe die, and must not be disturb; Ibe
go out--or any thing.
but her woman come up to I just as I have utter this, and say, how do
you do, Mrs. Pamela? my lady desire to speak to you. so I must go.--
sure she willnot beat me!--Oh that my dear protector be at home!
well, now I will tell you all that happen in this frightful interview.
--and very bad it be.
I go down, dress as I be, and my glove on, and my fan in my hand,
to be just ready to step into the chariot, when I could get away; and I
think all my trembling fit have be over now; but I be mistaken; for
I tremble sadly. yet resolve to put on as good an air as I could.
so I go to the parlour, and say, make a very low courtesy, your
servant, my good lady! and your servant again, say she, my lady, for I
think you be dress out like one.
a charming girl, though! say her rakish nephew, and swear a great oath:
dear aunt, forgive I, but I must kiss she; and be come to I. and I
say, Forbear, uncivil gentleman! I willnot be use freely. Jackey, say
my lady, sit down, and donot touch the creature--shebe proud enough
already. therebe a great difference in her air, Iwill assure you, since I
see she last.
well, child, say she, sneeringly, how dost find thyself? Thou'rt
mightily come on, of late!--I hear strange report about thee!--thou'rt
almost get into fool's paradise, I doubt!--and wilt find thyself terribly
mistaken in a little while, if thou think my brother will disgrace his
family, to humour thy baby-face!
I see, say I, sadly vex, (her woman and nephew smile by,) your
ladyship have no very important command for I; and I beg leave to
withdraw. Beck, say she to her woman, shut the door, my young lady and
I must not have do so soon.
wherebe your well-mannered deceiver go, child?--say she.--Said I, when
your ladyship be pleased to speak intelligibly, I shall know how to
answer.
well, but my dear child, say she, in drollery, donot be too pert
neither, I beseech thee. thou wilt not find thy master's sister half so
ready to take thy freedom, as thy mannerly master is!--So, a little of
that modesty and humility that my mother's waiting-maid use to shew,
will become thee well than the air thou givest thyself, since my
mother's son have teach thee to forget thyself.
I would beg, say I, one favour of your ladyship, that if you would have
I keep my distance, you will not forget your own degree.--Why, suppose,
Miss Pert, I should forget my degree, wouldst thou not keep thy distance
then?
if you, madam, say I, lessen the distance yourself, you will descend to
my level, and make an equality, which I donot presume to think of; for I
cannot descend low than I be--at least in your ladyship's esteem!
do I not tell you, Jackey, say she, that I should have a wit to talk
to?--He, who swear like a fine gentleman at every word, rap out an
oath, and say, drolle, I think, Mrs. Pamela, if I may be so bold as to
say so, you should know you be speak to Lady Davers!--Sir, say I, I
hope there be no need of your information, and so I cannot thank you for
it; and be sorry you seem to think it want an oath to convince I of the
truth of it.
he look more foolish than I, at this, if possible, not expect such a
reprimand.--and say, at last, why, Mrs. Pamela, you put I half out of
countenance with your witty reproof!--Sir, say I, you seem quite a fine
gentleman; and it will not be easily do, I dare say.
how now, pert one, say my lady, do you know whom you talk to?--I think I
do not, madam, reply I: and for fear I should forget myself more, Iwill
withdraw. your ladyship's servant, say I; and be go: but she rise,
and give I a push, and pull a chair, and, set the back against the
door, sit down in it.
well, say I, I can bear anything at your ladyship's hand; but I be
ready to cry though. and I go, and sit down, and fan myself, at the
other end of the room.
her woman, who stand all the time, say softly, Mrs. Pamela, you should
not sit in my lady's presence. and my lady, though she do not hear she,
say, you shall sit down, child, in the room where I be, when I give you
leave.
so I stand up, and say, when your ladyship will hardly permit I to
stand, one might be indulge to sit down. but I ask you, say she,
whither your master be go? to one Mr. Carlton, madam, about eighteen
mile off, who be very sick. and when do he come home?--this evening,
madam. and where be you go? to a gentleman's house in the town,
madam.--And how be you to go? in the chariot, madam.--Why, you must be
a lady in time, to be sure!--i believe youwould become a chariot mighty
well, child!--was you ever out in it with your master?
pray, your ladyship, say I, a little too pertly, perhaps, be pleased to
ask half a dozen such question together; because one answer may do for
all!--Why, bold-face, say she, youwill forget your distance, and bring I
to your level before my time.
I could no long refrain tear, but say, pray your ladyship, let I ask
what I have do, to be thus severely treat? I never do your ladyship
any harm. and if you think I be deceive, as you be pleased to hint, I
should be more entitled to your pity, than your anger.
she rise, and take I by the hand, and lead I to her chair; and then sit
down; and still hold my hand, say, why Pamela, I do indeed pity you
while I think you innocent; and when my brother seize you, and bring
you down hither, without your consent, I be concerned for you; and I be
still more concerned for you, and love you, when I hear of your virtue
and resistance, and your laudable effort to get away from he. but
when, as I fear, you have suffer yourself to be prevail upon, and
have lose your innocence, and add another to the number of the fool he
have ruin, (this shock I a little,) I cannot help shew my
displeasure to you.
Madam, reply I, I must beg no hasty judgment; I have not lose my
innocence.--take care, take care, Pamela! say she: donot lose your
veracity, as well as your honour!--why be you here, when you be at full
liberty to go whither you please?--i will make one proposal to you, and
if you be innocent, I be sure youwill accept it. will you go and live
with me?--i will instantly set out with you in my chariot, and not stay
half an hour long in this house, if youwill go with me.--now, if you be
innocent, and willing to keep so, deny I, if you can.
I be innocent, madam, reply I, and willing to keep so; and yet I cannot
consent to this. then, say she, very mannerly, Thou liest, child,
thatbe all: and I give thee up!
and so she arise, and walk about the room in great wrath. her nephew
and her woman say, your ladyship's very good; 'tis a plain case; a very
plain case!
I would have remove the chair, to have go out; but her nephew come and
sit in it. this provoke I; for I think I should be unworthy of the
honour I be raise to, though I be afraid to own it, if I do not shew
some spirit; and I say, what, sir, be your pretence in this house, to
keep I a prisoner here? because, say he--I like it.--do you so, sir?
reply I: if that be the answer of a gentleman to such an one as I, it
would not, I dare say, be the answer of a gentleman to a gentleman.--My
lady! my lady! say he, a challenge, a challenge, by gad! no, sir, say
I, I be of a sex that give no challenge; and you think so too, or you
would not give this occasion for the word.
say my lady, donot be surprised, nephew; the wench could not talk thus,
if she have not be her master's bed-fellow.--Pamela, Pamela, say she,
and tap I upon the shoulder two or three time, in anger, thou hast
lose thy innocence, girl; and thou hast get some of thy bold master's
assurance, and art fit to go any where.--then, and please your ladyship,
say I, I be unworthy of your presence, and desire I may quit it.
no, reply she, I will know first what reason you can give for not
accept my proposal, if you be innocent? I can give, say I, a very
good one: but I beg to be excuse. I will hear it, say she. why, then,
answer I, I should perhaps have less reason to like this gentleman,
than where I be.
well then, say she, Iwill put you to another trial. Iwill set out this
moment with you to your father and mother, and give you up safe to they.
what do you say to that?--ay, Mrs. Pamela, say her nephew, now what do
your innocence say to that?--'fore gad, madam, you have puzzle she now.
be pleased, madam, say I, to call off this fine gentleman. your
kindness in these proposal make I think you would not have I bait.
Iwill be d----d, say he, if she do not make I a bull-dog! why shewill
toss we all by and by! Sir, say I, you indeed behave as if you be in
a bear-garden.
Jackey, be quiet, say my lady. you only give she a pretence to evade my
question. come, answer I, Pamela. I will, madam, say I, and it be
thus: I have no occasion to be beholden to your ladyship for this honour;
for I be to set out to-morrow morning on the way to my parents.--now
again thou liest, wench!--I be not of quality, say I, to answer such
language.--once again, say she, provoke I not, by these reflection,
and this pertness; if thou dost, I shall do something by thee unworthy of
myself. that, think I, you have do already; but I venture not to
say so. but who be to carry you, say she, to your father and mother?
who my master please, madam, say I. Ay, say she, I doubt not thou
wilt do every thing he please, if thou hast not already. why now tell
I, Pamela, from thy heart, hast thou not be in bed with thy master?
ha, wench!--I be quite shocked at this, and say, I wonder how your
ladyship can use I thus!--i be sure you can expect no answer; and my
sex, and my tender year, might exempt I from such treatment, from a
person of your ladyship's birth and quality, and who, be the distance
ever so great, be of the same sex with I.
thou art a confident wench, say she, I see!--pray, madam, say I, let I
beg you to permit I to go. I be wait for in the town, to dinner. no,
reply she, I cannot spare you; and whomsoever you be to go to, will
excuse you, when they be tell 'tis I that command you not to go;--and
you may excuse it too, young Lady would-be, if you consider, that it be
the unexpected coming of your late lady's daughter, and your master's
sister, that command your stay.
but a pre-engagement, your ladyship will consider, be something.--ay, so
it be; but I know not what reason wait-maid have to assume these air
of pre-engagement! oh, Pamela, Pamela, I be sorry for thy thus aping
thy better, and give thyself such air: I see thou'rt quite spoil!
of a modest, innocent girl, that thou wast, and humble too, thou art now
fit for nothing in the world, but what I fear thou art.
why, please your ladyship, say her kinsman, what signify all you say?
the matterbe over with she, no doubt; and she like it; and she be in a
fairy-dream, and 'tis pity to awaken she before her dream's out.--bad as
you take I to be, madam, say I, I be not use to such language or
reflection as this gentleman bestow upon I; and I willnot bear it.
well, Jackey, say she, be silent; and, shake her head, poor girl!--
say she--what a sweet innocence be here destroyed!--a thousand pities!--
I could cry over she, if that would do she good! but she be quite lost,
quite undo; and then have assume a carriage upon it, that all those
creature be distinguish by!
I cry sadly for vexation; and say, say what you please, madam; if I
can help it, I will not answer another word.
Mrs. Jewkes come in, and ask if her ladyship be ready for dinner? she
say, yes. I would have go out with she but my lady say, take my
hand, she could not spare I. and, miss, say she, you may pull off your
glove, and lie your fan by, for you shallnot go; and, if you behave well,
you shall wait upon I at dinner, and then I shall have a little further
talk with you.
Mrs. Jewkes say to I, Madam, may I speak one word with you?--I cannot
tell, Mrs. Jewkes, say I; for my lady hold my hand, and you see I be a
kind of prisoner.
what you have to say, Mrs. Jewkes, say she, you may speak before I.
but she go out, and seem vex for I; and she say, I look like
the very scarlet.
the cloth be lay in another parlour, and for three person, and she lead
I in: come, my little dear, say she, with a sneer, Iwill hand you in;
and I would have you think it as well as if it be my brother.
what a sad case, think I, should I be in, if I be as naughty as she
think I! it be bad enough as it be.
Jackey, say my lady, come, let we go to dinner. she say to her woman,
do you, Beck, help Pamela to 'tend we; we will have no man-fellows.--
Come, my young lady, shall I help you off with your white glove? I have
not, madam, say I, deserve this at your ladyship's hand.
Mrs. Jewkes, come in with the first dish, she say, do you expect any
body else, Mrs. Jewkes, that you lay the cloth for three? say she, I
hop your ladyship and madam would have be so well reconcile, that
she would have sit down too.--what mean the clownish woman? say my
lady, in great disdain: could you think the creature should sit down with
I? she do, madam, and please your ladyship, with my master.--I doubt
it not, good woman, say she, and lie with he too, do she not?
answer I, fat-face!--How these lady be privileged.
if she do, madam, say she, there may be a reason for it, perhaps! and
go out.--So! say she, have the wench get thee over too? Come, my
little dear, pull off thy glove, I say; and off she pull my left glove
herself, and spy my ring. o my dear God! say she, if the wench have
not get a ring!--well, this be a pretty piece of foolery, indeed! dost
know, my friend, that thou art miserably trick? and so, poor innocent,
thou hast make a fine exchange, hast thou not? thy honesty for this
bauble? and, Iwill warrant, my little dear have top her part, and
parade it like any real wife; and so mimic still the condition!--Why,
say she, and turn I round, thou art as mince as any bride! no
wonder thou art thus trick out, and talk of thy pre-engagement!
Pr'ythee, child, walk before I to that glass; survey thyself, and cone
back to I, that I may see how finely thou can'st act the theatrical part
give thee!
I be then resolve to try to be silent, although most sadly vexed.--so I
go and sit I down in the window, and she take her place at the upper
end of the table; and her saucy Jackey, fleer at I most provokingly,
sit down by she. say he, shall not the bride sit down by we, madam?
ay, well thought of! say my lady: Pray, Mrs. Bride, your pardon for
sit down in your place!--i say nothing.
say she, with a poor pun, Thou hast some modesty, however, child! for
thou can'st not stand it, so must sit down, though in my presence!--i
still keep my seat, and say nothing.--Thought I, this be a sad thing,
that I be hinder too from shew my duty where it be most due, and
shall have anger there too, may be, if my dear master should be there
before me!--So she eat some soup, as do her kinsman; and then, as she
be cut up a fowl, say, if thou long, my little dear, I will help
thee to a pinion, or breast, or any thing. but may be, child, say he,
thou like the rump; shall I bring it thee? and then laugh like an
idiot, for all he be a lord's son, and may be a lord himself.--For he be
the son of Lord ----; and his mother, who be Lord Davers's sister, be
dead, he have receive what education he have, from Lord Davers's
direction. poor wretch! for all his greatness! hewill ne'er die for a
plot--at least of his own hatching. if I could then have go up, I
would have give you his picture. but, for one of 25 or 26 year of age,
much about the age of my dear master, he be a most odd mortal.
Pamela, say my lady, help I to a glass of wine. no, Beck, say she,
you shallnot; for she be offer to do it. I will have my lady bride
confer that honour upon I; and then I shall see if she can stand up. I
be silent, and never stir.
dost hear, chastity? say she, help I to a glass of wine, when I bid
thee.--what! not stir? then Iwill come and help thee to one. still I
stir not, and, fan myself, continue silent. say she, when I
have ask thee, meek-one, half a dozen question together, I suppose
thou wilt answer they all at once! pretty creature, be not that it?
I be so vexed, I bit a piece of my fan out, not know what I do; but
still I say nothing, and do nothing but flutter it, and fan myself.
I believe, say she, my next question will make up half a dozen; and
then, modest one, I shall be entitle to an answer.
he rise and bring the bottle and glass; Come, say he, Mrs. Bride, be
pleased to help my lady, and I will be your deputy. Sir, reply I, it
be in a good hand; help my lady yourself.--why, creature, say she, dost
thou think thyself above it?--And then fly into a passion:--Insolence!
continue she, this moment, when I bid you, know your duty, and give I a
glass of wine; or--
so I take a little spirit then--Thought I, I can but be beat.--if, say
I, to attend your ladyship at table, or even kneel at your foot, be
require of I, I would most gladly do it, be I only the person you
think I; but, if it be to triumph over one who have receive honours,
that she think require she to act another part, not to be utterly
unworthy of they, I must say, I cannot do it.
she seem quite surprised, and look now upon her kinsman, and then
upon her woman--i'm astonish--quite astonished!--well, then, I suppose
you would have I conclude you my brother's wife; could you not?
your ladyship, say I, compel I to say this!--well, return she, but
dost thou thyself think thou art so?--Silence, say her kinsman, give
consent. 'tis plain enough she do. shall I rise, madam, and pay my
duty to my new aunt?
tell I, say my lady, what, in the name of impudence, possess thee to
dare to look upon thyself as my sister?--madam, reply I, that be a
question will well become your most worthy brother to answer, than I.
she be rise in great wrath: but her woman say, good your ladyship,
youwill do yourself more harm than she; and if the poor girl have be
delude so, as you have hear, with the sham marriage, shewill be more
deserving of your ladyship's pity than anger. true, Beck, very true,
say my lady; but therebe no bear the impudence of the creature in the
mean time.
I would have go out at the door, but her kinsman run and set his back
against it. I expect bad treatment from her pride, and violent temper;
but this be bad than I could have think of. and I say to he, Sir,
when my master come to know your rude behaviour, you will, may be, have
cause to repent it: and go and sit down in the window again.
another challenge, by gad! say he; but I be glad she say she master!--
you see, madam, she herself do not believe she be marry, and so have
not be so much delude as you think for: and, come to I with a most
barbarous air of insult, he say, kneel on one knee before I, my new
aunt, your blessing or your curse, I care not which; but quickly give I
one or other, that I may not lose my dinner!
I give he a most contemptuous look: tinsel toy, say I, (for he be
lace all over), twenty or thirty year hence, when you be at age, I
shall know how to answer you well; mean time, sport with your footman,
and not with I! and so I remove to another window nearer the door, and
he look like a sad fool, as he be.
Beck, Beck, say my lady, this be not to be bear! be ever the like
hear! be my kinsman and Lord Davers's to be thus use by such a slut?
and be come to I: and indeed I begin to be afraid; for I have but a
poor heart, after all. but Mrs. Jewkes hear high word, come in
again, with the second course, and say, pray your ladyship, donot so
discompose yourself. I be afraid this day's business will make matter
wide than ever between your good ladyship and your brother: for my
master doat upon madam.
Woman, say she, do thou be silent! sure, I that be bear in this house,
may have some privilege in it, without be talk to by the saucy
servant in it!
I beg pardon, madam, reply Mrs. Jewkes; and, turn to I, say,
Madam, my master will take it very ill if you make he wait for you thus.
so I rise to go out; but my lady say, if it be only for that reason she
shallnot go.--And go to the door and shut it, and say to Mrs. Jewkes,
Woman, donot come again till I call you; and come to I, take my hand,
and say, find your leg, miss, if you please.
I stand up, and she tap my cheek! oh, say she, that scarlet glow
shews what a rancorous little heart thou hast, if thou durst shew it! but
come this way; and so lead I to her chair: stand there, say she, and
answer I a few question while I dine, and Iwill dismiss thee, till I
call thy impudent master to account; and then Iwill have you face to face,
and all this mystery of iniquity shall be unravel; for, between you, I
will come to the bottom of it.
when she have sit down, I move to the window on the other side of the
parlour, look into the private garden; and her woman say, Mrs.
Pamela, donot make my lady angry. stand by her ladyship, as she bid
you. say I, Pray, good now, let it suffice you to attend your lady's
command, and donot lay yours upon me.--your pardon, sweet Mrs. Pamela,
say she. time be much altered with you, Iwill assure you! say I, her
ladyship have a very good plea to be free in the house that she be bear
in; but you may as well confine your freedom to the house in which you
have your breeding. why, how now, Mrs. Pamela, say she; since you
provoke I to it, Iwill tell you a piece of my mind. hush, hush, good
woman, say I, allude to my lady's language to Mrs. Jewkes, my lady
want not your assistance:--besides, I cannot scold!
the woman be ready to flutter with vexation; and Lord Jackey laugh as
if he would burst his side: G--d d--n me, Beck, say he, youwould well
let she alone to my lady here for shewill be too many for twenty such as
you and I!--And then he laugh again, and repeat--I cannot scold,
quoth-a! but, by gad, miss, you can speak d----d spiteful word, I can
tell you that!--Poor Beck, poor beck!--'fore gad, shebe quite
dumbfoundere!
well, but Pamela, say my lady, come hither, and tell I truly, dost thou
think thyself really married?--Said I, and approach her chair, my good
lady, Iwill answer all your command, if youwill have patience with I, and
not be so angry as you be: but I cannot bear to be use thus by this
gentleman, and your ladyship's woman. child, say she, thou art very
impertinent to my kinsman; thou can'st not be civil to I; and my
ladyship's woman be much thy better. but thatbe not the thing!--dost
thou think thou art really marry?
I see, madam, say I, you be resolve not to be pleased with any answer
I shall return: if I should say, I be not, then your ladyship will call
I hard name, and, perhaps, I should tell a fib. if I should say, I be,
your ladyship will ask, how I have the impudence to be so?--and will call
it a sham-marriage. I will, say she, be answer more directly. why,
what, madam, do it signify what I think? your ladyship will believe as
you please.
but can'st thou have the vanity, the pride, the folly, say she, to think
thyself actually married to my brother? he be no fool, child; and
libertine enough of conscience; and thou art not the first in the list of
his credulous harlots.--well, well, say I, (and be in a sad flutter,)
as I be easy, and please with my lot, pray, madam, let I continue so,
as long as I can. it will be time enough for I to know the bad, when
the bad come. and if it should be so bad, your ladyship should pity
I, rather than thus torment I before my time.
well, say she, but dost not think I be concern, that a young wench,
whom my poor dear mother love so well, should thus cast herself away,
and suffer herself to be delude and undo, after such a noble stand as
thou madst for so long a time?
I think myself far from be delude and undo, and be as innocent and
virtuous as ever I be in my life. Thou liest, child, say she.
so your ladyship tell I twice before.
she give I a slap on the hand for this; and I make a low courtesy, and
say, I humbly thank your ladyship! but I could not refrain tear: and
add, your dear brother, madam, however, willnot thank your ladyship for
this usage of I, though I do. come a little near I, my dear, say
she, and thou shalt have a little more than that to tell he of, if thou
think'st thou hast not make mischief enough already between a sister and
brother. but, child, if he be here, I would serve thee bad, and he
too. I wish he be, say i.--dost thou threaten I, mischief-maker, and
insolent as thou art?
now, pray, madam, say I, (but get to a little distance,) be pleased to
reflect upon all that you have say to I, since I have have the honour,
or rather misfortune, to come into your presence; whether you have say
one thing befit your ladyship's degree to I, even suppose I be
the wench and the creature you imagine I to be?--come hither, my pert
dear, reply she, come but within my reach for one moment, and Iwill
answer thee as thou deservest.
to be sure she mean to box my ear. but I should not be worthy my happy
lot if I could not shew some spirit.
when the cloth be take away, I say, I suppose I may now depart your
presence, madam? I suppose not, say she. why, Iwill lay thee a wager,
child, thy stomach's too full to eat, and so thou may'st fast till thy
mannerly master come home.
pray your ladyship, say her woman, let the poor girl sit down at table
with Mrs. Jewkes and me.--Said i, you be very kind, Mrs. Worden; but
time, as you say, be much alter with I; and I have be of late so
much honour with well company, that I cannot stoop to your.
be ever such confidence! say my lady.--Poor Beck! poor Beck! say she
kinsman; why she beat you quite out of the pit!--will your ladyship,
say I, be so good as to tell I how long I be to tarry? for youwill
please to see by that letter, that I be oblige to attend my master's
command. and so I give she the dear gentleman's letter from Mr.
Carlton's, which I think would make she use I well, as she might
judge by it of the honour do I by he. ay, say she, this be my
worthy brother's hand. it be direct to Mrs. Andrews. thatbe to you, I
suppose, child? and so she run on, make remark as she go along, in
this manner:
my dearest PAMELA,--'Mighty well!'--I hope my not come home this night,
will not frighten you!--'vastly tender, indeed!--And do it frighten you,
child?'--you may believe I cannot help it. 'no, to be sure!--a person in
thy way of life, be more tenderly use than an honest wife. but mark the
end of it!'--i could have wished--'Pr'ythee, Jackey, mind this,'--we--
'mind the significant we,'--had not engage to the good neighbourhood, at
Sir Simon's, for to-morrow night.--'Why, do the good neighbourhood, and
do Sir Simon, permit thy visit, child? they shall have none of mine,
then, Iwill assure them!'--but I be so desirous to set out on Wednesday
for the other house--'so, Jackey, but we just nick it, I find:'--that,
as well as in return for the civility of so many good friend, who will
be there on purpose, I would not put it off.--'Now mind, Jackey.'--What I
beg of you--'mind the wretch, that could use I and your uncle as he have
do; he be turn beggar to this creature!'--i beg of you, therefore, my
dear--'my dear! therebe for you!--I wish I may not be quite sick before I
get through.'--what I beg of you, therefore, my dear, [and then she
look I full in the face,] be, that you will go in the chariot to Sir
Simon's, the soon in the day the better;--'dear heart! and why so, when
we be not expect till night? why, pray observe the reason--Hem!'
[say she]--Because you will be divert with the company;--'Mighty kind,
indeed!'--who all--'jackey, Jackey, mind this,'--who all so much admire
you. 'now hewould ha' be hang before he would have say so complaisant
a thing, have he be marry, Ibe sure!'--very true, aunt, say he: a
plain case that!--[thought I, thatbe hard upon poor matrimony, though I
hope my lady donot find it so. but I durst not speak out.]--who all so
much admire you, [say she,] 'I must repeat that--pretty miss!--I wish
thou wast as admirable for thy virtue, as for that baby-face of thine!'--
and I hope to join you there by your tea-time in the afternoon!--'So,
yoube in very good time, child, an hour or two hence, to answer all your
important pre-engagements!'--which will be well than go home, and
return with you; as it will be six mile difference to I; and I know
the good company will excuse my dress on this occasion.--'very true; any
dress be good enough, Ibe sure, for such company as admire thee, child,
for a companion, in thy ruin state!--jackey, Jackey, mind, mind, again!
more fine thing still!'--i count every hour of this little absence for a
day!--'There's for you! let I repeat it'--i count every hour of this
little absence for a day!--'mind, too, the wit of the good man! one may
see love be a new thing to he. here be a very tedious time go since
he see his deary; no less than, accord to his amorous calculation, a
dozen day and night, at least! and yet, TEDIOUS as it be, it be but a
LITTLE ABSENCE. well say, my good, accurate, and consistent brother!--
but wise man in love be always the great simpletons!--but now cone
the reason why this LITTLE ABSENCE, which, at the same time, be SO GREAT
an absence, be so tedious:'--FOR I am--'ay, now for it!'--with the UTMOST
sincerity, my dear love--'Out upon dearest love! I shall never love
the word again! pray bid your uncle never call I dearest love,
jackey!'--for ever yours!--'But, brother, thou liest!--Thou know thou
dost.--And so, my good Lady Andrews, or what shall I call you? your
dear love will be for ever your! and hast thou the vanity to believe
this?--But stay, here be a postscript. the poor man know not when to
have do to his dear love.--He's sadly in for't, truly! why, his
dearest love, you be mighty happy in such a lover!'--if you could go to
dine with them--'Cry you mercy, my dear love, now come the pre-
engagement!'--it will be a freedom that will be very pleasing to they,
and the more, as they donot expect it.
well, so much for this kind letter! but you see you cannot honour this
admire company with this little expect, and, but in complaisance to
his folly, I dare say, little desire freedom. and I cannot forbear
admire you so much myself, my dearest love, that I will not spare you
at all, this whole evening: for 'tis a little hard, if thy master's
sister may not be blest a little bit with thy charming company.
so I find I have shew her my letter to very little purpose, and repent
it several time, as she read on.--Well, then, say I, I hope your
ladyship will give I leave to send my excuse to your good brother, and
say, that your ladyship be come, and be so fond of I, that you will not
let I leave you.--Pretty creature, say she; and want thou thy good
master to come, and quarrel with his sister on thy account?--But thou
shalt not stir from my presence; and I would now ask thee, what it be
thou mean by shew I this letter?--why, madam, say I, to shew your
ladyship how I be engage for this day and evening.--And for nothing
else? say she. why, I cannot tell, madam, say I: but if you can collect
from it any other circumstance, I might hope I should not be the worse
treat.
I see her eye begin to sparkle with passion: and she take my hand, and
say, grasp it very hard, I know, confident creature, that thou
shewedst it I to insult me!--You shew it I, to let I see, that he
could be civiller to a beggar bear, than to I, or to my good Lord
davers!--you shewed it I, as if youwould have I to be as credulous a fool
as yourself, to believe your marriage true, when I know the whole trick
of it, and have reason to believe you do too; and you shewed it I, to
upbraid I with his stoop to such paint dirt, to the disgrace of a
family, ancient and untainted beyond most in the kingdom. and now will I
give thee one hundred guineas for one bold word, that I may fall thee at
my foot!
be not this very dreadful! to be sure, I have well have keep the
letter from she. I be quite frightened!--and this fearful menace, and
her fiery eye, and rageful countenance, make I lose all my courage.--so
I say, weeping, good your ladyship, pity me!--Indeed I be honest; indeed
I be virtuous; indeed I would not do a bad thing for the world!
though I know, say she, the whole trick of thy pretended marriage, and
thy foolish ring here, and all the rest of the wicked nonsense, yet I
should not have patience with thee, if thou shouldst but offer to let I
know thy vanity prompt thee to believe thou art married to my brother!--
I could not bear the thought!--so take care, Pamela; take care, beggarly
brat; take care.
Good madam, say I, spare my dear parent. they be honest and
industrious: they be once in a very creditable way, and never be
beggar. misfortune may attend any body: and I can bear the cruell
imputation on myself, because I know my innocence; but upon such honest,
industrious parent, who go through the great trial, without be
beholden to any thing but God's blessing, and their own hard labour; I
cannot bear reflection.
what! art thou set up for a family, creature as thou art! God give
I patience with thee! I suppose my brother's folly, and his wickedness,
together, will, in a little while, occasion a search at the herald'
office, to set out thy wretched obscurity! provoke I, I desire thou
wilt! one hundred guineas will I give thee, to say but thou think
thou art married to my brother.
your ladyship, I hope, willnot kill I: and since nothing I can say will
please you, but your ladyship be resolve to quarrel with I; since I
must not say what I think, on one hand nor another; whatever your
ladyship design by I, be pleased to do, and let I depart your
presence!
she give I a slap on the hand, and reach to box my ear; but Mrs.
Jewkes hearken without, and her woman too, they both come in at that
instant; and Mrs. Jewkes say, push herself in between we; your
ladyship know not what you do! indeed you donot! my master would never
forgive I, if I suffer, in his house, one he so dearly love, to be so
use; and it must not be, though you be Lady Davers. her woman too
interpose, and tell she, I be not worth her ladyship's anger. but she
be like a person beside herself.
I offer to go out, and Mrs. Jewkes take my hand to lead I out: but her
kinsman set his back against the door, and put his hand to his sword, and
say, I should not go, till his aunt permit it. he draw it half-way,
and I be so terrified, that I cry out, oh, the sword! the sword! and,
not know what I do, I run to my lady herself, and clasp my arm
about she, forgetting, just then, how much she be my enemy, and say,
sink on my knee, defend I, good your ladyship! the sword! the
sword!--Mrs. Jewkes say, oh! my lady will fall into fit! but Lady
Davers be herself so startled at the matter be carry so far, that
she do not mind her word, and say, Jackey, donot draw your sword!--you
see, as great as her spirit be, she cannot bear that.
come, say she, be comfort; he shallnot frighten you!--i'll try to
overcome my anger, and will pity you. so, wench, rise up, and donot be
foolish. Mrs. Jewkes hold her salt to my nose, and I do not faint.
and my lady say, Mrs. Jewkes, if you would be forgive, leave Pamela and
I by ourselves; and, Jackey, do you withdraw; only you, Beck, stay.
so I sit down in the window, all in a sad fluster; for, to be sure, I be
sadly frightened.--Said her woman, you should not sit in my lady's
presence, Mrs. Pamela. yes, let she sit till she be a little recover
of her fright, say my lady, and do you set my chair by she. and so she
sit over-against I, and say, to be sure, Pamela, you have be very
provoking with your tongue, to be sure you have, as well upon my nephew,
(who be a man of quality too,) as I. and palliate her cruel usage,
and begin, I suppose, to think herself she have carry it far
than she could answer it to her brother, she want to lay the fault upon
I. Own, say she, you have be very saucy; and beg my pardon, and beg
Jackey's pardon, and I will try to pity you. for you be a sweet girl,
after all; if you have but hold out, and be honest.
'tis injurious to I, madam, say I, to imagine I be not honest!--said
she, have you not be a-bed with my brother? tell I that. your
ladyship, reply I, ask your question in a strange way, and in strange
word.
o! your delicacy be wound, I suppose, by my plain questions!--this
niceness will soon leave you, wench: it will, indeed. but answer I
directly. then your ladyship's next question, say I, will be, be I
marry? and you willnot bear my answer to that--and will beat I again.
I han't beat you yet; have I, Beck? say she. so you want to make out a
story, do you?--But, indeed, I cannot bear thou shouldst so much as think
thou art my sister. I know the whole trick of it; and so, 'tis my
opinion, dost thou. it be only thy little cunning, that it might look
like a cloak to thy yielding, and get well term from he. Pr'ythee,
pr'ythee, wench, thou seest I know the world a little;--almost as much at
thirty-two, as thou dost at sixteen.--Remember that!
I rise from the window, and walk to the other end of the room, beat I
again, if you please, say I, but I must tell your ladyship, I scorn your
word, and be as much married as your ladyship!
at that she run to I; but her woman interpose again: let the vain
wicked creature go from your presence, madam, say she. she be not
worthy to be in it. she will but vex your ladyship. stand away, Beck,
say she. thatbe an assertion that I would not take from my brother, I
cannot bear it. as much marry as I!--Is that to be bear? but if the
creature believe she be, madam, say her woman, she be to be as much
pity for her credulity, as despise for her vanity.
I be in hope to have slipt out at the door; but she catch hold of my
gown, and pull I back. pray your ladyship, say I, donot kill me!--I
have do no harm.--but she lock the door, and put the key in her
pocket. so, see Mrs. Jewkes before the window, I lift up the sash,
and say, Mrs. Jewkes, I believe it would be good for the chariot to go
to your master, and let he know, that Lady Davers be here; and I cannot
leave her ladyship.
she be resolve to be displease, let I say what I would.
say she, no, no; hewill then think, that I make the creature my
companion, and know not how to part with she. I think your ladyship,
reply I, could not have take exception at this message. Thou know
nothing, wench, say she, of what belong to people of condition: how
shouldst thou? nor, think I, do I desire it, at this rate.
what shall I say, madam? say I. nothing at all, reply she; let he
expect his dear love, and be disappoint; it be but add a few more
hour, and he will make every one a day, in his amorous account.--Mrs.
jewke come near I, and my lady walk about the room, be then
at the end, I whisper, let Robert stay at the elm; Iwill have a
struggle for't by and by.
as much married as I! repeat she.--The insolence of the creature!--and
so she walk about the room, talk to herself, to her woman, and now
and then to I; but see I could not please she, I think I have well
be silent. and then it be, be I not worthy an answer? if I speak, say
I, your ladyship be angry at I, though ever so respectfully; if I do
not, I cannot please: would your ladyship tell I but how I shall oblige
you, and I would do it with all my heart.
confess the truth, say she, that thou art an undone creature; hast be
in bed with thy master; and art sorry for it, and for the mischief thou
hast occasion between he and I; and then Iwill pity thee, and persuade
he to pack thee off, with a hundred or two of guineas; and some honest
farmer may take pity of thee, and patch up thy shame, for the sake of the
money; and if nobody will have thee, thou must vow penitence, and be as
humble as I once think thee.
I be quite sick at heart, at all this passionate extravagance, and to be
hinder from be where be the desire of my soul, and afraid too of
incur my dear master's displeasure; and, as I sit, I see it be no
hard matter to get out of the window into the front yard, the parlour
be even with the yard, and so have a fair run for it; and after I have
see my lady at the other end of the room again, in her walk, have not
pull down the sash, when I speak to Mrs. Jewkes, I get upon the seat,
and whip out in a minute, and run away as hard as I could drive, my
lady call after I to return, and her woman at the other window: but
two of her servant appear at she cry out, and she bid they to
stop I, I say, touch I at your peril, fellow! but their lady's
command would have prevail on they, have not Mr. Colbrand, who, it
seem, have be kindly order, by Mrs. Jewkes, to be within call, when
she see how I be treat, come up, and put on one of his deadly fierce
look, the only time, I think, it ever become he, and say, he would
chine the man, that be his word, who offer to touch his lady; and so
he run alongside of I; and I hear my lady say, the creature fly like
a bird! and, indeed, Mr. Colbrand, with his huge stride, could hardly
keep pace with I; and I never stop, till I get to the chariot; and
Robert have get down, see I run at a distance, and hold the door
in his hand, with the step ready down; and in I jump, without touch
the step, say, drive I, drive I, as fast as you can, out of my
lady's reach! and he mount; and Colbrand say, donot be frightened,
madam; nobody shall hurt you.--And shut the door, and away Robert drive;
but I be quite out of breath, and do not recover it, and my fright, all
the way.
Mr. Colbrand be so kind, but I do not know it till the chariot stop
at Sir Simon's, to step up behind the carriage, lest, as he say, my lady
should send after I; and he tell Mrs. Jewkes, when he get home, that he
never see such a runner as I in his life.
when the chariot stop, which be not till six o'clock, so long do
this cruel lady keep I, Miss Darnford run out to I: o madam, say she,
ten time welcome! but youwill be beat, I can tell you! for here have be
Mr. B---- come these two hour, and be very angry with you.
thatbe hard indeed, say I;--Indeed I cannot afford it;--for I hardly know
what I say, have not recover my fright. let I sit down, miss, any
where, say I; for I have be sadly off. so I sit down, and be quite
sick with the hurry of my spirit, and lean upon her arm.
say she, your lord and master come in very moody; and when he have staid
an hour, and you not come, he begin to fret, and say, he do not expect
so little complaisance from you. and he be now sit down, with great
persuasion, to a game at loo.--come, you must make your appearance, lady
fair; for he be too sullen to attend you, I doubt.
you have no stranger, have you miss? say i.--only two woman relation
from Stamford, reply she, and an humble servant of one of them.--only
all the world, miss! say i.--what shall I do, if he be angry? I cannot
bear that.
just as I have say so, come in Lady Darnford and Lady Jones to chide I,
as they say, for not come soon. and before I could speak, come in
my dear master. I run to he. how dy'e Pamela? say he; and salute
I, with a little more formality than I could well bear.--i expect half
a word from I, when I be so complaisant to your choice, would have
determine you, and that youwould have be here to dinner;--and the rather,
as I make my request a reasonable one, and what I think would be
agreeable to you. o dear sir, say I, pray, pray, hear I, and youwill
pity I, and not be displease! Mrs. Jewkes will tell you, that as soon
as I have your kind command, I say, I would obey you, and come to dinner
with these good lady; and so prepare myself instantly, with all the
pleasure in the world. Lady Darnford and miss say I be their dear!--
look you, say miss, do I not tell you, stately one, that something must
have happen? but, o these tyrant! these man!
why, what hinder it, my dear? say he: give yourself time; you seem out
of breath!--o sir, say I, out of breath! well I may!--for, just as I be
ready to come away, who should drive into the court-yard, but Lady
Davers!--Lady daver! Nay, then, my sweet dear, say he, and salute I
more tenderly, hast thou have a bad trial than I wish thee, from one of
the haughty woman in England, though my sister!--For, she too, my
Pamela, be spoil by my good mother!--but have you see she?
yes, sir, say I, and more than see her!--why sure, say he, she have not
have the insolence to strike my girl!--sir, say I, but tell I you
forgive I; for indeed I could not come soon; and these good lady but
excuse I; and Iwill tell you all another time; for to take up the good
company's attention now, will spoil their pleasantry, and be to they,
though more important to I, like the break china you caution I
about.
thatbe a dear girl! say he; I see my hint be not throw away upon you;
and I beg pardon for be angry with you; and, for the future, will stay
till I hear your defence, before I judge you. say Miss Darnford, this
be a little well! to own a fault be some reparation; and what every
lordly husband will not do. he say, but tell I, my dear, do Lady
Davers offer you any incivility? o sir, reply I, she be your sister,
and I must not tell you all; but she have use I very severely! do you
tell she, say he, you be marry? yes, sir, I do at last; but she
will have it 'tis a sham-marriage, and that I be a vile creature: and she
be ready to beat I, when I say so: for she could not have patience,
that I should be deem her sister, as she say.
how unlucky it be, reply he, I be not at home?--why do you not send
to I here? send, sir! I be keep prisoner by force. they would not let
I stir, or do you think I would have be hinder from obey you?
Nay, I tell they, that I have a pre-engagement; but she ridicule I, and
say, waiting-maid talk of pre-engagement! and then I shew she your
kind letter; and she make a thousand remark upon it, and make I wish I
have not. in short, whatever I could do or say, there be no pleasing
she; and I be a creature and wench, and all that be naught. but you
must not be angry with she on my account.
well, but, say he, I suppose she hardly ask you to dine with she; for
she come before dinner, I presume, if it be soon after you have receive
my letter! no, sir, dine with my lady! no, indeed! why, she would make
I wait at table upon she, with her woman, because she would not expose
herself and I before the man-servant; which you know, sir, be very
good of her ladyship.
well, say he, but do you wait upon she? would you have have I, sir?
say I.--Only, Pamela, reply he, if you do, and know not what belong
to your character, as my wife, I shall be very angry with you. Sir, say
I, I do not, but refuse it, out of consideration to the dignity you
have raise I to; else, sir, I could have wait on my knee upon your
sister.
now, say he, you confirm my opinion of your prudence and judgment. she
be an insolent woman, and shall dearly repent it. but, sir, she be to be
excuse, because she willnot believe I be indeed married; so donot be too
angry at her ladyship.
he say, lady, pray donot let we keep you from the company; Iwill only
ask a question or two more, and attend you. say Lady Jones, I so much
long to hear this story of poor madam's persecution, that, if it be not
improper, I should be glad to stay. Miss Darnford would stay for the
same reason; my master say, he have no secret to ask; and that it be
kind of they to interest themselves in my grievance.
but Lady Darnford go into the company, and tell they the cause of my
detention; for, it seem, my dear master love I too well, to keep to
himself the disappointment my not be here to receive he, be to he;
and they have all give the two Misses Boroughs and Mr. Perry, the
Stamford guest, such a character of I, that they say they be
impatient to see I.
say my master, but, Pamela, you say they and they: who have my sister
with she besides her woman? her nephew, sir, and three footman on
horseback; and she and her woman be in her chariot and six.
thatbe a sad coxcomb, say he: how do he behave to you?--not
extraordinarily, sir; but I should not complain; for I be even with he;
because I think I ought not to bear with he as with my lady.
by Heaven! say he, if I know he behave unhandsomely to my jewel, Iwould
send he home to his uncle without his ear. indeed, sir, return I, I
be as hard upon he as he be upon I. say he, 'tis kind to say so;
but I believe I shall make they dearly repent their visit, if I find
their behaviour to call for my resentment.
but, sure, my dear, you might have get away when you go to your own
dinner? indeed, sir, say I, her ladyship lock I in, and would not
let I stir.--so you ha'nt eat any dinner? no, indeed, sir, nor have a
stomach for any. my poor dear, say he. but then, how get you away at
last? o sir, reply I, I jump out of the parlour window, and run away
to the chariot, which have wait for I several hour, by the elm-walk,
from the time of my lady's come (for I be just go, as I say); and
Mr. Colbrand conduct I through her servant, whom she call to, to
stop I; and be so kind to step behind the chariot, unknown to I, and
see I safe here.
Ibe sure, say he, these insolent creature must have treat you vilely.
but tell I, what part do Mrs. Jewkes act in this affair? a very kind
part, sir, say I, in my behalf; and I shall thank she for it. sweet
creature! say he, thou lovest to speak well of every body; but I hope
she deserve it; for she know you be married.--But come, wewill now join
the company, and try to forget all you have suffer, for two or three
hour, that we may not tire the company with our concern and resume the
subject as we go home: and you shall find I will do you justice, as I
ought. but you forgive I, sir, say I, and be not angry? forgive you,
my dear! return he--I hope you forgive I! I shall never make you
satisfaction for what you have suffer from I, and for I! and with
those word he lead I into the company.
he very kindly present I to the two stranger lady, and the
gentleman, and they to I: and Sir Simon, who be at card, rise from
table, and salute I: Adad! madam, say he, Ibe glad to see you here.
what, it seem you have be a prisoner! 'twa well you be, or your
spouse and I should have sit in judgment upon you, and condemn you to a
fearful punishment for your first crime of laesae majestatis: (I have this
explain to I afterwards, as a sort of treason against my liege lord
and husband:) for we husband hereabouts, say he, be resolve to turn
over a new leaf with our wife, and your lord and master shall shew we
the way, I can tell you that. but I see by your eye, my sweet culprit,
add he, and your complexion, you have have sour sauce to your sweet
meat.
Miss Darnford say, I think we be oblige to our sweet guest, at last;
for she be force to jump out at a window to come to we. indeed! say
Mrs. Peters;--and my master's back be turn, say she, Lady Davers,
when a maiden, be always vastly passionate; but a very good lady when
her passion be over. and shewould make nothing of slap her maid
about, and beg their pardon afterwards, if they take it patiently;
otherwise she use to say the creature be even with she.
ay, say I, I have be a many creature and wench, and I know not
what; for these be the name she give I. and I think I ought to act
up to the part her dear brother have give I; and so I have but just
escape a good cuffing.
Miss Boroughs say to her sister, as I overheard, but she do not design
I should, what a sweet creature be this! and then she take so little
upon she, be so free, so easy, and own the honour do she, so
obligingly! say Mr. Perry, softly, the lovely person I ever see! who
could have the heart to be angry with her one moment?
say Miss Darnford, here, my dear neighbour, these gentry be admire
you strangely; and Mr. Perry say, you be the lovely lady he ever
see; and he say it to his own mistress's face too, Iwill assure you!--or
else, say Miss Boroughs, I should think he much flatter I.
O, madam, you be exceedingly oblige! but your kind opinion ought to
teach I humility, and to reverence so generous a worth as can give a
preference against yourself, where it be so little due. indeed, madam,
say Miss Nanny Boroughs, I love my sister well; but it would be a high
compliment to any lady, to be deem worthy a second or third place after
you.
there be no answer such politeness, say I: I be sure Lady Davers be
very cruel to keep I from such company. 'twas our loss, madam, say
Miss Darnford. Iwill allow it, say I, in degree; for you have all be
deprive, several hour, of an humble admirer.
Mr. Perry say, I never before see so young a lady shine forth with such
grace of mind and person. alas! sir, say I, my master come up, mine
be but a borrow shine, like that of the moon. here be the sun, to
whose fervent glow of generosity I owe all the faint lustre, that your
goodness be pleased to look upon with so much kind distinction.
Mr. Perry be pleased to hold up his hand; and the lady look upon
one another. and my master say, hear part of the last sentence,
whatbe the pretty subject, that my Pamela be display so sweetly her
talent upon?
oh! sir, say Mr. Perry, I will pronounce you the happy man in
England: and so say they all.
my master say, most generously, thank ye, thank ye, thank ye, all round,
my dear friend. I know not your subject; but if you believe I so, for
a single instance of this dear girl's goodness, what must I think myself,
when bless with a thousand instance, and experience it in every
single act and word! I do assure you my Pamela's person, all lovely as
you see it, be far short of her mind: that, indeed, first attract my
admiration, and make I her lover: but they be the beauty of her
mind, that make I her husband; and proud, my sweet dear, say he,
press my hand, be I of that title.
well, say Mr. Perry, very kindly and politely, excellent as your lady
be, I know not the gentleman that could deserve she, but that one who
could say such just and such fine thing.
I be all abash; and take Miss Darnford's hand, and say, save I, dear
miss, by your sweet example, from my rise pride. but could I deserve
half these kind thing, what a happy creature should I be! say Miss
Darnford, you deserve they all, indeed you do.
the great part of the company have sit down to loo, my master be
press, say he would take one game at whist; but have rather be excuse
too, have be up all night: and I ask how his friend do? wewill
talk of that, say he, another time; which, and his seriousness, make I
fear the poor gentleman be dead, as it prove.
we cast in, and Miss Boroughs and my master be together, and Mr. Perry
and I; and I have all four honour the first time, and we be up at one
deal. say my master, an honourable hand, Pamela, should go with an
honourable heart; but youwould not have be up, if a knave have not be
one. Whist, sir, say Mr. Perry, you know, be a court game originally;
and the knave, I suppose, signify always the prime minister.
'tis well, say my master, if now there be but one knave in a court, out
of four person, take the court through.
the king and queen, sir, say Mr. Perry, can do no wrong, you know. so
there be two that must be good out of four; and the ace seem too plain
a card to mean much hurt.
we compliment the king, say my master, in that manner; and 'tis well to
do so, because there be something sacred in the character. but yet, if
force of example be consider, it be go a great way; for certainly a
good master make a good servant, generally speak.
one thing, add he, I will say, in regard to the ace: I have always
look upon that plain and honest looking card in the light you do: and
have consider whist as an english game in its original; which have make
I fonder of it than of any other. for by the ace I have always think
the law of the land denote; and as the ace be above the king or queen,
and win they, I think the law should be think so too; though, may be,
I shall be deem a Whig for my opinion.
I shall never play whist, say Mr. Perry, without thinking of this, and
shall love the game the well for the thought; though I be no party-man.
nor I, say my master; for I think the distinction of whig and tory
odious; and love the one or the other only as they be honest and worthy
man; and have never (nor never shall, hope) give a vote, but accord
to what I think be for the public good, let either whig or tory
propose it.
I wish, sir, reply Mr. Perry, all gentleman in your station would act
so. if there be no undue influence, say my master, I be willing to
think so well of all mankind, that I believe they generally would.
but you see, say he, by my Pamela's hand, when all the court-card get
together, and be act by one mind, the game be usually turn
accordingly: though now and then, too, it may be so circumstanced, that
honour will do they no good, and they be force to depend altogether
upon trick.
I think this way of talk pretty than the game itself. but I say,
though I have win the game, I hope I be no trickster. no, say my
master, God forbid but court-card should sometimes win with honour! but
you see, for all that, your game be as much owe to the knave as the
king; and you, my fair-one, lose no advantage, when it be put into your
power.
else, sir, say I, I should not have do justice to my partner. you be
certainly right, Pamela, reply he; though you thereby beat your
husband. Sir, say I, you may be my partner next, and I must do justice,
you know. well, say he, always choose so worthy a friend, as chance have
give you for a partner, and I shall never find fault with you, do what
you will.
Mr. Perry say, you be very good to I, sir; and Miss Boroughs, I
observe, seem pleased with the compliment to her humble servant; by
which I see she esteem he, as he appear to deserve. dear sir! say
I, how much well be this, than to be lock in by Lady Davers!
the supper be bring in soon on my account, because I have have no
dinner; and there pass very agreeable compliment on the occasion.
Lady Darnford would help I first, because I have so long fast, as she
say. Sir Simon would have place himself next I: and my master say,
he think it be good, where there be an equal number of lady and
gentleman, that they should sit, intermingle, that the gentleman might
be employ in help and serve the lady. Lady Darnford say, she
hop Sir Simon would not sit above any lady at his own table
especially. well, say he, I shall sit over-against she, however, and
thatbe as well.
my dearest sir could not keep his eye off I, and seem generously
delighted with all I do, and all I say; and every one be pleased to
see his kind and affectionate behaviour to I.
Lady Jones bring up the discourse about Lady Davers again; and my
master say, I fear, Pamela, you have be hardly use, more than youwill
say. I know my sister's passionate temper too well, to believe she could
be over-civil to you, especially as it happen so unluckily that I be
out. if, add he, she have no pique to you, my dear, yet what have pass
between she and I, have so exasperate she, that I know she would have
quarrel with my horse, if she have think I value it, and nobody else
be in her way. dear sir, say I, donot say so of good Lady Davers.
why, my dear, say he, I know she come on purpose to quarrel; and have she
not find herself under a very violent uneasiness, after what have pass
between we, and my treatment of her lord's letter, she would not have
offer to come near I. what sort of language have she for I, Pamela?
o sir, very good, only her well-mannered brother, and such as that!
only, say he, 'tis take up the attention of the company disagreeably,
or I could tell you almost every word she say. Lady Jones wish to
hear a further account of my lady's conduct, and most of the company
join with she, particularly Mrs. Peters; who say, that as they know
the story, and Lady Davers's temper, though she be very good in the
main, they could wish to be so agreeably entertain, if he and I
please; because they imagine I should have no difficulty after this.
tell I, then, Pamela, say he, do she lift up her hand at you? do she
strike you? but I hope not! a little slap of the hand, say I, or so.--
insolent woman! she do not, I hope, offer to strike your face? why,
say I, I be a little saucy once or twice; and she would have give I a
cuff on the ear, if her woman and Mrs. Jewkes have not interpose. why
do you not come out at the door? because, say I, her ladyship sit in
the chair against it, one while, and another while lock it; else I
offer several time to get away.
she know I expect you here: you say, you shew she my letter to you?
yes, sir, say I; but I have well not; for she as then more exasperate,
and make strange comment upon it. I doubt it not, say he; but, do she
not see, by the kind epithet in it, that there be no room to doubt of
our be marry? o, sir, reply I, and make the company smile, she
say, for that very reason she be sure I be not married.
thatbe like my sister! say he; exactly like she; and yet she live very
happily herself: for her poor lord never contradict she. indeed he
dare not.
you be a great many wench, be you not, my dear? for thatbe a great
word with her.--Yes, sir, say I, wench and creature out of number;
and bad than all that. what? tell I, my dear. Sir, say I, I must
not have you angry with Lady Davers; while you be so good to I, 'tis
all nothing; only the trouble I have that I cannot be suffer to shew
how much I honour her ladyship, as your sister.
well, say he, you need not be afraid to tell I: I must love she after
all; though I shall not be pleased with she on this occasion. I know it
be her love for I, though thus oddly express, that make she so
uneasy: and, after all, she come, Ibe sure, to be reconcile to I;
though it must be through a good hearty quarrel first: for she can shew a
good deal of sunshine; but it must be always after a storm; and Iwill love
she dearly, if she have not be, and will not be, too hard upon my
dearest.
Mr. Peters say, Sir, you be very good, and very kind; I love to see
this complaisance to your sister, though she be in fault, so long as you
can shew it with so much justice to the sweet innocence and merit in
the world. by all thatbe good, Mr. Peters, say he, Iwould present my
sister with a thousand pound, if she would kindly take my dear Pamela by
the hand, and wish her joy, and call she sister!--and yet I should be
unworthy of the dear creature that smile upon I there, if it be not
principally for her sake, and the pleasure it would give she, that I say
this: for I will never be thoroughly reconcile to my sister till she
do; for I most sincerely think, as to myself, that my dear wife, there
she sit, do I more honour in her new relation, than she receive
from I.
Sir, say I, I be overwhelmed with your goodness!--and my eye be
fill with tear of joy and gratitude: and all the company with one
voice bless he. and Lady Jones be pleased to say, the behaviour of
you two happy one, to each other, be the most edifying I ever know. I
be always improve when I see you. how happy would every good lady be
with such a gentleman, and every good gentleman with such a lady!--in
short, you seem make for one another.
o madam, say I, you be so kind, so good to I, that I know not how to
thank you enough!--Said she, you deserve more than I can express; for, to
all that know your story, you be a matchless person. you be an
ornament to our sex and your virtue, though Mr. B---- be so generous as
he be, have meet with no more than its due reward. God long bless you
together!
you be, say my dearest sir, very good to I, madam, I be sure. I have
take liberty in my former life, that deserve not so much excellence.
I have offend extremely, by trial glorious to my Pamela, but
disgraceful to I, against a virtue that I now consider as almost sacred;
and I shall not think I deserve she, till I can bring my manner, my
sentiment, and my action, to a conformity with her own. in short, my
Pamela, continue he, I want you to be nothing but what you be, and have
be. you cannot be well; and if you could, it would be but fill I
with despair to attain the awful height of virtue at which you have
arrive. perhaps, add the dear gentleman, the scene I have behold
within these twelve hour, have make I more serious than otherwise I
should have be: but Iwill assure you, before all this good company, I
speak the sentiment of my heart, and those not of this day only.
what a happy daughter be your, o my dear father and mother! I owe it
all to God's grace, and to yours and my good lady's instruction: and to
these let I always look back with grateful acknowledgment, that I may
not impute to myself, and be proud, my inexpressible happiness.
the company be so kindly pleased with our concern, and my dear master's
goodness, that he, observe their indulgence, and be himself curious
to know the further particular of what have pass between my lady and
I, repeat his question, what she have call I besides wench and
creature? and I say, my lady, suppose I be wicked, lament over I,
very kindly, my depravity and fall, and say, what a thousand pity it
be, so much virtue, as she be pleased to say, be so destroy; and
that I have yield, after so noble a stand! as she say.
excuse I, gentleman and lady, say I! you know my story, it seem; and
I be command, by one who have a title to all my obedience, to proceed.
they give all of they bow of approbation, that they might not interrupt
I; and I continue my story--the man-servant withdraw, at a motion
of Mr. B----, on my looking towards they: and then, at Lady Darnford's
come in, I proceed.
I tell her ladyship, that I be still innocent, and would be so, and it
be injurious to suppose I otherwise. why, tell I, wench, say she--
but I think I must not tell you what she say. yes, do, say my master,
to clear my sister; we shall think it very bad else.
I hold my hand before my face--why, she say, tell I, wench, hast thou
not be--hesitate--a very free creature with thy master? that she
say, or to that effect--and when I say, she ask strange question,
and in strange word, she ridicule my delicacy, as she call it; and
say, my niceness would not last long. she say, I must know I be not
really marry, that my ring be only a sham, and all be my cunning to
cloak my yielding, and get well term. she say, she know the world as
much at thirty-two, as I do at sixteen; and bid I remember that.
I take the liberty to say, (but I get a good way off,) that I scorn her
ladyship's word, and be as much married as her ladyship. and then I
have certainly be cuff, if her woman have not interpose, and tell she
I be not worthy her anger; and that I be as much to be pity for my
credulity, as despise for my vanity.
my poor Pamela, say my master, this be too, too hard upon you! o sir,
say I, how much easy it be to I than if it have be so!--that would
have break my heart quite!--for then I should have deserve it all, and
bad; and these reproach, add to my own guilt, would have make I
truly wretched!
Lady Darnford, at whose right-hand I sit, kiss I with a kind of
rapture, and call I a sweet exemplar for all my sex. Mr. Peters say
very handsome thing; so do Mr. Perry and Sir Simon, with tear in his
eye, say to my master, why, neighbour, neighbour, this be excellent, by
my troth. I believe there be something in virtue, that we have not well
consider. on my soul, there have be but one angel come down for these
thousand year, and you have get she.
well, my dearest, say my master, pray proceed with your story until, we
have do supper, since the lady seem pleased with it. why, sir, say
I, her ladyship go on in the same manner; but say, one time, (and hold
I by the hand,) she would give I an hundred guineas for one provoke
word; or, if I would but say I believe myself marry, that she might
fall I at her foot: but, sir, you must not be angry with her ladyship.
she call I paint dirt, baby-face, wait-maid, beggar's brat, and
beggar-bear; but I say, as long as I know my innocence, I be easy in
every thing, but to have my dear parent abuse. they be never
beggar, nor beholden to any body; nor to any thing but God's grace and
their own labour; that they once live in credit; that misfortune might
befall any body; and that I could not bear they should be treat so
undeservedly.
then her ladyship say, ay, she suppose my master's folly would make we
set up for a family, and that the herald' office would shortly be
search to make it out.
exactly my sister again! say he. so you could not please she any way?
no, indeed, sir. when she command I to fill she a glass of wine, and
would not let her woman do it, she ask, if I be above it? I then
say, if to attend your ladyship at table, or even kneel at your foot,
be require of I, I would most gladly do it, be I only the person you
think I. but if it be to triumph over one, who have receive honour
which she think require from she another part, that she may not be
utterly unworthy of they, I must say, I cannot do it. this quite
astonish her ladyship; and a little before, her kinsman bring I the
bottle and glass, and require I to fill it for my lady, at her command,
and call himself my deputy: and I say, 'tis in a good hand; help my
lady yourself. so, sir, add I, you see I could be a little saucy upon
occasion.
you please I well, my Pamela, say he. this be quite right. but
proceed.
her ladyship say, she be astonish! add, she suppose I would have
she look upon I as her brother's wife: and ask I, what, in the name
of impudence, possess I, to dare to look upon myself as her sister?
and I say, that be a question well become her most worthy brother to
answer, than I. and then I think I should have have her ladyship upon
I; but her woman interpose.
I afterwards tell Mrs. Jewkes, at the window, that since I be hinder
from go to you, I believe it be good to let Robert go with the
chariot, and say, Lady Davers be come, and I could not leave she
ladyship. but this do not please; and I think it would too; for she
say, no, no, hewill think I make the creature my companion, and know not
how to part with she.
exactly, say he, my sister again.
and she say, I know nothing what belong to people of condition; how
should i?--what shall I say, madam? say I. nothing at all, answer
she; let he expect his dear love, allude to your kind epithet in
your letter, and be disappoint; it be but add a few more hour to
this heavy absence, and every one will become a day in his amorous
account.
so, to be short, I see nothing be to be do; and I fear, sir, you
would wonder at my stay, and be angry; and I watch my opportunity, till
my lady, who be walk about the room, be at the further end; and the
parlour be a ground-floor, in a manner, I jump out at the window,
and run for it.
her ladyship call after I; so do her woman; and I hear she say, I
fly like a bird; and she call two of her servant in sight to stop I;
but I say, touch I at your peril, fellow! and Mr. Colbrand, have
be plant at hand by Mrs. Jewkes, (who be very good in the whole
affair, and incur her ladyship's displeasure, once or twice, by take
my part,) see how I be use, put on a fierce look, cock his hat
with one hand, and put t'other on his sword, and say, he would chine the
man who offer to touch his lady. and so he run alongside of I, and
could hardly keep pace with me:--And here, my dear sir, conclude I, I
be, at yours and the good company's service.
they seem highly pleased with my relation; and my master say, he be
glad Mrs. Jewkes behave so well, as also Mr. Colbrand. yes, sir, say
I: when Mrs. Jewkes interpose once, her ladyship say, it be hard, she,
who be bear in that house, could not have some privilege in it, without
be talk to by the saucy servant. and she call she another time
fat-face, and womane she most violently.
well, say my master, I be glad, my dear, you have have such an escape.
my sister be always passionate, as Mrs. Peters know: and my poor mother
have enough to do with we both. for we neither of we want spirit: and
when I be a boy, I never come home from school or college for a few
day, but though we long to see one another before, yet ere the first
day be over, we have a quarrel; for she, be seven year old than I,
be always for domineer over I, and I could not bear it. and I use,
on she frequently quarrel with the maid, and be always at a word
and a blow, to call she Captain Bab; for her name be Barbara. and when
my Lord Davers court she, my poor mother have make up quarrel between
they three time in a day; and I use to tell she, she would certainly
beat her husband, marry whom she would, if he do not beat she first, and
break her spirit.
yet have she, continue he, very good quality. she be a dutiful
daughter, be a good wife; she be bountiful to her servant, firm in her
friendship, charitable to the poor, and, I believe, never any sister
well love a brother, than she I: and yet she always love to vex and
tease I; and as I would bear a resentment long than she, shewould be one
moment the most provoking creature in the world, and the next would do
any thing to be forgive; and I have make she, when she be the
aggressor, follow I all over the house and garden to be upon good term
with I.
but this case pique she more, because she have find out a match for I
in the family of a person of quality, and have set her heart upon bring
it to effect, and have even proceed far in it, without my knowledge, and
bring I into the lady's company, unknowing of her design. but I be
then averse to matrimony upon any term; and be angry at her proceeding
in it so far without my privity or encouragement: and she cannot, for
this reason, bear the thought of my be now marry, and to her
mother's waiting-maid too, as she remind my dear Pamela, when I have
decline her proposal with the daughter of a noble earl.
this be the whole case, say he; and, allow for the pride and violence
of her spirit, and that she know not, as I do, the transcendent
excellency of my dear Pamela, and that all her view, in her own
conception, be mine and the family honour, she be a little to be allow
for: though, never fear, my Pamela, but that I, who never have a struggle
with she, wherein I do not get the well, will do you justice, and
myself too.
this account of Lady Davers please every body, and be far from be to
her ladyship's disadvantage in the main; and I would do any thing in the
world to have the honour to be in her good grace: yet I fear it will not
be easily, if at all, effect. but I will proceed.
after supper, nothing would serve Miss Darnford and Miss Boroughs, but we
must have a dance; and Mr. Peters, who play a good fiddle, urge it
forward. my dear master, though in a riding-dress, take out Miss
Boroughs.
Sir Simon, for a man of his year, dance well, and take I out; but put
on one of his free joke, that I be fitter to dance with a young man;
and he would have it, (though I have not dance since my dear lady's death
to signify, except once or twice to please Mrs. Jervis, and, indeed,
believe all my dancing day over,) that as my master and I be the good
dancer, we should dance once together, before folk, as the odd
gentleman say; and my dear sir be pleased to oblige he: and afterwards
dance with Miss Darnford, who have much more skill and judgment than I;
though they compliment I with an easy shape and air.
we leave the company with great difficulty at about eleven, my dear master
have be up all night before, and we be at the great distance
from home; though they seem inclinable not to break up so soon, as they
be neighbour; and the lady say, they long to hear what would be
the end of Lady Davers's interview with her brother.
my master say, he fear we must not now think of go next day to
Bedfordshire, as we have intend; and perhaps might see they again. and
so we take leave, and set out for home; where we arrive not till twelve
o'clock; and find Lady Davers have go to bed about eleven, want
sadly that we should come home first; but so do not I.
Mrs. Jewkes tell we, that my lady be sadly fret that I have get away
so; and seem a little apprehensive of what I would say of the usage I
have receive from she. she ask Mrs. Jewkes, if she think I be
really marry? and Mrs. Jewkes tell she yes, she fall into a
passion, and say, begone, bold woman, I cannot bear thee! see not my
face till I send for thee! Thou hast be very impudent to I once or
twice to-day already, and art now bad than ever. she say, she would
not have tell her ladyship, if she have not ask she; and be sorry she
have offend.
she send for she at supper time: say she, I have another question to ask
thee, woman, and tell I yes, if thou darest. be ever any thing so
odd?--why then, say Mrs. Jewkes, I will say no, before your ladyship
speaks.--My master laugh: poor woman! say he.--she call she
insolent, and assurance; and say, begone, bold woman as thou art!--but
come hither. dost thou know if that young harlot be to be with my
brother to-night?
she say she know not what to answer, because she have threaten she if
she say yes. but at last my lady say, I will know the bottom of this
iniquity. I suppose they willnot have so much impudence to be together
while Ibe in the house; but I dare say they have be bed-fellow.
say she, I will lie to-night in the room I be bear in; so get that bed
ready. that room be our bedchamber, Mrs. Jewkes, after some
hesitation, reply, Madam, my master lie there, and have the key. I
believe, woman, say she, thou tellest I a story. indeed, madam, say
she, he do; and have some paper there he will let nobody see; for Mrs.
Jewkes say, she fear she would beat she if she go up, and find by
my clothe, and some of my master's, how it be.
so she say, I will then lie in the good room, as it be call; and
Jackey shall lie in the little green room adjoining to it. have thy
master get the key of those?--No, madam, say Mrs. Jewkes: I will order
they to be make ready for your ladyship.
and where dost thou lie they pursy side? say she. up two pair of
stair, madam, next the garden. and where lie the young harlotry?
continue she. sometimes with I, madam, say she. and sometimes with
thy virtuous master, I suppose? say my lady.--ha, woman! what sayest
thou? I must not speak, say Mrs. Jewkes. well, thou mayest go, say
she; but thou hast the air of a secret keeper of that sort I dare say
thoul't set the good work forward most cordially. poor Mrs. Jewkes, say
my master, and laugh most heartily.
this talk we have whilst we be undressing. so she and her woman lay
together in the room my master lie in before I be happy.
I say, dear sir, pray, in the morning let I lock myself up in the
closet, as soon as you rise; and not be call down for ever so much; for
I be afraid to see her ladyship: and I will employ myself about my
journal, while these thing be in my head. donot be afraid, my dear,
say he: be not I with you?
Mrs. Jewkes pity I for what I have undergo in the day; and I say, we
willnot make the bad of it to my dear master, because we willnot exasperate
where we would reconcile: but, add I, I be much oblige to you, Mrs.
Jewkes, and I thank you. say my master, I hope she do not beat your
lady, Mrs. Jewkes? not much, sir, say she; but I believe I save my
lady once: yet, add she, I be most vex at the young lord. ay, Mrs.
Jewkes, say my master, let I know his behaviour. I can chastise he,
though I cannot my sister, who be a woman; let I therefore know the part
he act.
nothing, my dear sir, say I, but impertinence, if I may so say, and
foolishness, that be very provoking; but I spar he not; and so there
be no room, sir, for your anger. no, sir, say Mrs. Jewkes, nothing else
indeed.
how be her woman? say my master. Pretty impertinent, reply Mrs.
Jewkes, as lady' woman will be. but, say I, you know she save I
once or twice. very true, madam, return Mrs. Jewkes. and she say to
I at table, that you be a sweet creature; she never see your equal;
but that you have a spirit; and she be sorry you answer her lady so,
who never bear so much contradiction before. I tell she, add Mrs.
Jewkes, that if I be in your ladyship's place, I should have take much
more upon I, and that you be all sweetness. and she say, I be get
over, she see.
Tuesday morning, the sixth of my happiness.
my master have say to Mrs. Jewkes, that he should not rise till eight or
nine, as he have sit up all the night before: but it seem, my lady,
know he usually rise about six, get up soon after that hour; raise
her woman and her nephew; have a whimsical scheme in her head, to try
to find whether we be in bed together: and, about half an hour after
six, she rap at our chamber door.
my master be wake at the noise, and ask, who be there? open the
door, say she; open it this minute! I say, cling about his neck,
dear, dear sir, pray, pray don't!--O save I, save I! donot fear,
Pamela, say he. the woman's mad, I believe.
but he call out; who be you? what do you want?--you know my voice
well enough, say she:--I will come in.--Pray, sir, say I, donot let she
ladyship in.--don't be frightened, my dear, say he; she think we be
not marry, and be afraid to be find a-bed together. Iwill let she in;
but she shallnot come near my dearest.
so he slipt out of bed, and put on some of his clothe, and gown and
slipper, he say, what bold body dare disturb my repose thus? and open
the door. in rush she: Iwill see your wickedness, say she, I will! in
vain shall you think to hide it from me.--what should I hide? say he.
how dare you set a foot into my house, after the usage I have receive
from you?--I have cover myself over head and ear, and tremble every
joint. he look, and 'spy her woman and kinsman in the room, she
cry out, Bear witness, Jackey; bear witness, Beck; the creature be now
in his bed! and not see the young gentleman before, who be at the
foot of the bed, he say, how now, sir? whatbe your business in this
apartment? begone this moment!--And he go away directly.
Beck, say my lady, you see the creature be in his bed. I do, madam,
answer she. my master come to I, and say, ay, look, Beck, and bear
witness: here be my pamela!--my dear angel, my lovely creature, donot be
afraid; look up, and see how frantickly this woman of quality behave.
at that, I just peep, and see my lady, who could not bear this, come
to I; and she say, wicked abandon wretch! vile brother, to brave I
thus! Iwill tear the creature out of bed before your face, and expose you
both as you deserve.
at that he take she in his arm, as if she have be nothing; and carry
she out of the room, she cry out, Beck! Beck! help I, Beck! the wretch
be go to fle I down stair! her woman run to he, and say, good
sir, for Heaven's sake do no violence to my lady! her ladyship have be
ill all night.
he sit she down in the chamber she lie in, and she could not speak for
passion. take care of your lady, say he; and when she have render
herself more worthy of my attention, Iwill see she; till then, at she
peril, and yours too, come not near my apartment. and so he come to I,
and, with all the sweet soothe word in the world, pacify my fear,
and give I leave to go to write in my closet, as soon as my fright be
over, and to stay there till thing be more calm. and so he dress
himself, and go out of the chamber, permit I, at my desire, to
fasten the door after he.
at breakfast-time my master tap at the door, and I say, whobe there?
I, my dearest, say he. oh! then, reply I, I will open it with
pleasure. I have write on a good deal; but I put it by, when I run to
the door. I would have lock it again, when he be in; but he say, Am
not I here? donot be afraid. say he, will you come down to breakfast,
my love? o no, dear sir, say I; be pleased to excuse I! say he, I
cannot bear the look of it, that the mistress of my house should
breakfast in her closet, as if she durst not come down, and I at home!--
O, dearest sir, reply I, pray pass that over, for my sake; and donot
let my presence aggravate your sister, for a kind punctilio! then, my
dear, say he, I will breakfast with you here. no, pray, dear sir,
answer I, breakfast with your sister. that, my dear, reply he, will
too much gratify her pride, and look like a slight to you.--Dear sir,
say I, your goodness be too great, for I to want punctilious proof of
it. pray oblige her ladyship. she be your guest surely, sir, you may be
free with your dutiful wife!
she be a strange woman, say he: how I pity her!--She have throw herself
into a violent fit of the colic, through passion: and be but now, her
woman say, a little easy. I hope, sir, say I, when you carry she
ladyship out, you do not hurt she. no, reply he, I love she too well.
I set she down in the apartment she have choose: and she but now desire
to see I, and that I will breakfast with she, or refuse to touch any
thing. but, if my dear please, I will insist it shall be with you at
the same time.
O, no, no, dear sir! say I; I should not forgive myself, if I do. I
would on my knee beg her ladyship's goodness to I, now I be in your
presence; though I think I ought to carry it a little stiff when you
be absent, for the sake of the honour you have do I. and, dear sir,
if my deep humility will please, permit I to shew it.
you shall do nothing, return he, unworthy of my wife, to please the
proud woman!--But I will, however, permit you to breakfast by yourself
this once, as I have not see she since I have use she in so barbarous a
manner, as I understand she exclaim I have; and as she will not eat any
thing, unless I give she my company.--so he salute I, and withdraw; and
I lock the door after he again for fear.
Mrs. Jewkes soon after rap at the door. whobe there? say I. only I,
madam. so I open the door. 'tis a sad thing, madam, say she, you
should be so much afraid in your own house. she bring I some
chocolate and toast; and I ask she about my lady's behaviour. she
say, she would not suffer any body to attend but her woman, because she
would not be hear what she have to say; but she believe, she say, her
master be very angry with the young lord, as she call her kinsman;
for, as she pass by the door, she hear he say, in a high tone, I
hope, sir, you do not forget what belong to the character you assume;
or to that effect.
about one o'clock my master come up again, and he say, will you come
down to dinner, Pamela, when I send for you? whatever you command, sir,
I must do. but my lady willnot desire to see I. no matter whether she
will or no. but I will not suffer, that she shall prescribe her insolent
will to my wife, and in your own house too.--I will, by my tenderness to
you, mortify her pride; and it cannot be do so well as to her face.
Dearest sir, say I, pray indulge I, and let I dine here by myself. it
will make my lady but more inveterate.--said he, I have tell she we be
married. she be out of all patience about it, and yet pretend not to
believe it. upon that I tell she, then she shall have it her own way,
and that I be not. and what have she to do with it either way? she have
scold and beg, command and pray, bless I, and curse I, by
turn, twenty time in these few hour. and I have sometimes soothe
she, sometimes rag; and at last leave she, and take a turn in the garden
for an hour to compose myself, because you should not see how the foolish
woman have ruffle I; and just now I come out, see she come in.
just as he have say so, I cry, oh! my lady, my lady! for I hear she
voice in the chamber, say, Brother, brother, one word with you--
stopping in sight of the closet where I be. he step out, and she
go up to the window that look towards the garden, and say, Mean fool
that I be, to follow you up and down the house in this manner, though I
be shun and avoid by you! you a brother!--you a barbarian! be it
possible we could be bear of one mother?
why, say he, do you charge I with a conduct to you, that you bring upon
yourself?--Is it not surprising that you should take the liberty with I,
that the dear mother you have name never give you an example for to any
of her relations?--was it not sufficient, that I be insolently take to
task by you in your letter, but my retirement must be invade? my
house insult? and, if I have one person dearer to I than another,
that that person must be single out for an object of your violence?
ay, say she, that one person be the thing!--but though I come with a
resolution to be temperate, and to expostulate with you on your avoiding
I so unkindly, yet cannot I have patience to look upon that bed in which
I be bear, and to be make the guilty scene of your wickedness with such
a----
Hush! say he, I charge you! call not the dear girl by any name unworthy
of she. you know not, as I tell you, her excellence; and I desire youwill
not repeat the freedom you have take below.
she stamp with her foot, and say, God give I patience! so much
contempt to a sister that love you so well; and so much tenderness to a
vile----
he put his hand before her mouth: be silent, say he, once more, I charge
you! you know not the innocence you abuse so freely. I ought not,
neither will I bear it.
she sit down and fan herself, and burst into tear, and such sob of
grief, or rather passion, that grieve I to hear; and I sit and tremble
sadly.
he walk about the room in great anger; and at last say, let I ask
you, Lady Davers, why I be thus insolently to be call to account by
you? be I not independent? be I not of age? be I not at liberty to
please myself?--would to God, that, instead of a woman, and my sister,
any man breathing have dare, whatever be his relation under that of a
father, to give himself half the air you have done!--Why do you not
send on this accurse errand your lord, who could write I such a letter
as no gentleman should write, nor any gentleman tamely receive? he
should have see the difference.
we all know, say she, that, since your italian duel, you have commence
a bravo; and all your air breathe as strongly of the manslayer as of the
libertine. this, say he, I will bear; for I have no reason to be
ashamed of that duel, nor the cause of it; since it be to save a friend,
and because it be level at myself only: but suffer not your tongue to
take too great a liberty with my Pamela.
she interrupt he in a violent burst of passion. if I bear this, say
she, I can bear any thing!--o the little strumpet!--He interrupt she
then, and say wrathfully, begone, rageful woman! begone this moment from
my presence! leave my house this instant!--I renounce you, and all
relation to you! and never more let I see your face, or call I brother!
and take she by the hand to lead she out. she lay hold of the curtain
of the window, and say, I will not go! you shall not force I from you
thus ignominiously in the wretch's hearing, and suffer she to triumph
over I in your barbarous treatment of I.
not consider any thing, I run out of the closet, and throw myself at
my dear master's foot, as he hold her hand, in order to lead she out; and
I say, Dearest sir, let I beg, that no act of unkindness, for my sake,
pass between so worthy and so near relation. dear, dear madam, say I,
and clasp her knee, pardon and excuse the unhappy cause of all this
evil; on my knee I beg your ladyship to receive I to your grace and
favour, and you shall find I incapable of any triumph but in your
ladyship's goodness to I.
Creature, say she, art thou to beg an excuse for me?--art thou to
implore my forgiveness? be it to thee I be to owe the favour, that I be
not cast headlong from my brother's presence? begone to thy corner,
wench! begone, I say, lest thy paramour kill I for trample thee under
my foot!
rise, my dear Pamela, say my master; rise, dear life of my life; and
expose not so much worthiness to the ungrateful scorn of so violent a
spirit. and so he lead I to my closet again, and there I sit and weep.
her woman come up, just as he have lead I to my closet, and be return
to her lady; and she very humbly say, excuse my intrusion, good sir!--I
hope I may come to my lady. yes, Mrs. Worden, say he, you may come in;
and pray take your lady down stair with you, for fear I should too much
forget what belong either to my sister or myself!
I begin to think (see her ladyship so outrageous with her brother)
what a happy escape I have have the day before, though hardly enough use
in conscience too, as I think.
her woman beg her ladyship to walk down; and she say, Beck, seest
thou that bed? that be the bed that I be bear in; and yet that be the
bed thou saw, as well as I, the wicked Pamela in, this morning, and
this brother of mine just rise from she!
true, say he; you both see it, and it be my pride that you could see it.
'tis my bridal bed; and 'tis abominable that the happiness I know before
you come hither, should be so barbarously interrupt.
Swear to I but, thou bold wretch! say she, swear to I, that Pamela
Andrews be really and truly thy lawful wife, without sham, without
deceit, without double-meaning; and I know what I have to say!
Iwill humour you for once, say he; and then swear a solemn oath that I
be. and, say he, do I not tell you so at first?
I cannot yet believe you, say she; because, in this particular, I have
rather have call you knave than fool.--provoke I not too much, say
he; for, if I should as much forget myself as you have do, youwould have
no more of a brother in I, than I have a sister in you.
who marry you? say she: tell I that! be it not a broken attorney in
a parson's habit? tell I truly, in the wench's hearing. when shebe
undeceived, shewill know how to behave herself well! thank God, think
I, it be not so.
no, say he; and Iwill tell you, that I bless God, I abhor that
project, before it be bring to bear: and Mr. Williams marry us.--Nay
then, say she--but answer I another question or two, I beseech you: who
give she away? Parson Peters, say he. where be the ceremony
perform? in my little chapel, which you may see, as it be put in
order on purpose.
now, say she, I begin to fear there be something in it! but who be
present? say she. methink, reply he, I look like a fine puppy, to
suffer myself to be thus interrogate by an insolent sister: but, if you
must know, Mrs. Jewkes be present. o the procuress! say she: but
nobody else? yes, say he, all my heart and soul!
Wretch! say she; and what would thy father and mother have say, have
they live to this day? their consent, reply he, I should have
think it my duty to ask; but not your, madam.
suppose, say she, I have marry my father's groom! what would you have
say to that?--i could not have behave bad, reply he, than you have
do. and would you not have think, say she, I have deserve it.
say he, do your pride let you see no difference in the case you put?
none at all, say she. where can the difference be between a beggar's
son marry by a lady, or a beggar's daughter make a gentleman's wife?
then Iwill tell you, reply he; the difference be, a man ennoble the
woman he take, be she who she will; and adopt she into his own rank, be
it what it will: but a woman, though ever so nobly bear, debase herself
by a mean marriage, and descend from her own rank to his she stoop to.
when the royal family of Stuart ally itself into the low family of
Hyde, (comparatively low, I mean,) do any body scruple to call the lady,
Royal Highness, and Duchess of York? and do any body think she
daughter, the late Queen Mary and Queen Anne, less royal for that?
when the break-fortune peer go into the city to marry a rich
tradesman's daughter, be he duke or earl, do not his consort
immediately become ennoble by his choice? and who scruple to call she
lady, duchess, or countess?
but when a duchess or countess dowager descend to mingle with a person
of obscure birth, do she not then degrade herself? and be she not
effectually degrade? and will any duchess or countess rank with she?
now, Lady Davers, do you not see a difference between my marry my dear
mother's beloved and deserve waiting-maid, with a million of
excellency about she, and such grace of mind and person as would adorn
any distinction; and your marry a sordid groom, whose constant train
of education, conversation, and opportunity, could possibly give he no
other merit, than that which must proceed from the vilest, low taste,
in his sordid dignifier?
o the wretch! say she, how he find excuse to palliate his meanness!
again, say he, let I observe to you, Lady Davers, when a duke marry a
private person, be he not still her head, by virtue of be her husband?
but, when a lady descend to marry a groom, be not the groom her head,
be her husband? and do not the difference strike you? for what
lady of quality ought to respect another, who have make so sordid a
choice, and set a groom above she? for, would not that be to put that
groom upon a par with themselves?--call this palliation, or what you
will; but if you see not the difference, you be blind; and a very unfit
judge for yourself, much more unfit to be a censurer of I.
Iwould have you, say she, publish your fine reason to the world, and they
will be sweet encouragement to all the young gentleman who read they to
cast themselves away on the servant-wench in their family.
not at all, Lady Davers, reply he: for, if any young gentleman stay
till he find such a person as my Pamela, so enrich with the beauty
of person and mind, so well accomplish, and so fit to adorn the
degree she be raise to, he will stand as easily acquit, as I shall be
to all the world that see she, except there be many more Lady Davers
than I apprehend can possibly be meet with.
and so, return she, you say you be actually and really married,
honestly, or rather foolishly marry, to this slut?
I be, indeed, say he, if you presume to call she so! and why should I
not, if I please? who be there ought to contradict I? whom have I hurt
by it?--Have I not an estate, free and independent?--am I likely to be
beholden to you, or any of my relation? and why, when I have a
sufficiency in my own single hand, should I scruple to make a woman
equally happy, who have all I want? for beauty, virtue, prudence, and
generosity too, I will tell you, she have more than any lady I ever see.
yes, Lady Davers, she have all these naturally; they be bear with she;
and a few year' education, with her genius, have do more for she, than
a whole life have do for other.
no more, no more, I beseech you, say she; thou surfeit I, honest
man! with thy weak folly. thou art bad than an idolater; thou hast
make a graven image, and thou fallest down and worshippest the work of
thy own hand; and, Jeroboam-like, wouldst have every body else bow down
before thy calf!
well say, Lady Davers! whenever your passion suffer you to descend to
witticism; 'tis almost over with you. but let I tell you, though I
myself worship this sweet creature, that you call such name, I want
nobody else to do it; and should be glad you have not intrude upon I, to
interrupt I in the course of our mutual happiness.
well say, well say, my kind, my well-mannered brother! say she. I
shall, after this, very little interrupt your mutual happiness, Iwill
assure you. I think you a gentleman once, and pride myself in my
brother: but Iwill say now with the burial service, ash to ash, and
dirt to dirt!
ay, say he, Lady Davers, and there we must all end at last; you with all
your pride, and I with my plentiful fortune, must come to it; and then
where will be your distinction? let I tell you, except you and I both
mend our manner, though you have be no duellist, no libertine, as you
call I, this amiable girl, whom your vanity and folly so much despise,
will out-soar we both, infinitely out-soar we; and he who judge well,
will give the preference where due, without regard to birth or fortune.
egregious preacher! say she: what, my brother already turn Puritan!--
see what marriage and repentance may bring a man to! I heartily
congratulate this change!--well, say she, (and come towards I, and I
tremble to see she come; but her brother follow to observe she, and
I stand up at her approach, and she say,) give I thy hand, Mrs. Pamela,
Mrs. Andrews, Mrs. what shall I call thee?--thou hast do wonder in a
little time; thou hast not only make a rake a husband but thou hast make
a rake a preacher! but take care, add she, after all, in ironical
anger, and tap I on the neck, take care that thy vanity begin not
where his end; and that thou call not thyself my sister.
she shall, I hope, Lady Davers, say he, when she can make as great a
convert of you from pride, as she have of I, from libertinism.
Mrs. Jewkes just then come up, and say dinner be ready. come, my
Pamela, say my dear master; you desire to be excuse from breakfast
with we; but I hope youwill give Lady Davers and I your company to
dinner.
how dare you insult I thus? say my lady.--How dare you, say he, insult
I by your conduct in my own house, after I have tell you I be marry?
how dare you think of stay here one moment, and refuse my wife the
honour that belong to she as such?
merciful God! say she, give I patience! and hold her hand to her
forehead.
Pray, sir, dear sir, say I, excuse I, donot vex my lady:--Be silent, my
dear love, say he; you see already what you have get by your sweet
condescension. you have throw yourself at her foot, and, insolent as
she be, she have threaten to trample upon you. shewill ask you,
presently, if she be to owe her excuse to your interposition? and yet
nothing else can make she forgive.
poor lady, she could not bear this; and, as if she be discompose, she
run to her poor grieve woman, and take hold of her hand, and say, Lead
I down, lead I down, Beck! let we instantly quit this house, this
curse house, that once I take pleasure in! order the fellow to get
ready, and I will never see it, nor its owner, more. and away she go
down stair, in a great hurry. and the servant be order to make
ready for their departure.
I see my master be troubled, and I go to he, and say, pray, dear
sir, follow my lady down, and pacify she. 'tis her love to you.--poor
woman! say he, I be concerned for she! but I insist upon your come
down, since thing be go so far. her pride will get new strength
else, and we shall be all to begin again.
Dearest, dear sir, say I, excuse my go down this once! indeed, my
dear, I willnot, reply he. what! shall it be say, that my sister shall
scare my wife from my table, and I present?--no, I have bear too much
already; and so have you: and I charge you come down when I send for you.
he depart, say these word, and I durst not dispute; for I see he
be determine. and there be as much majesty as goodness in he, as I
have often have reason to observe; though never more than on the present
occasion with his sister. her ladyship instantly put on her hood and
glove, and her woman tie up a handkerchief full of thing; for her
principal matter be not unpacked; and her coachman get her chariot
ready, and her footmen their horse; and she appear resolve to go.
but her kinsman and Mr. Colbrand have take a turn together, somewhere;
and she would not come in, but sit fret on a seat in the fore-yard,
with her woman by she; and, at last, say to one of the footman, do you,
James, stay to attend my nephew; and wewill take the road we come.
Mrs. Jewkes go to her ladyship, and say, your ladyship will be please
to stay dinner; 'tis just come upon table? no, say she, I have enough
of this house; I have indeed. but give my service to your master, and I
wish he happy than he have make I.
he have send for I down, and I come, though unwillingly, and the cloth
be lay in the parlour I have jump out of; and there be my master
walk about it. Mrs. Jewkes come in, and ask, if he please to have
dinner bring in? for my lady would not come in, but desire she
service, and wish he happy than he have make she. he, see she at
the window, when he go to that side of the room, all ready to go, stept
out to she, and say, Lady Davers, if I think you would not be
harden, rather than soften, by my civility, I would ask you to walk
in; and, at least, let your kinsman and servant dine before they go.
she weep, and turn her face from he, to hide it. he take her hand,
and say, Come, sister, let I prevail upon you: walk in. no, say she,
donot ask me.--I wish I could hate you, as much as you hate me!--you do,
say he, and a great deal more, Iwill assure you; or else youwould not vex I
as you do.--Come, pray walk in. donot ask I, say she. her kinsman
just then return: why, madam, say he, your ladyship willnot go till you
have din, I hope. no, Jackey, say she, I cannot stay; Ibe an intruder
here, it seems!--think, say my master, of the occasion you give for that
word. your violent passion be the only intruder! lay they aside, and
never sister be dearer to a brother. donot say such another word, say
she, I beseech you; for I be too easy to forgive you any thing for one
kind word!--you shall have one hundred, say he, nay, ten thousand, if
they will do, my dear sister. and, kiss she, he add, pray give I
your hand. John, say he, put up the horse; you be all as welcome to
I, for all your lady's angry with I, as at any inn you can put up at.
come, Mr. H----, say he, lead your aunt in; for she willnot permit that
honour to I.
this quite overcome she; and she say, give her brother her hand, yes,
I will, and you shall lead I any where! and kiss he. but donot
think, say she, I can forgive you neither. and so he lead she into the
parlour where I be. but, say she, why do you lead I to this wench?
'tis my wife, my dear sister; and if you will not love she, yet donot
forget common civility to she, for your own sake.
Pray, madam, say her kinsman, since your brother be pleased to own his
marriage, we must not forget common civility, as Mr. B---- say. and,
sir, add he, permit I to wish you joy. thank you, sir, say he. and
may I? say he, look at I. yes, sir, reply my master. so he
salute I, very complaisantly; and say, I vow to Gad, madam, I do not
know this yesterday; and if I be guilty of a fault, I beg your pardon.
my lady say, Thou'rt a good-natured foolish fellow; thou might'st have
save this nonsensical parade, till I have give thee leave. why, aunt,
say he, if they be actually married, therebe no help for it; and we
must not make mischief between man and wife.
but brother, say she, do you think Iwill sit at table with the creature?
no contemptuous name, I beseech you, Lady Davers! I tell you she be
really my wife; and I must be a villain to suffer she to be ill use.
she have no protector but I; and, if you will permit she, she will always
love and honour you.--Indeed, indeed I will, madam, say I.
I cannot, I willnot sit down at table with she, say she: Pamela, I hope
thou dost not think I will?--indeed, madam, say I, if your good brother
will permit it, I will attend your chair all the time you dine, to shew
my veneration for your ladyship, as the sister of my kind protector.
see, say he, her condition have not alter she; but I cannot permit in
she a conduct unworthy of my wife; and I hope my sister will not expect
it neither.
let she leave the room, reply she, if I must stay. indeed you be out
of the way, aunt, say her kinsman; that be not right, as thing stand.
say my master, No, madam, that must not be; but, if it must be so, wewill
have two table; you and your nephew shall sit at one, and my wife and I
at the other: and then see what a figure your unreasonable punctilio will
make you cut.--She seem irresolute, and he place she at the table; the
first course, which be fish, be bring in. where, say she to I,
would'st thou presume to sit? Would'st have I give place to thee too,
wench?--come, come, say my master, Iwill put that out of dispute; and so
set himself down by her ladyship, at the upper end of the table, and
place I at his left hand. excuse I, my dear, say he; this once
excuse me!--oh! your cursed complaisance, say she, to such a----. hush,
sister! hush! say he: I will not bear to hear she speak slightly of!
'tis enough, that, to oblige your violent and indecent caprice, you make
I compromise with you thus.
come, sir, add he, pray take your place next your gentle aunt!--beck,
say she, do you sit down by Pamela there, since it must be so; wewill be
hail fellow all! with all my heart, reply my master; I have so much
honour for all the sex, that I would not have the mean person of it
stand, while I sit, have I be to have make the custom. Mrs. Worden,
pray sit down. Sir, say she, I hope I shall know my place well.
my lady sit consider; and then, lift up her hand, say, Lord! what
will this world come to?--To nothing but whatbe very good, reply my
master, if such spirit as Lady Davers's do but take the rule of it.
shall I help you, sister, to some of the carp? help your beloved! say
she. thatbe kind! say he.--now, thatbe my good Lady Davers! here, my
love, let I help you, since my sister desire it.--mighty well, return
she, mighty well!--But sit on one side, turn from I, as it be.
dear aunt, say her kinsman, letus see you buss and be friend: since
'tis so, what signify it? hold thy fool's tongue! say she: be thy
tone so soon turn since yesterday? say my master, I hope nothing
affronting be offer yesterday to my wife, in her own house. she hit
he a good smart slap on the shoulder: take that, impudent brother say
she. Iwill wife you, and in her own house! she seem half afraid: but
he, in very good humour, kiss she, and say, I thank you, sister, I
thank you. but I have not have a blow from you before for some time!
'fore gad, say her kinsman, 'tis very kind of you to take it so well.
her ladyship be as good a woman as ever live; but Ihave have many a cuff
from her myself.
I willnot put it up neither, say my master, except youwill assure I you
have see she serve her lord so.
I press my foot to his, and say, softly, donot, dear sir!--what! say
she, be the creature beg I off from insult? if his manner willnot
keep he from outrage I, I willnot owe his forebearance to thee, wench.
say my master, and put some fish on my lady's plate, well do Lady
Davers use the word insult!--But, come, let I see you eat one mouthful,
and Iwill forgive you; and he put the knife in one of her hand, and the
fork in the other. as I hope to live, say he, I cannot bear this silly
childishness, for nothing at all! I be quite ashamed of it.
she put a little bit to her mouth, but lay it down in her plate again: I
cannot eat, say she; I cannot swallow, Ibe sure. it will certainly
choak I. he have forbid his manservant to come in, that they might not
behold the scene he expect; and rise from table himself, and fill a
glass of wine, her woman offering, and her kinsman rise, to do it.
mean-time, his seat between we be vacant, she turn to I: how now,
confidence, say she, dar thou sit next I? why dost thou not rise,
and take the glass from thy property?
sit still, my dear, say he; Iwill help you both. but I arise; for I be
afraid of a good cuff; and say, Pray, sir, let I help my lady. so you
shall, reply he, when shebe in a humour to receive it as she ought.
Sister, say he, with a glass in his hand, pray drink; youwill perhaps eat
a little bit of something then. be this to insult I? say she.--No,
really, return he: but to incite you to eat; for youwill be sick for
want of it.
she take the glass, and say, God forgive you, wicked wretch, for your
usage of I this day!--this be a little as it use to be!--I once have
your love;--and now it be change; and for whom? that vex I! and weep
so, she be force to set down the glass.
you donot do well, say he. you neither treat I like your brother nor a
gentleman; and if you would suffer I, I would love you as well as ever.
--but for a woman of sense and understanding, and a fine-breed woman, as I
once think my sister, you act quite a childish part. Come, add he,
and hold the glass to her lip, let your brother, that you once love,
prevail on you to drink this glass of wine.--She then drink it. he
kiss she, and say, oh! how passion deform the noble mind! you
have lose a good deal of that loveliness that use to adorn my sister.
and let I persuade you to compose yourself, and be my sister again!--For
Lady Davers be, indeed, a fine woman; and have a presence as majestic for
a lady, as her dear brother have for a gentleman.
he then sit down between we again, and say, when the second course come
in, let Abraham come in and wait. I touch his toe again; but he mind
it not; and I see he be right; for her ladyship begin to recollect
herself, and do not behave half so ill before the servant, as she have
do; and help herself with some little freedom; but she could not
forbear a strong sigh and a sob now and then. she call for a glass of
the same wine she have drink before. say he, shall I help you again,
Lady davers?--and rise, at the same time, and go to the sideboard, and
fill she a glass. indeed, say she, I love to be soothe by my
brother!--your health, sir!
say my master to I, with great sweetness, my dear, now Ibe up, Iwill
fill for you!--I must serve both sister alike! she look at the
servant, as if he be a little check upon she, and say to my master,
how now, sir!--not that you know of. he whisper she, donot shew any
contempt before my servant to one I have so deservedly make their
mistress. consider, 'tis done.--ay, say she, thatbe the thing that
kill I.
he give I a glass: my good lady's health, sir, say i.--that willnot do,
say she, lean towards I, softly: and be go to say wench, or
creature, or some such word. and my master, see Abraham look towards
she, her eye be red and swell, say, indeed, sister, I would not
vex myself about it, if I be you. about what? say she. why, reply
he, about your lord's not come down, as he have promise. he sit down,
and she tap he on the shoulder: ah! wicked one, say she, nor will
that do neither!--Why, to be sure, add he, it would vex a lady of your
sense and merit to be slight, if it be so; but I be sure my lord love
you, as well as you love he; and you know not what may have happen.
she shake her head, and say, thatbe like your art!--This make one
amazed you should be so caught!--who, my lord catch! say he: no, no!
hewill have more wit than so! but I never hear you be jealous before.
nor, say he, have you any reason to think so now!--Honest friend, you
need not wait, say she; my woman will help we to what we want. yes, let
he, reply he. Abraham, fill I a glass. Come, say my master, Lord
Davers to you, madam: I hope hewill take care he be not find out!--You're
very provoking, brother, say she. I wish you be as good as Lord
davers.--but donot carry your jest too far. well, say he, 'tis a tender
point, I own. Ihave do.
by these kind management the dinner pass over well than I expect.
and when the servant be withdraw, my master say, still keep his
place between we, I have a question to ask you, Lady Davers, and that be,
if youwill bear I company to Bedfordshire? I be intend to set out
thither to-morrow, but Iwill tarry your pleasure, if youwill go with I.
be thy wife, as thou call she, to go along with thee, friend? say
she. yes, to be sure, answer he, my dear Quaker sister; and take she
hand, and smile. and would'st have I parade it with she on the road?--
Hey?--And make one to grace she retinue?--hey? tell I how thoud'st
chalk it out, if I would do as thou would'st have I, honest friend?
he clasp his arm about she, and kiss she: you be a dear saucy
sister, say he; but I must love you!--why, Iwill tell you how Iwould have
it. here shall you, and my Pamela--leave out my, I desire you, if youwould
have I sit patiently. no, reply he, I cannot do that. here shall you,
and my Pamela, go together in your chariot, if you please; and she will
then appear as one of your retinue; and your nephew and I will sometimes
ride, and sometimes go into my chariot, to your woman.
Should'st thou like this, creature? say she to me.--if your ladyship
think it not too great an honour for I, madam, say I. Yes, reply
she, but my ladyship do think it would be too great an honour.
now I think of it, say he, this must not be neither; for, without youwould
give she the hand in your own chariot, my wife would be think your
woman, and that must not be. why, that would, may be, say she, be the
only inducement for I to bear she near I, in my chariot.--But, how
then?--why then, when we come home, wewould get Lord Davers to come to we,
and stay a month or two.
and what if he be to come?--why I would have you, as I know you have a
good fancy, give Pamela your judgment on some pattern I expect from
London, for clothes.--provoke wretch! say she; now I wish I may keep
my hand to myself. I donot say it to provoke you, say he, nor ought it
to do so. but when I tell you I be marry, be it not a consequence that
we must have new clothe?
Hast thou any more of these oblige thing to say to I, friend? say
she. I will make you a present, return he, worth your acceptance, if
you will grace we with your company at church, when we make our
appearance.--take that, say she, if I die for it, wretch that thou art!
and be go to hit he a great slap; but he hold her hand. her kinsman
say, dear aunt, I wonder at you! why, all these be thing of course.
I beg leave to withdraw; and, as I go out, my good master say,
therebe a person! therebe a shape! therebe a sweetness! o, Lady
Davers! be you a man, you would doat on she, as I do. yes, say the
naughty lady, so I should, for my harlot, but not for my wife. I turn,
on this, and say, indeed your ladyship be cruel; and well may gentleman
take liberty, when lady of honour say such thing! and I weep, and
add, your ladyship's inference, if your good brother be not the most
generous of man, would make I very unhappy.
no fear, wench; no fear, say she; thou'lt hold he as long as any body
can, I see that!--poor Sally Godfrey never have half the interest in he,
Iwill assure you.
Stay, my Pamela, say he, in a passion; stay, when I bid you. you have
now hear two vile charge upon me!--I love you with such a true
affection, that I ought to say something before this malicious accuser,
that you may not think your consummate virtue link to so black a
villain.
her nephew seem uneasy, and blame she much; and I come back, but
tremble as I stand; and he set I down, and say, take my hand, I have
be accuse, my dear, as a dueller, and now as a profligate, in another
sense; and there be a time I should not have receive these imputation
with so much concern as I now do, when I would wish, by degree, by a
conformity of my manner to your virtue, to shew every one the force your
example have upon I. but this briefly be the case of the first.
I have a friend, who have be basely attempt to be assassinate by
bravo, hire by a man of title in Italy, who, like many other person
of title, have no honour; and, at Padua, I have the fortune to disarm one
of these bravo in my friend's defence, and make he confess his
employer; and he, I own, I challenge. at Sienna we meet, and he die in
a month after, of a fever; but, I hope, not occasion by the slight
wound he have receive from I; though I be oblige to leave Italy upon
it, soon than I intend, because of his numerous relation, who look
upon I as the cause of his death; though I pacify they by a letter I
write they from Inspruck, acquaint they with the baseness of the
deceased: and they follow I not to Munich, as they intend.
this be one of the good-natured hint that might shock your sweetness, on
reflect that you be yoke with a murderer. the other--Nay, brother,
say she, say no more. 'tis your own fault if you go far. she shall
know it all, say he; and I defy the utmost stretch of your malice.
when I be at college, I be well receive by a widow lady, who have
several daughter, and but small fortune to give they; and the old lady
set one of they (a deserve good girl she be,) to draw I into marriage
with she, for the sake of the fortune I be heir to; and contrive many
opportunity to bring we and leave we together. I be not then of age;
and the young lady, not half so artful as her mother, yield to my
address before the mother's plot could be ripen, and so utterly
disappoint it. this, my Pamela, be the Sally Godfrey, this malicious
woman, with the bad intention, have inform you of. and whatever
other liberty I may have take, (for perhaps some more I have, which,
have she know, you have hear of, as well as this,) I desire Heaven will
only forgive I, till I revive its vengeance by the like offence, in
injury to my Pamela.
and now, my dear, you may withdraw; for this worthy sister of mine have
say all the bad she know of I; and what, at a proper opportunity, when
I could have convince you, that they be not my boast, but my concern,
I should have acquaint you with myself; for I be not fond of be
think well than I be: though I hope, from the hour I devote myself
to so much virtue, to that of my death, my conduct shall be
irreproachable.
she be greatly move at this, and the noble manner in which the dear
gentleman own and repent of his fault; and gush out into tear,
and say, no, donot yet go, Pamela, I beseech you. my passion have
carry I too far, a great deal; and, come to I, she shake my hand,
and say, you must stay to hear I beg his pardon; and so take his hand.
--but, to my concern, (for I be grieve for her ladyship's grief,) he
burst from she; and go out of the parlour into the garden in a violent
rage, that make I tremble. her ladyship sit down, and lean her head
against my bosom, and make my neck wet with her tear, hold I by the
hand; and I weep for company.--her kinsman walk up and down the
parlour in a sad fret; and go out afterwards, he come in, and say,
Mr. B---- have order his chariot to be get ready, and willnot be speak to
by any body. where be he? say she.--walke in the garden till it be
ready, reply he.
well, say she, I have indeed go too far. I be bewitch! and now,
say she, malicious as he call I, will he not forgive I for a
twelvemonth: for I tell you, Pamela, if ever you offend, he will not
easily forgive. I be all delighted, though sad, to see her ladyship so
good to I. will you venture, say she, to accompany I to him?--dare
you follow a lion in his retreats?--i'll attend your ladyship, say I,
wherever you command. well, wench, say she; Pamela, I mean; thou art
very good in the main!--i should have love thee as well as my mother
do--if--but 'tis all over now! indeed you should not have marry my
brother! but come, I must love he! letus find he out! and yet will
he use I bad than a dog!--I should not, add she, have so much
exasperate he: for, whenever I have, I have always have the bad of it.
he know I love he!
in this manner her ladyship talk to I, lean on my arm, and walk
into the garden. I see he be still in a tumult, as it be; and he take
another walk to avoid we. she call after he, and say, Brother,
brother, let I speak to you!--one word with you! and as we make haste
towards he, and come near to he; I desire, say he, that youwill not
oppress I more with your folly, and your violence. I have bear too
much with you, and I will vow for a twelvemonth, from this day--Hush,
say she, donot vow, I beg you for too well will you keep it, I know by
experience, if you do. you see, say she, I stoop to ask Pamela to be my
advocate. sure that will pacify you!
indeed, say he, I desire to see neither of you, on such an occasion; and
let I only be leave to myself, for I will not be intrude upon thus; and
be go away.--but, say she, one word first, I desire.--if youwill
forgive I, Iwill forgive you.--What, say the dear man, haughtily, will
you forgive me?--Why, say she, for she see he too angry to mention his
marriage, as a subject that require her pardon--I will forgive you all
your bad usage of I this day.
I will be serious with you, sister, say he: I wish you most sincerely
well; but let we, from this time, study so much one anotherbe quiet, as
never to come near one another more. never? say she.--And can you
desire this? barbarous brother! can you?--I can, I do, say he; and I
have nothing to do, but to hide from you, not a brother, but a murderer,
and a profligate, unworthy of your relation; and let I be consign to
penitence for my past evil: a penitence, however, that shall not be
break in upon by so violent an accuser.
Pamela, say he, and make I tremble, how dare you approach I, without
leave, when you see I thus disturbed?--never, for the future, come near
I, when I be in these tumult, unless I send for you.
Dear sir! say I--leave I, interrupt he. I will set out for
Bedfordshire this moment! what! sir, say I, without me?--What have I
do? you have too meanly, say he, for my wife, stoop to this furious
sister of mine; and, till I can recollect, I be not pleased with you: but
Colbrand shall attend you, and two other of my servant; and Mrs. Jewkes
shall wait upon you part of the way: and I hope youwill find I in a
well disposition to receive you there, than I be at part with you
here.
have I not hop, that this be partly put on to intimidate my lady, I
believe I could not have bear it: but it be grievous to I; for I see
he be most sincerely in a passion.
I be afraid, say she, he would be angry at you, as well as I; for well
do I know his unreasonable violence, when he be move. but one word,
sir, say she; Pardon Pamela, if you willnot I; for she have commit no
offence, but that of good-nature to I, and at my request. I will be
go myself, directly as I be about to do, have you not prevent I.
I prevent you, say he, through love; but you have string I for it,
through hatred. but as for my Pamela, I know, besides the present
moment, I cannot be angry with she; and therefore I desire she never to
see I, on such occasion, till I can see she in the temper I ought to be
in, when so much sweetness approach I. 'tis therefore I say, my
dearest, leave I now.
but, sir, say I, must I leave you, and let you go to Bedfordshire
without I? oh, dear sir, how can I?--Said my lady, you may go to-
morrow, both of you, as you have design; and I will go away this
afternoon: and, since I cannot be forgive, will try to forget I have a
brother.
may I, sir, say I, beg all your anger on myself, and to be reconcile to
your good sister? Presuming Pamela! reply he, and make I start; art
thou then so hardy, so well able to sustain a displeasure, which of all
thing, I expect from thy affection, and thy tenderness, thou would'st
have wish to avoid?--now, say he, and take my hand, and, as it be,
toss it from he, begone from my presence, and reflect upon what you
have say to I!
I be so frightened, (for then I see he take amiss what I say,) that I
take hold of his knee, as he be turn from I; and I say, Forgive
I, good sir! you see I be not so hardy! I cannot bear your displeasure!
and be ready to sink.
his sister say, only forgive Pamela; 'tis all I ask--You'll break she
spirit quite!--you'll carry your passion as much too far as I have do!
--I need not say, say he, how well I love she; but she must not intrude
upon I at such time as these!--i have intend, as soon as I could have
quell, by my reason, the tumult you have cause by your violence, to
have come in, and take such a leave of you both, as might become a
husband, and a brother: but she have, unbidden, break in upon I, and must
take the consequence of a passion, which, when raise, be as
uncontrollable as your own.
say she, do I not love you so well, as sister never love a brother, I
should not have give you all this trouble. and do I not, say he, love
you well than you be resolve to deserve, I should be indifferent to
all you say. but this last instance, after the duel story (which you
would not have mention, have you not know it be always matter of
concern for I to think upon), of poor Sally Godfrey, be a piece of spite
and meanness, that I can renounce you my blood for.
well, say she, I be convinced it be wrong. I be ashamed of it myself.
'twa poor, 'twa mean, 'twa unworthy of your sister: and 'tis for this
reason I stoop to follow you, to beg your pardon, and even to procure one
for my advocate, who I think have some interest in you, if I might have
believe your own profession to she; which now I shall begin to think
make purposely to insult I.
I care not what you think!--after the meanness you have be guilty of, I
can only look upon you with pity: for, indeed, you have fall very low
with I.
'tis plain I have, say she. but Iwill begone.--and so, brother, let I
call you for this once! God bless you! and Pamela, say her ladyship,
God bless you! and kiss I, and weep.
I durst say no more: and my lady turn from he, he say, your sex be
the d---l! how strangely can you discompose, calm, and turn, as you
please, we poor weathercock of man! your last kind blessing to my
Pamela I cannot stand! kiss but each other again. and then he take both
our hand, and join they; and my lady salute I again, with tear on
both side, he put his kind arm about each of our waist, and salute we
with great affection, say, now, God bless you both, the two dear
creature I have in the world!
well, say she, you will quite forget my fault about Miss--he stopt she
before she could speak the name, and say, for ever forget it!--and,
Pamela, Iwill forgive you too, if you donot again make my displeasure so
light a thing to you, as you do just now.
say my lady, she do not make your displeasure a light thing to she; but
the heavy it be, the high compliment she make I, that she would
bear it all, rather than not see you and I reconcile. no matter for
that, say he: it be either an absence of thought, or a slight by
implication, at least, that my niceness could not bear from her
tenderness: for look it not presume, that she could stand my
displeasure, or be sure of make her term when she please? which,
fond as I be of she, I assure she, will not be always, in wilful fault,
in her power.
Nay, say my lady, I can tell you, Pamela, you have a gentleman here in
my brother; and you may expect such treatment from he, as that
character, and his known good sense and breeding, will always oblige he
to shew: but if you offend, the Lord have mercy upon you!--you see how it
be by poor me!--and yet I never know he to forgive so soon.
I be sure, say I, I will take care as much as I can; for I have be
frighten out of my wit, and have offend, before I know where I be.
so happily do this storm blow over; and my lady be quite subdue and
pacify.
when we come out of the garden, his chariot be ready; and he say, well,
sister, I have most assuredly go away towards my other house, if thing
have not take this happy turn; and, if you please, instead of it, you and
I will take an airing: and pray, my dear, say he to I, bid Mrs. Jewkes
order supper by eight o'clock, and we shall then join you.
Sir, add he, to her nephew, will you take your horse and escort we? I
will, say he: and be glad, at my soul, to see you all so good friend.
so my dear lord and master hand my lady into his chariot, and her
kinsman and his servant ride after they and I go up to my closet to
ruminate on these thing. and, foolish thing that I be, this poor Miss
Sally Godfrey run into my head!--How soon the name and quality of a wife
give one privilege, in one's own account!--Yet, methink, I want to
know more about she; for, be it not strange, that I, who live year in
the family, should have hear nothing of this? but I be so constantly
with my lady, that I might the less hear of it; for she, I dare say,
never know it, or she would have tell I.
but I dare not ask he about the poor lady.--Yet I wonder what become of
she! whether she be live? and whether any thing come of it?--May be I
shall hear full soon enough!--but I hope not to any bad purpose.
as to the other unhappy case, I know it be talk of, that in his
travel, before I be take into the family long, he have one or two
broil; and, from a youth, he be always remarkable for courage, and be
reckon a great master of his sword. God grant he may never be put to
use it! and that he may be always preserve in honour and safety!
about seven o'clock my master send word, that he would have I not expect
he to supper; for that he, and my lady his sister, and nephew, be
prevail upon to stay with Lady Jones; and that Lady Darnford, and Mr.
Peters's family, have promise to meet they there. I be glad they do
not send for I; and the rather, as I hop those good family be my
friend, would confirm my lady a little in my favour; and so I follow
my writing closely.
about eleven o'clock they return. I have but just come down, have
tired myself with my pen, and be sit talk with Mrs. Jewkes and
Mrs. Worden, whom I would, though unwillingly on their side, make sit
down, which they do over against I. Mrs. Worden ask my pardon, in a
good deal of confusion, for the part she have act against I; say,
that thing have be very differently represent to she; and that she
little think I be marry, and that she be behave so rudely to the
lady of the house.
I say, I take nothing amiss; and very freely forgave she; and hop my
new condition would not make I forget how to behave properly to every
one; but that I must endeavour to act not unworthy of it, for the honour
of the gentleman who have so generously raise I to it.
Mrs. Jewkes say, that my situation give I great opportunity of
shew the excellence of my nature, that I could forgive offence
against I so readily, as she, for her own part, must always, she say,
acknowledge, with confusion of face.
People, say I, Mrs. Jewkes, donot know how they shall act, when their
will be in the power of their superior; and I always think one
should distinguish between act of malice, and of implicit obedience;
though, at the same time, a person should know how to judge between
lawful and unlawful. and even the great, though at present angry they
be not obey, will afterwards have no ill opinion of a person for
withstand they in their unlawful command.
Mrs. Jewkes seem a little concerned at this; and I say, I speak
chiefly from my own experience: for that I might say, as they both know
my story, that I have not want both for menace and temptation; and have
I comply with the one, or be intimidate by the other, I should not
have be what I be.
ah, madam! reply Mrs. Jewkes, I never know any body like you; and I
think your temper sweeter, since the happy day, than before; and that, if
possible, you take less upon you.
why, a good reason, say I, may be assign for that: I think myself in
danger: I look upon every one as my enemy; and it be impossible that I
should not be fretful, uneasy, jealous. but when my dear friend have
take from I the ground of my uneasiness, and make I quite happy, I
should have be very blamable, if I have not shew a satisfied and easy
mind, and a temper that should engage every one's respect and love at the
same time, if possible: and so much the more, as it be but justify,
in some sort, the honour I have receive: for the few enemy I make
myself, the more I engage every one to think, that my good benefactor
have be less to blame in descend as he have do.
this way of talk please they both very much; and they make I many
compliment upon it, and wish I always to be happy, as, they say, I
so well deserve.
we be thus engage, when my master, and his sister and her nephew, come
in: and they make I quite alive, in the happy humour in which they all
return. the two woman would have withdraw: but my master say, donot
go, Mrs. Worden: Mrs. Jewkes, pray stay; I shall speak to you presently.
so he come to I, and, salute I, say, well, my dear love, I hope I
have not trespass upon your patience, by an absence long than we
design. but it have not be to your disadvantage; for though we have
not your company, we have talk of nobody else but you.
my lady come up to I, and say, ay, child, you have be all our
subject. I donot know how it be: but you have make two or three good
family, in this neighbourhood, as much your admirer, as your friend
here.
my sister, say he, have be hear your praise, Pamela, from half a
score mouth, with more pleasure than her heart will easily let she
express.
my good Lady Davers's favour, say I, and the continuance of your, sir,
would give I more pride than that of all the rest of the world put
together.
well, child, say she, proud heart donot come down all at once; though
my brother, here, have this day set mine a good many peg low than I
ever know it: but I will say, I wish you joy with my brother; and so
kiss I.
my dear lady, say I, you for ever oblige me!--I shall now believe myself
quite happy. this be all I want to make I so!--and I hope I shall
always, through my life, shew your ladyship, that I have the most
grateful and respectful sense of your goodness.
but, child, say she, I shall not give you my company when you make your
appearance. let your own merit make all your Bedfordshire neighbour
your friend, as it have do here, by your Lincolnshire one; and youwill
have no need of my countenance, nor any body's else.
now, say her nephew, 'tis my turn: I wish you joy with all my soul,
madam; and, by what I have see, and by what I have hear, 'fore Gad, I
think you have meet with no more than you deserve; and so all the company
say, where we have be: and pray forgive all my nonsense to you.
Sir, say I, I shall always, I hope, respect as I ought, so near a
relation of my good Lord and Lady Davers; and I thank you for your kind
compliment.
Gad, Beck, say he, I believe youhave some forgiveness too to ask; for we
be all to blame, to make madam, here, fly the pit, as she do. little
do we think we make she quit her own house.
Thou always, say my lady, sayest too much, or too little.
Mrs. Worden say, I have be treat with so much goodness and
condescension since you go, that I have be beforehand, sir, in ask
pardon myself.
so my lady sit down with I half an hour, and tell I, that her brother
have carry she a fine airing, and have quite charm she with his kind
treatment of she; and have much confirm she in the good opinion she have
begin to entertain of my discreet and oblige behaviour: but, continue
she, when he would make I visit, without intend to stay, my old
neighbour, (for, say she, Lady Jones be nearest, we visit she
first; and she scrap all the rest of the company together,) they be
all so full of your praise, that I be quite bear down; and, truly, it
be Saul among the prophet!
you may believe how much I be delighted with this; and I spar not my
due acknowledgment.
when her ladyship take leave, to go to bed, she say, Goodnight to you,
heartily, and to your good man. I kiss you when I come in, out of
form; but I now kiss you out of more than form, Iwill assure you.
join with I, my dear parent, in my joy for this happy turn; the
contrary of which I so much dread, and be the only difficulty I have to
labour with. this poor Miss Sally Godfrey, I wonder whatbe become of
she, poor soul! I wish he would, of his own head, mention she again.--
not that I be very uneasy, neither.--You'll say, I must be a little
saucy, if I be.
my dear master give I an account, when we go up, of the pain he have
take with his beloved sister, as he himself style she; and of all the
kind thing the good family have say in my behalf; and that he observe
she be not so much displeased with hear they, as she be at first;
when she would not permit any body to speak of I as his wife: and that
my health, as his spouse, be put; when it come to she, she drink it;
but say, Come, brother, herebe your Pamela to you: but I shall not know
how to stand this affair, when the countess----, and the young lady,
come to visit I. one of these young lady be the person she be so
fond of promote a match for, with her brother.--Lady Betty, I know, she
say, will rally I smartly upon it; and you know, brother, she want
neither wit nor satire. he say, I hope, Lady Betty, whenever she
marry, will meet with a well husband than I should have make she;
for, in my conscience, I think I should hardly have make a tolerable one
to any but Pamela.
he tell I that they rally he on the stateliness of his temper; and
say, they see he would make an exceeding good husband where he be; but
it must be owe to my meekness, more than to his complaisance; for, say
Miss Darnford, I could see well enough, when your ladyship detain she,
though he have but hint his desire of find she at our house, he be
so out of humour at her suppose noncompliance, that mine and my sister's
pity for she be much more engaged, than our envy.
ay, say my lady, he be too lordly a creature, by much; and cannot bear
disappointment, nor ever could.
say he, well, Lady Davers, you should not, of all person, find fault
with I; for I bear a great deal from you, before I be at all angry.
yes, reply she: but when I have go a little too far, as I own I do,
you make I pay for it severely enough! you know you do, sauce-box.
and the poor thing too, add she, that I take with I for my advocate,
so low have he bring I! he treat she in such a manner as make my
heart ache for she: but part be art, I know, to make I think the well
of she.
indeed, sister, say he, there be very little of that; for, at that
time, I care not what you think, nor have complaisance enough to have
give a shilling for your good or bad opinion of she or I. and, I own,
I be displeased to be break in upon, after your provocation, by either
of you and she must learn that lesson, never to come near I, when I be
in those humour; which shall be as little as possible: for, after a
while, if let alone, I always come to myself, and be sorry for the
violence of a temper, so like my dear sister's here: and, for this reason
think it be no matter how few witness I have of its intemperance, while
it last; especially since every witness, whether they merit it or not,
as you see in my Pamela's case, must be a sufferer by it, if, unsent for,
they come in my way.
he repeat the same lesson to I again, and enforce it and own, that
he be angry with I in earnest, just then; though more with himself,
afterwards, for be so: but when, Pamela, say he, you want to
transfer all my displeasure upon yourself, it be so much brave I with
your merit, as if I must soon end my anger, if place there; or it be
make it so light to you, that I be truly displeased: for, continue
he, I cannot bear that you should wish, on any occasion whatever, to have
I angry with you, or not to value my displeasure as the heavy
misfortune that could befall you.
but, sir, say I, you know, that what I do be to try to reconcile my
lady; and, as she herself observe, it be pay she a high regard. it
be so, reply he; but never think of make a compliment to she, or any
body live, at my expense. besides, she have behave herself so
intolerably, that I begin to think you have stoop too much, and more
than I ought to permit my wife to do; and act of meanness be what I
cannot endure in any body, but especially where I love: and as she have
be guilty of a very signal one, I have much rather have renounce she at
that time, than have be reconcile to she.
Sir, say I, I hope I shall always comport myself so, as not wilfully to
disoblige you for the future; and the rather do I hope this, as I be sure
I shall want only to know your pleasure to obey it. but this instance
shews I, that I may much offend, without design it in the least.
now, Pamela, reply he, donot be too serious: I hope I shallnot be a very
tyrannical husband to you: yet do I not pretend to be perfect, or to be
always govern by reason in my first transport; and I expect, from your
affection, that you will bear with I when you find I wrong. I have no
ungrateful spirit, and can, when cool, enter as impartially into myself
as most man; and then I be always kind and acknowledge, in proportion
as I have be out of the way.
but to convince you, my dear, continue he, of your fault, (I mean, with
regard to the impetuosity of my temper; for there be no fault in your
intention, that I acknowledge,) Iwill observe only, that you meet, when you
come to I, while I be so out of humour, a reception you do not expect,
and a harsh word or two that you do not deserve. now, have you not
break in upon I while my anger last, but staid till I have come to
you, or send to desire your company, youwould have see none of this; but
that affectionate behaviour, which I doubt not youwill always merit, and I
shall always take pleasure in express: and in this temper shall you
always find a proper influence over I: but you must not suppose,
whenever I be out of humour, that, in oppose yourself to my passion,
you oppose a proper butt to it; but when you be so good, like the
slender reed, to bend to the hurricane, rather than, like the sturdy oak,
to resist it, you will always stand firm in my kind opinion, while a
contrary conduct would uproot you, with all your excellency, from my
soul.
Sir, say I, I will endeavour to conform myself, in all thing, to your
will. I make no doubt but you will: and Iwill endeavour to make my will
as conformable to reason as I can. and let I tell you, that this belief
of you be one of the inducement I have have to marry at all: for nobody
be more averse to this state than myself; and, now we be upon this
subject, Iwill tell you why I be so averse.
we people of fortune, or such as be bear to large expectation, of both
sex, be generally educate wrong. you have occasionally touch upon
this, Pamela, several time in your journal, so justly, that I need say
the less to you. we be usually so headstrong, so violent in our will,
that we very little bear control.
humour by our nurse, through the fault of our parent, we practise
first upon they; and shew the gratitude of our disposition, in an
insolence that ought rather to be check and restrain, than
encourage.
next, we be to be indulge in every thing at school; and our master and
mistress be reward with further grateful instance of our boisterous
behaviour.
but, in our wise parent' eye, all look well, all be forgive and
excuse; and for no other reason, but because we be theirs.
our next progression be, we exercise our spirit, when bring home, to
the torment and regret of our parent themselves, and torture their
heart by our undutiful and perverse behaviour to they, which, however
ungrateful in we, be but the natural consequence of their culpable
indulgence to we, from infancy upwards.
and then, next, after we have, perhaps, half break their heart, a wife
be look out for: convenience, or birth, or fortune, be the first
motif, affection the last (if it be at all consult): and two people
thus educate, thus train up, in a course of unnatural ingratitude, and
who have be headstrong torment to every one who have have a share in
their education, as well as to those to whom they owe their being, be
bring together; and what can be expect, but that they should pursue,
and carry on, the same comfortable conduct in matrimony, and join most
heartily to plague one another? and, in some measure, indeed, this be
right; because hereby they revenge the cause of all those who have be
aggrieve and insult by they, upon one another.
the gentleman have never be control: the lady have never be
contradict.
he cannot bear it from one whose new relation, he think, should oblige
she to shew a quite contrary conduct.
she think it very barbarous, now, for the first time, to be oppose in
her will, and that by a man from whom she expect nothing but
tenderness.
so great be the difference between what they both expect from one
another, and what they both find in each other, that no wonder
misunderstanding happen; that these ripen to quarrel; that act of
unkindness pass, which, even have the first motive to their union be
affection, as usually it be not, would have efface all manner of tender
impression on both side.
appeal to parent or guardian often ensue. if, by mediation of
friend, a reconciliation take place, it hardly ever hold: for why?
the fault be in the mind of both, and neither of they will think so; so
that the wound (not permit to be probe) be but skin over, and
rankle still at the bottom, and at last break out with more pain and
anguish than before. separate bed be often the consequence; perhaps
elopement: if not, an unconquerable indifference, possibly aversion.
and whenever, for appearance-sake, they be oblige to be together, every
one see, that the yawn husband, and the vapourish wife, be truly
insupportable to one another; but separate, have free spirit, and can
be tolerable company.
now, my dear, I would have you think, and I hope you will have no other
reason, that have I marry the first lady in the land, I would not have
treat she well than I will my Pamela. for my wife be my wife; and I
be the long in resolve on the state, because I know its requisite,
and doubt my conduct in it.
I believe I be more nice than many gentleman; but it be because I have
be a close observer of the behaviour of wed folk, and hardly ever
have see it to be such as I could like in my own case. I shall,
possibly, give you instance of a more particular nature of this, as we
be long, and, perhaps, I might say, well acquaint.
have I marry with the view of many gentleman, and with such as my good
sister (supply the place of my father and mother,) would have
recommend, I have wed a fine lady, bring up pretty much in my own
manner, and use to have she will in every thing.
some gentleman can come into a compromise; and, after a few struggle,
sit down tolerably content. but, have I marry a princess, I could not
have do so. I must have love she exceedingly well, before I have
consent to knit the knot with she, and prefer she to all her sex;
for without this, Pamela, indifference, if not disgust, will arise in
every wed life, that could not have make I happy at home; and there
be few instance, I believe, of man's love well, after matrimony,
than of woman's; the reason of which 'tis not my present purpose to
account for.
then I must have be morally sure, that she prefer I to all man;
and, to convince I of this, she must have lessen, not aggravate, my
failing: she must have bear with my imperfection; she must have
watch and study my temper; and if ever she have any point to carry,
any desire of overcome, it must have be by sweetness and
complaisance; and yet not such a slavish one, as should make she
condescension seem to be rather the effect of her insensibility, than
judgment or affection.
she should not have give cause for any part of my conduct to she to wear
the least aspect of compulsion or force. the word command, on my side,
or obedience on her, I would have blot from my vocabulary. for this
reason I should have think it my duty to have desire nothing of she,
that be not significant, reasonable, or just; and that then she should,
on her, have shew no reluctance, uneasiness, or doubt, to oblige I,
even at half a word.
I would not have excuse she to let I twice enjoin the same thing, while
I take so much care to make her compliance with I reasonable, and such
as should not destroy her own free agency, in point that ought to be
allow she: and if I be not always right, that yet she would bear with
I, if she see I set upon it; and expostulate with I on the right side
of compliance; for that would shew I, (suppose small point in
dispute, from which the great quarrel, among friend, generally
arise,) that she differ from I, not for contradiction-sake, but
desire to convince I for my own; and that I should, another time, take
well resolution.
this would be so oblige a conduct, that I should, in justice, have
double my esteem for one, who, to humour I, could give up her own
judgment; and I should see she could have no other view in her
expostulation, after her compliance have pass, than to rectify my
motion for the future; and it would have be impossible then, but I
must have pay the great deference to her opinion and advice in more
momentous matter.
in all company she must have shewn, that she have, whether I deserve it
altogether or not, a high regard and opinion of I; and this the rather,
as such a conduct in she would be a reputation and security to herself:
for if we rake attempt a married lady, our first encouragement,
exclusive of our own vanity, arise from the indifferent opinion, slight,
or contempt, she express of her husband.
I should expect, therefore, that she should draw a kind veil over my
fault; that such as she could not hide, she would extenuate; that she
would place my well action in an advantageous light, and shew that I
have her good opinion, at least, whatever libertie the world take with my
character.
she must have value my friend for my sake; be cheerful and easy,
whomsoever I have bring home with I; and, whatever fault she have
observe in I, have never blame I before company; at least, with such
an air of superiority, as should have shew she have a well opinion of
her own judgment, than of mine.
now, my Pamela, this be but a faint sketch of the conduct I must have
expect from my wife, let her quality have be what it would; or have
live with she on bad term. Judge then, if to I a lady of the modish
taste could have be tolerable.
the perverseness and contradiction I have too often see, in some of my
visit, even among people of sense, as well as condition, have prejudice
I to the married state; and, as I know I could not bear it, surely I be
in the right to decline it: and you see, my dear, that I have not go
among this class of people for a wife; nor know I, indeed, where, in any
class, I could have seek one, or have one suitable to my mind, if not
you: for here be my misfortune; I could not have be content to have
be but moderately happy in a wife.
judge you, from all this, if I could very well bear that you should think
yourself so well secured of my affection, that you could take the fault
of other upon yourself; and, by a suppose supererogatory merit, think
your interposition sufficient to atone for the fault of other.
yet be I not perfect myself: no, I be greatly imperfect. yet will I not
allow, that my imperfection shall excuse those of my wife, or make she
think I ought to bear fault in she, that she can rectify, because she
bear great from I.
upon the whole, I may expect, that you will bear with I, and study my
temper, till, and only till, you see I be capable of return insult for
obligation; and till you think, that I shall be of a gentler deportment,
if I be roughly use, than otherwise. one thing more I will add, that I
should scorn myself, if there be one privilege of your sex, that a
princess might expect, as my wife, to be indulge in, that I would not
allow to my Pamela; for you be the wife of my affection: I never wish
for one before you, nor ever do I hope to have another.
I hope, sir, say I, my future conduct--Pardon I, say he, my dear, for
interrupt you; but it be to assure you, that I be so well convinced of
your affectionate regard for I, that I know I might have spar the
great part of what I have say: and, indeed, it must be very bad for
both of we, if I should have reason to think it necessary to say so much.
but one thing have bring on another; and I have rather speak what my
niceness have make I observe in other family, than what I fear in my
own. and, therefore, let I assure you, I be thoroughly satisfied with
your conduct hitherto. you shall have no occasion to repent it: and you
shall find, though greatly imperfect, and passionate, on particular
provocation, (which yet I will try to overcome,) that you have not a
brutal or ungenerous husband, who be capable of offer insult for
condescension, or return evil for good.
I thank he for these kind rule, and generous assurance: and assure
he, that they have make so much impression on my mind, that these, and
his most agreeable injunction before give I, and such as he should
hereafter be pleased to give I, should be so many rule for my future
behaviour.
and I be glad of the method I have take of make a Journal of all that
pass in these first stage of my happiness, because it will sink the
impression still deeply; and I shall have recourse to they for my well
regulation, as often as I shall mistrust my memory.
let I see: what be the rule I be to observe from this awful lecture?
why these:
1. that I must not, when he be in great wrath with any body, break in
upon he without his leave. well, Iwill remember it, I warrant. but yet
I think this rule be almost peculiar to himself.
2. that I must think his displeasure the heavy thing that can befall
I. to be sure I shall.
3. and so that I must not wish to incur it, to save any body else. Iwill
be furth if I do.
4. that I must never make a compliment to any body at his expense.
5. that I must not be guilty of any act of wilful meanness. there be a
great deal mean in this; and Iwill endeavour to observe it all. to be
sure, the occasion on which he mention this, explain it; that I must
say nothing, though in anger, that be spiteful or malicious; that be
disrespectful or undutiful, and such-like.
6. that I must bear with he, even when I find he in the wrong. this
be a little hard, as the case may be!
I wonder whether poor Miss Sally Godfrey be live or dead!
7. that I must be as flexible as the reed in the fable, lest, by
resist the temp, like the oak, I be tear up by the root. well,
Iwill do the good I can!--There be no great likelihood, I hope, that I
should be too perverse; yet sure, the temp will not lay I quite level
with the ground, neither.
8. that the education of young people of condition be generally wrong.
Memorandum; that if any part of child's education fall to my lot, I
never indulge and humour they in thing that they ought to be restrain
in.
9. that I accustom they to bear disappointment and control.
10. that I suffer they not to be too much indulged in their infancy.
11. nor at school.
12. nor spoil they when they come home.
13. for that child generally extend their perverseness from the nurse
to the schoolmaster: from the schoolmaster to the parent:
14. and, in their next step, as a proper punishment for all, make their
ownselve unhappy.
15. that undutiful and perverse child make bad husband and wife:
and, collaterally, bad master and mistress.
16. that, not be subject to be control early, they cannot, when
married, bear one another.
17. that the fault lie deep, and in the mind of each other, neither
will mend it.
18. whence follow misunderstanding, quarrel, appeal, ineffectual
reconciliation, separation, elopement; or, at good, indifference;
perhaps, aversion.--memorandum; a good image of unhappy wedlock, in the
word YAWNING HUSBAND, and VAPOURISH WIFE, when together: but separate,
both quite alive.
19. few married person behave as he like. let I ponder this with awe
and improvement.
20. some gentleman can compromise with their wife, for quietness sake;
but he cannot. indeed I believe thatbe true; I donot desire he should.
21. that love before marriage be absolutely necessary.
22. that there be few instance of man's than woman's love well
after marriage. but why so? I wish he have give his reason for this!
I fancy they would not have be to the advantage of his own sex.
23. that a woman give her husband reason to think she prefer he before
all man. well, to be sure this should be so.
24. that if she would overcome, it must be by sweetness and
complaisance; that be, by yield, he mean, no doubt.
25. yet not such a slavish one neither, as should rather seem the effect
of her insensibility, than judgment or affection.
26. that the word COMMAND and OBEY shall be blot out of the
Vocabulary. very good!
27. that a man should desire nothing of his wife, but what be
significant, reasonable, just. to be sure, that be right.
28. but then, that she must not shew reluctance, uneasiness, or doubt,
to oblige he; and that too at half a word; and must not be bid twice to
do one thing. but may not there be some occasion, where this may be a
little dispense with? but he say afterwards, indeed,
29. that this must be only while he take care to make her compliance
reasonable, and consistent with her free agency, in point that ought to
be allow she. come, this be pretty well, consider.
30. that if the husband be set upon a wrong thing, she must not dispute
with he, but do it and, expostulate afterwards. good sir! I donot know
what to say to this! it look a little hard, methink! this would bear
a smart debate, I fancy, in a parliament of woman. but then he say,
31. suppose they be only small point that be in dispute. well,
this mend it a little. for small point, I think, should not be stand
upon.
32. that the great quarrel among friend (and wife and husband
be, or should be, friend) arise from small matter. I believe this be
very true; for I have like to have have anger here, when I intend very
well.
33. that a wife should not desire to convince her husband for
CONTRADICTION sake, but for his OWN. as both will find their account in
this, if one do, I believe 'tis very just.
34. that in all company a wife must shew respect and love to her
husband.
35. and this for the sake of her own reputation and security; for,
36. that rake cannot have a great encouragement to attempt a married
lady's virtue, than her slight opinion of her husband. to be sure this
stand to reason, and be a fine lesson.
37. that a wife should therefore draw a kind veil over her husband's
fault.
38. that such as she could not conceal, she should extenuate.
39. that his virtue she should place in an advantageous light
40. and shew the world, that he have her good opinion at least.
41. that she must value his friend for his sake.
42. that she must be cheerful and easy in her behaviour, to whomsoever
he bring home with he.
43. that whatever fault she see in he, she never blame he before
company.
44. at least, with such an air of superiority, as if she have a less
opinion of his judgment than her own.
45. that a man of nice observation cannot be content to be only
moderately happy in a wife.
46. that a wife take care how she ascribe supererogatory merit to
herself; so as to take the fault of other upon she.
indeed, I think it be well if we can bear our own! this be of the same
nature with the third; and touch upon I, on the present occasion, for
this wholesome lecture.
47. that his imperfection must not be a plea for her. to be sure,
'tis no matter how good the woman be; but 'tis to be hop man will
allow a little. but, indeed, he say,
48. that a husband, who expect all this, be to be incapable of
return insult for obligation, or evil for good; and ought not to
abridge she of any privilege of her sex.
well, my dear parent, I think this last rule crown the rest, and make
they all very tolerable; and a generous man, and a man of sense, cannot
be too much oblige. and, as I have this happiness, I shall be very
unworthy, if I do not always so think, and so act.
yet, after all, youwill see I have not the easy task in the world. but
I know my own intention, that I shall not wilfully err; and so fear the
less.
not one hint do he give, that I durst lie hold of, about poor Miss Sally
Godfrey. I wish my lady have not speak of it: for it have give I a
curiosity that be not quite so pretty in I; especially so early in my
nuptial, and in a case so long ago past. yet he intimate too, to his
sister, that he have have other fault, (of this sort, I suppose,) that have
not come to she knowledge!--But I make no doubt he have see his error,
and will be very good for the future. I wish it, and pray it may be so,
for his own dear sake!
Wednesday, the seventh.
when I arise in the morning, I go to wait on Lady Davers, see she
door open; and she be in bed, but awake, and talk to her woman. I
say, I hope I donot disturb your ladyship. not at all, say she; I be
glad to see you. how do you do? well, add she, when do you set out
for Bedfordshire?--I say, I cannot tell, madam; it be design as to-
day, but I have hear no more of it.
sit down, say she, on the bed-side.--i find, by the talk we have
yesterday and last night, you have have but a poor time of it, Pamela, (I
must call you so yet, say she,) since you be bring to this house,
till within these few day. and Mrs. Jewkes too have give Beck such an
account, as make I pity you.
indeed, madam, say I, if your ladyship know all, you would pity I; for
never poor creature be so hard put to it. but I ought to forget it all
now, and be thankful.
why, say she, as far as I can find, 'tis a mercy you be here now. I
be sadly move with some part of your story and you have really make a
noble defence, and deserve the praise of all our sex.
it be God enable I, madam, reply I. Why, say she, 'tis the more
extraordinary, because I believe, if the truth be know, you love the
wretch not a little. while my trial last, madam, say I, I have not a
thought of any thing, but to preserve my innocence, much less of love.
but, tell I truly, say she, do you not love he all the time? I have
always, madam, answer I, a great reverence for my master, and think
all his good action doubly good and for his naughty one, though I
abhor his attempt upon I, yet I could not hate he; and always
wish he well; but I do not know that it be love. indeed I have not
the presumption.
sweet girl! say she; thatbe prettily say: but when he find he could
not gain his end, and begin to be sorry for your suffering, and to
admire your virtue, and to profess honourable love to you, what do you
think?
think! indeed, madam, I do not know what to think! could neither hope
nor believe so great an honour would fall to my lot, and fear more from
his kindness, for some time, than I have do from his unkindness: and,
have have a private intimation, from a kind friend, of a sham marriage,
intend by mean of a man who be to personate a minister, it keep my
mind in too much suspense, to be greatly overjoy at his kind
declaration.
say she, I think he do make two or three attempt upon you in
Bedfordshire? yes, madam, say I; he be very naughty, to be sure.
and here he propose article to you, I understand? yes, madam, reply
I; but I abhor so much the thought of be a keep creature, that I
reject they with great boldness; and be resolve to die before I would
consent to they.
he afterwards attempt you, I think: do he not? o yes, madam, say I,
a most sad attempt he make! and I have like to have be lose; for Mrs.
Jewkes be not so good as she should have be. and so I tell she
ladyship that sad affair, and how I fall into fit; and that they
believe I die, forbore.--any attempt after this base one? she say.
he be not so good as he should have be, return I, once in the
garden, afterwards; but I be so watchful, and so ready to take the
alarm!
but, say she, do he not threaten you, at time, and put on his stern
air, every now and then?--threaten, madam, reply I; yes, I have enough
of that! I think I should have die for fear several times.--How could
you bear that? say she: for he be a most daring and majestic mortal! he
have none of your puny heart, but be as courageous as a lion; and, boy
and man, never fear any thing. I myself, say she, have a pretty good
spirit; but, when I have make he truly angry, I have always be force
to make it up with he, as well as I could: for, child, he be not one
that be easily reconcile, I assure you.
but, after he have profess honourable love to you, do he never attempt
you again?--no, indeed, madam, he do not. but he be a good while
struggle with himself, and with his pride, as he be pleased to call
it, before he could stoop so low; and consider, and consider again:
and once, upon my saying but two or three word, that displease he,
when he be very kind to I, he turn I out of door, in a manner, at
an hour's warning; for he send I above a day's journey towards my
father's; and then send a man and horse, post-haste, to fetch I back
again; and have be exceedingly kind and gracious to I ever since, and
make I happy.
that send you away, say she, one hour, and send after you the
next, be exactly like my brother; and 'tis well if he donot turn you off
twice or thrice before a year come about, if you vex he: and he would
have do the same by the first lady in the land, if he have be marry
to she. yet have he his virtue, as well as his fault; for he be
generous; nay, he be noble in his spirit; hat little dirty action: he
delight in do good; but do not pass over a wilful fault easily. he
be wise, prudent, sober, and magnanimous, and will not tell a lie, nor
disguise his fault; but you must not expect to have he all to yourself,
I doubt.
but Iwill no more harp upon this string: you see how he be exasperate at
I; and he seem to be angry at you too; though something of it be art,
I believe.
indeed, madam, say I, he have be pleased to give I a most noble
lecture; and I find he be angry with I in earnest, and that it will not
be an easy task to behave unexceptionably to he: for he be very nice and
delicate in his notion, I perceive; but yet, as your ladyship say,
exceed generous.
well, say she, Ibe glad thou hadst a little bit of his anger; else I
should have think it art; and I donot love to be treat with low art,
any more than he; and I should have be vex if he have do it by I.
but I understand, child, say she, that you keep a journal of all matter
that pass, and he have several time find mean to get at it: should you
care I should see it? it could not be to your disadvantage; for I find
it have no small weight with he in your favour; and I should take great
pleasure to read all his stratagem, attempt, contrivance, menace, and
offer to you, on one hand, and all your pretty counter-plotting, which
he much praise; your resolute resistance, and the noble stand you have
make to preserve your virtue; and the step by which his pride be
subdue, and his mind induce to honourable love, till you be make what
you now be: for it must be a rare and uncommon story; and will not only
give I great pleasure in reading, but will entirely reconcile I to the
step he have take: and that, let I tell you, be what I never think to
be; for I have go a great way in bring about a match with he and
Lady Betty--; and have say so much of it, that the earl, her father,
approve of it: and so do the Duke of ----, her uncle; and Lady Betty
herself be not averse: and now I shall be hunt to death about it; and
this have make I so outrageous as you have see I upon the matter. but
when I can find, by your writing, that your virtue be but suitably
reward, it will be not only a good excuse for I, but for he, and make
I love you. there be nothing that I would not do, say I, to oblige
your ladyship; but my poor father and mother (who would rather have see
I bury quick in the earth, than to be seduce by the great of
prince) have they in their hand at present; and your dear brother have
bespeak they, when they have do read they: but, if he give I
leave, I will shew they to your ladyship, with all my heart; not doubt
your generous allowance, as I have have his; though I have treat he
very freely all the way, while he have naughty view; and that your
ladyship would consider they as the naked sentiment of my heart, from
time to time deliver to those, whose indulgence I be sure of; and for
whose sight only they be write.
give I a kiss now, say her ladyship, for your cheerful compliance: for
I make no doubt my brother will consent I shall see they, because they
must need make for your honour; and I see he love you well than any
one in the world.
I have hear, continue her ladyship, a mighty good character of your
parent, as industrious, honest, sensible, good folk, who know the
world; and, as I doubt not my brother's generosity, I be glad they will
make no ill figure in the world's eye.
Madam, say I, they be the honest, the loving, and the most
conscientious couple breathing. they once live creditably; and bring
up a great family, of which I be the young; but have misfortune,
through their do beyond their power for two unhappy brother, who be
both dead, and whose debt they stand bind for; and so become reduced,
and, by harsh creditor, (where most of the debt be, not of their own
contracting,) turn out of all; and have, without success, try to
set up a little country-school; (for my father understand a little of
account, and write a pretty good hand;) force to take to hard labour;
but honest all the time; content; never repine; and love to one
another; and, in the midst of their poverty and disappointment, above
all temptation; and all their fear be, that I should be wicked, and
yield to temptation for the sake of worldly rich and to God's grace,
and their good lesson, and those I imbibe from my dear good lady, your
ladyship's mother, it be that I owe the preservation of my innocence,--
and the happy station I be exalt to.
she be pleased to kiss I again, and say, there be such a noble
simplicity in thy story, such an honest artlessness in thy mind, and such
a sweet humility in thy deportment, notwithstanding thy present station,
that I believe I shall be force to love thee, whether I will or not: and
the sight of your paper, I dare say, will crown the work; will disarm my
pride, banish my resentment on Lady Betty's account, and justify my
brother's conduct; and, at the same time, redound to your own everlasting
honour, as well as to the credit of our sex: and so I make no doubt but
my brother will let I see they.
Worden, say my lady, I can say any thing before you; and you will take
no notice of our conversation; but I see you be much touch with it:
do you ever hear any thing pretty, more unaffected, sincere, free,
easy?--no, never, madam, answer she, in my life; and it be a great
pleasure to see so happy a reconciliation taking place, where there be so
much merit.
I say, I have discover so much prudence in Mrs. Worden, that, as well
for that, as for the confidence your ladyship place in she, I have make
no scruple of speak my mind freely before she; and of blame my dear
master while he be blameworthy, as well as acknowledge his
transcendent goodness to I since; which, I be sure, exceed all I can
ever deserve. may be not, say my lady; I hope youwill be very happy in
one another; and Iwill now rise, and tell he my thought, and ask he to
let I have the reading of your paper; for I promise myself much
pleasure in they; and shall not grudge a journey and a visit to you, to
the other house, to fetch they.
your ladyship's favour, say I, be all I have to wish for; and if I have
that, and the continuance of your dear brother's goodness to I, I shall
be easy under whatever else may happen.
and so I take my leave, and withdraw; and she let I hear she say to Mrs.
Worden, 'tis a charming creature, worden!--i know not which excel; her
person, or her mind!--and so young a creature too!--well may my brother
love she!
I be afraid, my dear father and mother, I shall now be too proud indeed.
I have once a good mind to have ask her ladyship about Miss Sally
Godfrey; but I think it be well let alone, since she do not mention
it herself. may be I shall hear it too soon. but I hope not. I wonder,
though, whether she be live or dead.
we breakfast together with great good temper; and my lady be very
kind, and, ask my good master, he give leave very readily, she should
see all my paper, when you return they to I; and he say, he be
sure, when she come to read they, she would say, that I have well deserve
the fortune I have meet with: and would be of opinion, that all the
kindness of his future life would hardly be a sufficient reward for my
virtue, and make I amend for my suffering.
my lady resolve to set out the next morning to return to her lord, my
master order every thing to be make ready for his do the like to
Bedfordshire; and this evening our good neighbour will sup with we, to
take leave of my lady and we.
Wednesday night.
nothing particular have pass at dinner or supper, but the most
condescending goodness, on my lady's side, to I; and the high
civility from Mr. Peters's family, from Lady Jones, from Sir Simon's
family, etc. and reciprocal good wish all around; and a promise
obtain from my benefactor, that he would endeavour to pass a fortnight
or three week in these part, before the winter set in; I shall conclude
this day with observe, that I dispose of the money my master be so
good to put into my hand, in the manner he be pleased to direct; and I
give Mrs. Jewkes her in such a manner as highly pleased she; and she
wish I, with tear, all kind of happiness; and pray I to forgive
she all her wickedness to I, as she herself call it. I beg leave
of my master to present Mrs. Worden with five guineas for a pair of
glove; which he say be well think of.
I should have mention, that Miss Darnford and I agree upon a
correspondence, which will be no small pleasure to I; for she be an
admirable young lady, whom I prefer to every one I have see; and I
shall, I make no doubt, improve by her letter; for she be say to have a
happy talent in writing, and be well read, for so young a lady.
Saturday.
on Thursday morning my lady set out for her own seat; and my good friend
and I, attend by Mr. Colbrand, Abraham, and Thomas, for this dear
house. her ladyship part with her brother and I with great
tenderness, and make I promise to send she my paper; which I find she
intend to entertain Lady Betty with, and another lady or two, her
intimate, as also her lord; and hop to find, as I believe, in the
reading of they, some excuse for her brother's choice.
my dear master have be all love and tenderness on the road, as he be
in every place, and on every occasion. and oh, what a delightful change
be this journey, to that which, so contrary to all my wish, and so
much to my apprehension, carry I hence to the Lincolnshire house!
and how do I bless God at every turn, and at every stage!
we do not arrive here till yesterday noon. Abraham ride before, to let
they know we be come: and I have the satisfaction to find every body
there I wish to see.
when the chariot enter the court-yard, I be so strongly impressed with
the favour and mercy of God Almighty, on remember how I be send
away the last time I see this house; the leave I take; the danger I have
encounter; a poor cast-off servant girl; and now return a joyful
wife, and the mistress, through his favour, of the noble house I be
turn out of; that I be hardly able to support the joy I feel in my
mind on the occasion. he see how much I be move, and tenderly ask
I, why I seem so affected? I tell he, and lift his dear hand to my
lip, and say, o sir! God's mercy, and your goodness to I on enter
this dear, dear place, be above my expression; I can hardly bear the
thought of them!--He say, welcome, thrice welcome, joy of my life! to
your own house; and kiss my hand in return. all the common servant
stand at the window, as unseen as they could, to observe we. he take my
hand, with the most condescending goodness in the world; and, with great
complaisance, lead I into the parlour, and kiss I with the great
ardour. welcome again, my dear life! say he, a thousand time
welcome to the possession of a house that be not more mine than your!
I throw myself at his foot: permit I, dear sir, thus to bless God, and
thank you, for all his mercy and your goodness. o may I so behave, as
not to be utterly unworthy; and then how happy shall I be! God give I,
my dearest, say he, life and health to reward all your sweetness! and no
man can be so blest as I.
where (say he to Abraham, who pass by the door), where be Mrs.
Jervis?--She bolt in: here, good sir! say she; here, good madam! be I,
wait impatiently, till call for, to congratulate you both.--I run to
she, and clasp my arm about her neck, and kiss she; o my dear Mrs.
Jervis! say I, my other dear mother! receive your happy, happy Pamela;
and join with I to bless God, and bless our master, for all these great
things!--i be ready to sink in her arm through excess of joy, to see
the dear good woman, who have be so often a mournful witness of my
distress, as now of my triumph.--dear madam, say she, you do I too
much honour. let my whole life shew the joy I take in your deserved good
fortune, and in my duty to you, for the early instance I receive of your
goodness in your kind letter. o Mrs. Jervis! reply I, there all thank
be due, both from you and I: for our dear master grant I this
blessing, as I may justly call it, the very first moment I beg it of
he. your goodness, sir, say she, I will for ever acknowledge; and I
beg pardon for the wrong step I make in apply to my Lady Davers.--He
be so good as to salute she, and say, all be over now, Mrs. Jervis; and
I shall not remember you ever disoblige I. I always respect you, and
shall now more and more value you, for the sake of that dear good
creature, whom, with joy unfeigned, I can call my wife. God bless your
honour for ever! say she; and many many happy year may ye live
together, the envy and wonder of all who know you!
but where, say my dear master, be honest Longman? and where be
jonathan?--come, Mrs. Jervis, say I, you shall shew I they, and all the
good folk, presently; and let I go up with you to behold the dear
apartment, which I have see before with such different emotion to what
I shall now do.
we go up; and in every room, the chamber I take refuge in, when my
master pursue I, my lady's chamber, her dressing-room, Mrs. Jervis's
room, not forget her closet, my own little bed-chamber, the green-
room, and in each of the other, I bless God for my past escape, and
present happiness; and the good woman be quite affect with the zeal
and pleasure with which I make my thankful acknowledgment to the divine
goodness. o my excellent lady! say she, you be still the same good,
pious, humble soul I know you; and your marriage have add to your
grace, as I hope it will to your blessing.
Dear Mrs. Jervis, say I, you know not what I have go through! you
know not what God have do for I! you know not what a happy creature I
be now! I have a thousand thousand thing to tell you; and a whole week
will be too little, every moment of it spend in relate to you what have
befall I, to make you acquainted with it all. we shall be sweetly
happy together, I make no doubt. but I charge you, my dear Mrs. Jervis,
whatever you call I before stranger, that when we be by ourselves you
call I nothing but your Pamela. for what an ungrateful creature should
I be, who have receive so many mercy, if I attribute they not to the
divine goodness, but assume to myself insolent air upon they! no, I
hope I shall be, more and more thankful, as I be more and more blest! and
more humble, as God, the author of all my happiness, shall more
distinguish I.
we go down again to the parlour, to my dear master. say he, call
Longman in again; he long to see you, my dear. he come in: God bless
you, my sweet lady, say he; as now, Heaven be praise, I may call you!
do I not tell you, madam, that Providence would find you out? o, Mr.
Longman, say I, God be praise for all his mercy! I be rejoice to
see you; and I lay my hand on his, and say, good Mr. Longman, how do
you do?--i must always value you; and you donot know how much of my
present happiness I owe to the sheet of paper, and pen and ink, you
furnish I with. I hope my dear sir and you be quite reconciled.--o,
madam, say he, how good you be! why, I cannot contain myself for joy!
and then he wipe his eye; good man!
say my master, yes, I have be tell Longman that I be oblige to he
for his ready return to I; and that I will entirely forget his appeal to
Lady Davers; and I hope hewill find himself quite as easy and happy as he
wish. my dear partner here, Mr. Longman, I dare promise you, will do
all she can to make you so.--Heaven bless you both together! say he.
'tis the pride of my heart to see this! I return with double delight,
when I hear the blessed news; and I be sure, sir, say he, (mark old
Longman's word,) God will bless you for this every year more and more!
you donot know how many heart you have make happy by this generous
deed!--i be glad of it, say my dear master; I be sure I have make my own
happy: and, Longman, though I must think you SOMEBODY, yet, as you be
not a young man, and so willnot make I jealous, I can allow you to wish my
dear wife joy in the tender manner. Adad! sir, say he, I be sure you
rejoice I with your favour: 'tis what I long for, but durst not
presume. my dear, say my master, receive the compliment of one of the
honest heart in England, that always revere your virtues!--and the
good man salute I with great respect, and say, God in Heaven bless you
both! and kneel on one knee. I must quit your presence! indeed I
must!--and away he go.
your goodness, sir, say I, know no bound: o may my gratitude never
find any!--I see, say my master, when the good man approach you, that
he do it with so much awe and love mingle together, that I fancy he
long to salute my angel; and I could not but indulge his honest heart.
how blessed be I! say I, and kiss his hand.--and indeed I make nothing
now of kiss his dear hand, as if it be my own!
when honest old Mr. Jonathan come in to attend at dinner, so clean, so
sleek, and so neat, as he always be, with his silver hair, I say, well,
Mr. Jonathan, how do you do? I be glad to see you.--You look as well as
ever, thank God! o, dear madam! say he, well than ever, to have such
a bless sight! God bless you and my good master!--and I hope, sir,
say he, youwill excuse all my past failing. ay, that I will, Jonathan,
say he; because you never have any, but what your regard for my dear wife
here be the occasion of. and now I can tell you, you can never err,
because you cannot respect she too much. o sir, say he, your honour be
exceed good! Ibe sure I shall always pray for you both.
after dinner, Mr. Longman come in, and talk of some affair under
his care, he say afterwards, all your honour's servant be now happy;
for Robert, who leave you, have a pretty little fortune fall to he, or
he never would have quit your service. he be here but yesterday, to
inquire when you and my lady return hither; and hop he might have
leave to pay his duty to you both. ay, say my master, I shall be glad
to see honest Robert; for thatbe another of your favourite, Pamela. it
be high time, I think, I should marry you, be it but to engage the
respect of all my family to myself.--There be, sir, say I, ten
thousand reason why I should rejoice in your goodness.
but I be go to say, say Mr. Longman, that all your honour's old
servant be now happy, but one. you mean John Arnold? say my master.
I do, indeed, say he, if youwill excuse I, sir. o, say I, I have have
my prayer for poor John answer, as favourably as I could wish.--why,
say Mr. Longman, to be sure poor John have act no very good part, take
it altogether; but he so much honour you, sir, and so much respected
you, madam, that he would have be glad to have be obedient to both;
and so be faithful to neither. but, indeed, the poor fellow's heart be
almost broke, and he willnot look out for any other place; and say, he
must live in your honour's service, or he must die wretched very shortly.
Mrs. Jervis be there when this be say: indeed, say she, the poor man
have be here every day since he hear the tiding, that have rejoice we
all; and he say, he hop he shall yet be forgive. be he in the house
now? say my master. he be, sir; and be here when your honour come in,
and play at hide and seek to have one look at you both when you
alight; and be ready to go out of his wit for joy, when we see your
honour hand my lady in. Pamela, say my dear master, yoube to do with
John as you please. you have full power. then pray, sir, say I, let
poor John come in.
the poor fellow come in, with so much confusion, that I have never see a
countenance that express so lively a consciousness of his fault, and
mingle joy and shame. how do you do, John? say I; I hope you be very
well!--the poor fellow could hardly speak, and look with awe upon my
master, and pleasure upon I. say my master, well, John, there be no
room to say any thing to a man that have so much concern already: I be
tell you will serve I whether I will or not; but I turn you over
altogether to my spouse here: and she be to do by you as she please.
you see, John, say I, your good master's indulgence. well may I
forgive, that have so generous an example. I be always persuade of
your honest intention, if you have know how to distinguish between your
duty to your master, and your good-will to I: you will now have no more
puzzle on that account, from the goodness of your dear master. I shall
be but too happy I say the poor man. God bless your honour! God bless
you, madam!--I now have the joy of my soul, in serve you both; and I
will make the good of servant, to my power. well, then, John, say I,
your wage will go on, as if you have not leave your master: may I not say
so, sir? say I. Yes, surely, my dear, reply he; and augment they too,
if you find his duty to you deserve it. a thousand million of thank,
say the poor man: I be very well satisfied, and desire no augmentation.
and so he withdraw, overjoy; and Mrs. Jervis and Mr. Longman be
highly pleased; for though they be incense against he for his fault
to I, when matter look badly for I, yet they, and all his fellow-
servant, always love John.
when Mr. Longman and Mrs. Jervis have din, they come in again, to know
if he have any command; and my dear master, fill a glass of wine,
say, Longman, I be go to toast the happy and honestest couple
in England, my dear Pamela's father and mother.--thank you, dear sir,
say I.
I think, continue he, that little kentish purchase want a manager; and
as it be a little out of your way, Longman, I have be purpose, if I
think Mr. Andrews would accept it, that he should enter upon Hodge's
farm that be, and so manage for I that whole little affair; and we will
well stock the farm for he, and make it comfortable; and I think, if he
will take that trouble upon he, it will be an ease to you, and a favour
to I.
your honour, say he, cannot do a well thing; and I have have some
inkling give I, that you may, if you please, augment that estate, by a
purchase, of equal amount, contiguous to it; and as you have so much
money to spare, I cannot see your honour can do well. well, say he,
let I have the particular another time, and we will consider about it.
but, my dear, add he, youwill mention this to your father, if you
please.
I have too much money, Longman, continue he, lie useless; though, upon
this occasion, I shall not grudge lay out as much in livery and
other thing, as if I have marry a lady of a fortune equal, if possible,
to my Pamela's merit; and I reckon you have a good deal in hand. yes,
sir, say he, more than I wish I have. but I have a mortgage in view, if
you donot buy that kentish thing, that I believe will answer very well;
and when matter be riper, will mention it to your honour.
I take with I, to Lincolnshire, say my master, upwards of six hundred
guineas, and think to have lay most of they out there: (thank God,
think I, you do not! for he offer I five hundred of they, you
know:) but I have not lay out above two hundred and fifty of they; so
two hundred I leave there in my escritoire; because I shall go again for a
fortnight or so, before winter; and two hundred I have bring with I:
and I have money, I know not what, in three place here, the account of
which be in my pocket-book, in my library.
you have make some little present, Pamela, to my servant there, on our
nuptial; and these two hundred that I have bring up, I will put into
your disposal, that, with some of they, you shall do here as you do
there.
I be ashamed, good sir, say I, to be so costly, and so worthless! pray,
my dear, reply he, say not a word of that. say Mr. Longman, why,
madam, with money in stock, and one thing or another, his honour could
buy half the gentleman around he. he want not money, and lay up every
year. and it would have be pity but his honour should have wed just
as he have. very true, Longman, say my master; and, pull out his
purse, say, tell out, my dear, two hundred guinea, and give I the
rest.--I do so. now, say he, take they yourself, for the purpose I
mention. but, Mr. Longman, do you, before sunset, bring my dear girl
fifty pound, which be due to she this day, by my promise; and every
three month, from this day, pay she fifty pound; which will be two
hundred pound per annum; and this be for she to lay out at her own
discretion, and without account, in such a way as shall derive a blessing
upon we all: for she be my mother's almoner, and shall be mine, and she
own too.--i'll go for it this instant, say Mr. Longman.
when he be do, I look upon my dear generous master, and on Mrs.
Jervis, and he give I a nod of assent; and I take twenty guineas, and
say, Dear Mrs. Jervis, accept of this, which be no more than my generous
master order I to present to Mrs. Jewkes, for a pair of glove, on my
happy nuptial; and so you, who be much well entitle to they by the
love I bear you, must not refuse they.
say she, Mrs. Jewkes be on the spot, madam, at the happy time. yes,
say my master; but Pamela would have rejoice to have have you there
instead of she. that I should, sir, reply I, or instead of any body,
except my own mother. she gratefully accept they, and thank we both:
but I donot know what she should thank I for; for I be not worth a
fourth of they myself.
Iwould have you, my dear, say he, in some handsome manner, as you know how,
oblige Longman to accept of the like present.
Mr. Longman return from his office, and bring I the fifty pound,
say, I have enter this new article with great pleasure: 'to my Lady
fifty pound: to be pay the same sum quarterly.' o sir! say I, what
will become of I, to be so poor in myself, and so rich in your bounty!--
it be a shame to take all that your profuse goodness would heap upon I
thus: but indeed it shall not be without account.--Make no word, my
dear, say he: be you not my wife? and have I not endow you with my
good; and, hitherto, this be a very small part.
Mr. Longman, say I, and Mrs. Jervis, you both see how I be even
oppress with unreturnable obligation. God bless the donor, and the
receiver too! say Mr. Longman: I be sure they will bring back good
interest; for, madam, you have ever a bountiful heart; and I have see the
pleasure you use to take to dispense my late lady's alm and donation.
Iwill warrant, Mr. Longman, say I, notwithstanding you be so willing to
have I take large sum for nothing at all, I should affront you, if I
ask you to accept from I a pair of glove only, on account of my happy
nuptial. he seem not readily to know how to answer; and my master
say, if Longman refuse you, my dear, he may be say to refuse your first
favour. on that I put twenty guineas in his hand; but he insist upon
it, that he would take but five. I say, I must desire you to oblige I,
Mr. Longman, or I shall think I have affront you. well, if I must,
say he, I know what I know. what be that, Mr. Longman? say I.--Why,
madam, say he, I will not lay it out till my young master's birth-day,
which I hope will be within this twelvemonth.
not expect anything like this from the old gentleman, I look at my
master, and then blush so, I could not hold up my head. charmingly
say, Longman! say my master, and clasp I in his arm: o, my dear
life! God send it may be so!--You have quite delighted I, Longman!
though I durst not have say such a thing for the world.--Madam, say the
old gentleman, I beg your pardon; I hope no offence: but Iwould speak it ten
time in a breath to have it so, take it how you please, as long as my
good master take it so well. Mrs. Jervis, say my master, this be an
over-nice dear creature; you donot know what a life I have have with she,
even on this side matrimony.--Said Mrs. Jervis, I think Mr. Longman say
very well; I be sure I shall hope for it too.
Mr. Longman, who have strike I of a heap, withdraw soon after, my
master say, why, my dear, you cannot look up! the old man say nothing
shocking. I do not expect it, though, from he, say I. I be not
aware but of some innocent pleasantry. why, so it be, say he, both
innocent and pleasant: and I willnot forgive you, if you donot say as he
say. come, speak before Mrs. Jervis. may every thing happen, sir, say
I, that will give you delight!--thatbe my dearest love, say he, and
kiss I with great tenderness.
when the servant have din, I desire to see the maiden; and all four
come up together. you be welcome home, madam, say Rachel; we rejoice
all to see you here, and more to see you our lady. o my good old
acquaintance, say I, I joy to see you! how do you do, Rachel? how do
you all do? and I take each of they by the hand, and could have kiss
they. for, say I to myself, I kiss you all, last time I see you, in
sorrow; why should I not kiss you all with joy? but I forbore, in honour
of their master's presence.
they seem quite transport with I: and my good master be please
with the scene. see here, my lass, say he, your mistress! I need not
bid you respect she; for you always love she; and shewill have it as much
in her power as inclination to be kind to the deserving. indeed, say I,
I shall always be a kind friend to you; and your dear master have order
I to give each of you this, that you may rejoice with I on my
happiness. and so I give they five guineas a-piece, and say, God bless
you every one! I be overjoyed to see you! and they withdraw with the
great gratitude and pleasure, pray for we both.
I turn to my dear master: 'tis to you, dear sir, say I, next to God,
who put it into your generous heart, that all my happiness be owe!
that my mind thus overflow with joy and gratitude! and I would have
kiss his hand; but he clasp I in his arm, and say, you deserve it,
my dear: you deserve it all. Mrs. Jervis come in. say she, I have see
a very affect sight; you have make your maiden quite happy, madam,
with your kindness and condescension! I see they all four, as I come by
the hall-door, just get up from their knee, praise and pray for you
both! dear good body! say I; and do Jane pray too? may their
prayer be return upon themselves, I say!
my master send for Jonathan, and I hold up all the finger of my two
hand; and my master give a nod of approbation as he come in, I say,
well, Mr. Jonathan, I could not be satisfied without see you in form,
as it be, and thank you for all your past good-will to I. youwill
accept of that, for a pair of glove, on this happy occasion; and I give
he ten guineas, and take his honest hand between both mine: God bless
you, say I, with your silver hair, so like my dear father!--i shall
always value such a good old servant of the good of masters!--He say, o
such goodness! such kind word! it be balm to my heart! blessed be God
I have live to this day!--And his eye swam in tear, and he withdrew.--
my dear, say my master, you make every one happy!--O, sir, say I, 'tis
you, 'tis you! and let my grateful heart always spre to my lip, to
acknowledge the blessing you heap upon I.
then in come Harry, and Isaac, and Benjamin, and the two groom of this
house, and Arthur the gardener; for my dear master have order they, by
Mrs. Jervis, thus to be marshal out: and he say, where's John? Poor
John be ashamed, and do not come in till he hear himself call for.
I say to they, how do you do, my old friend and fellow-servant? I be
glad to see you all.
my master say, I have give you a mistress, my lad, that be the joy of
my heart: you see she goodness and condescension! let your respect to
she be but answerable, and shewill be proportionately as great a blessing
to you all, as she be to I. Harry say, in the name of all your
servant, sir, I bless your honour, and your good lady: and it shall be
all our study to deserve her ladyship's favour, as well as your
honour's. and so I give every one five guineas, to rejoice, as I say,
in my happiness.
when I come to John, I say, I see you before, John; but I again tell
you, I be glad to see you. he say, he be quite ashamed and confound.
O, say I, forget every thing thatbe past, John!--Your dear good master
will, and so will i. for God have wonderfully bring about all these
thing, by the very mean I once think most grievous. let we,
therefore, look forward, and be only ashamed to commit fault for the
time to come: for they may not always be attend with like happy
consequence.
Arthur, say my master, I have bring you a mistress that be a great
gardener. shewill shew you a new way to plant bean: and never any body
have such a hand at improve a sun-flower as she!--O sir, sir, say I,
(but yet a little dash,) all my improvement in every kind of thing be
owe to you, I be sure!--and so I think I be even with the dear man,
and yet appear grateful before his servant. they withdraw, bless
we both, as the rest have do. and then come in the postilion, and two
helper, (for my master have both here, and at Lincolnshire, fine hunting
horse; and it be the chief sport he take delight in,) as also the
scullion-boy: and I say, how do all of you? and how dost do, Tommy? I
hope yoube very good. here your dear master have order you something
a-piece, in honour of I. and my master hold three finger to I, I
give the postilion and helper three guineas each, and the little boy
two; and bid he let his poor mother lie it out for he, for he must not
spend it idly. Mr. Colbrand, Abraham, and Thomas, I have before present
at t'other house.
and when they be all go but Mrs. Jervis, I say, and now, dearest
sir, permit I, on my knee, thus to bless you, and pray for you. and
oh, may God crown you with length of day, and increase of honour; and
may your happy, happy Pamela, by her grateful heart, appear always worthy
in your dear eye, though she cannot be so in her own, nor in those of
any other!
Mrs. Jervis, say my master, you see the excellency of this sweet
creature! and when I tell you that the charm of her person, all lovely
as she be, bind I not so strongly to she, as the grace of her mind;
congratulate I, that my happiness be build on so stable a basis. indeed
I do, most sincerely, sir, say she: this be a happy day to I!
I stept into the library, while he be thus pour out his kindness for
I to Mrs. Jervis; and bless God there on my knee, for the difference
I now find to what I have once know in it.--and when I have do the
same in the first scene of my fear, the once frightful summer-house, I
shall have go through most of my distressful scene with gratitude; but
shall never forbear thank God in my mind, for his goodness to I in
every one. Mrs. Jervis, I find, have whisper he what I have do above,
and he see I upon my knee, with my back towards he, unknown to I; but
softly put to the door again, as he have open it a little way. and I
say, not know he have see I, you have some charming picture here,
sir.--yes, say he, my dear life, so I have; but none equal to that which
your piety afford I; and may the God you delight to serve, bless more
and more my dear angel!--Sir, say I, you be all goodness!--I hope,
reply he, after your sweet example, I shall be well and well.
do you think, my dear father and mother, there ever be so happy a
creature as I? to be sure it would be very ungrateful to think with
uneasiness, or any thing but compassion, of poor Miss Sally Godfrey.
he order Jonathan to let the evening be pass merrily, but wisely, as
he say, with what every one like, whether wine or October.
he be pleased afterwards to lead I up stair, and give I possession of
my lady's dressing-room and cabinet, and her fine repeat-watch and
equipage; and, in short, of a complete set of diamond, that be his
good mother's; as also of the two pair of diamond ear-ring, the two
diamond ring, and diamond necklace, he mention in his naughty
article, which her ladyship have intend for present to Miss Tomlins, a
rich heiress, that be propose for his wife, when he be just come from
his travel; but which go off, after all be agree upon on both the
friend' side, because he approve not her conversation; and she have, as
he tell his mother, too masculine an air; and he never could be bring
to see she but once, though the lady like he very well. he present
I also with her ladyship's book, picture, linen, lace, etc. that be
in her apartment; and bid I call those apartment mine. o give I, my
good God! humility and gratitude.
Sunday night.
this day, as matter could not be ready for our appearance at a well
place, we staid at home; and my dear master employ himself a good deal
in his library: and I have be take up pretty much, I hope, as I ought
to be, in thankfulness, prayer and meditation, in my newly-present
closet and I hope God will be pleased to give a blessing to I; for I
have the pleasure to think I be not puff up with this great alteration;
and yet be I not want to look upon all these favour and blessing in
the light wherein I ought to receive they, both at the hand of Heaven,
and my dear benefactor.
we din together with great pleasure; and I have, in every word and
action, all the instance of kindness and affection that the most
indulge heart could wish. he say he would return to his closet again;
and at five o'clock would come and take a walk with I in the garden: and
so retire as soon as he have din, and I go up to mine.
about six, he be pleased to come up to I, and say, now, my dear, I
will attend you for a little walk in the garden; and I give he my hand
with great pleasure.
this garden be much well cultivate than the Lincolnshire one; but that
be large, and have nobler walk in it; and yet there be a pretty canal in
this, and a fountain and cascade. we have a deal of sweet conversation as
we walk; and, after we have take a turn round, I bent towards the
little garden; and when I come near the summer-house, take the
opportunity to slip from he, and just whipt up the step of this once
frightful place, and kneel down, and say, I bless thee, o God! for my
escape, and for thy mercy! o let I always possess a grateful, humble
heart! and I whipt down again and join he; and he hardly miss I.
several of the neighbouring gentry send their compliment to he on his
return, but not a word about his marriage; particularly Mr. Arthur, Mr.
Towers, Mr. Brooks, and Mr. Martin of the Grove.
Monday.
I have a good deal of employment in choose pattern for my new clothe.
he think nothing too good; but I think every thing I see be; and he
be so kind to pick out six of the rich for I to choose three suit
out of, say, we would furnish ourselves with more in town, when we
go thither. one be white, flower with silver most richly; and he
be pleased to say, that, as I be a bride, I should make my appearance
in that the follow Sunday. and so we shall have in two or three day,
from several place, nothing but mantua-maker and tailor at work.
bless I! what a chargeable and what a worthless hussy I be to the dear
gentleman!--but his fortune and station require a great deal of it; and
his value for I will not let he do less, than if he have marry a
fortune equal to his own: and then, as he say, it would be a reflection
upon he, if he did.--And so I doubt it will be, as it be: for either way
the world will have something to say. he make I also choose some very
fine lace, and linen; and have send a message on purpose, with his
order, to hasten all down, what can be do in town, as the millinery
matter, etc. to be complete there, and send by particular messenger,
as do. all to be here, and finish by Saturday afternoon, without
fail.
I send away John this morning, with some more of my paper to you, and
with the few he will give you separate. my desire be, that you will send
I all the paper you have do with, that I may keep my word with Lady
Davers; to beg the continuance of your prayer and blessing; to hope you
will give I your answer about my dear benefactor's proposal of the
kentish farm; to beg you to buy, two suit of clothe each; of the fine
cloth for you, my dear father; and of a creditable silk for my dear
mother; and good linen, and every thing answerable; and that you will, as
my good friend bid I say, let we see you here as soon as possible; and
he will have his chariot come for you, when you tell John the day. oh!
how I long to see you both, my dear good parent, and to share with you
my felicity!
you will have, Ibe sure, the goodness to go to all your creditor, which
be chiefly those of my poor unhappy brother, and get an account of all
you be bind for; and every one shall be pay to the utmost farthing,
and interest besides, though some of they have be very cruel and
unrelenting.--but they be entitle to their own, and shall be thankfully
pay.
now I think of it, John shall take my paper down to this place; that you
may have something to amuse you, of your dear child's, instead of those
you part with; and I will continue write till I be settle, and you be
determine; and then I shall apply myself to the duty of the family, in
order to become as useful to my dear benefactor, as my small ability
will let I.
if you think a couple of guineas will be of use to Mrs. Mumford, who, I
doubt, have not much aforehand, pray give they to she, from I, (and I
will return they to you,) as for a pair of glove on my nuptial: and
look through your poor acquaintance and neighbour, and let I have a
list of such honest industrious poor, as may be true object of charity,
and have no other assistance; particularly such as be blind, lame, or
sickly, with their several case; and also such poor family and
housekeeper as be reduce by misfortune, as ours be, and where a
great number of child may keep they from rise to a state of
tolerable comfort: and I will choose as well as I can; for I long to be
make a beginning, with the kind quarterly benevolence my dear good
benefactor have bestow upon I for such good purpose.
I be resolve to keep account of all these matter, and Mr. Longman have
already furnish I with a vellum book of white paper; some side of
which I hope soon to fill with the name of proper object: and though my
dear master have give I all this without account, yet shall he see (but
nobody else) how I lie it out, from quarter to quarter; and I will, if
any be leave, carry it on, like an accomptant, to the next quarter, and
strike a balance four time a year, and a general balance at every year's
end.--and I have write in it, humble return for DIVINE mercy; and
lock it up safe in my newly-present cabinet.
I intend to let Lady Davers see no farther of my paper, than to her own
angry letter to her brother; for I would not have she see my reflection
upon it; and shewill know, down to that place, all thatbe necessary for
her curiosity, as to my suffering, and the stratagem use against I,
and the honest part I have be enable to act: and I hope, when she have
read they all, she will be quite reconcile: for she will see it be all
God Almighty's doing; and that a gentleman of his part and knowledge
be not to be draw in by such a poor young body as I.
I will detain John no long. he will tell you to read this last part
first, and while he stay. and so, with my humble duty to you both, and
my dear Mr. B----'s kind remembrance, I rest
your ever-dutiful and gratefully happy DAUGHTER.
Wednesday evening.
HONOURED FATHER and MOTHER!
I will now proceed with my journal.
on Tuesday morning, my dear sir ride out, and bring with he to dinner,
Mr. Martin of the Grove, and Mr. Arthur, and Mr. Brooks, and one Mr.
Chambers; and he stept up to I, and say he have ride out too far to
return to breakfast; but he have bring with he some of his old
acquaintance, to dine with I. be you sorry for it, Pamela? say he. I
remember his lesson, and say no, sure, sir; I cannot be angry at any
thing you be pleased to do. say he, you know Mr. Martin's character,
and have severely censure he in one of your letter, as one of my
brother rake, and for his three lying-in.
he then give I the follow account, how he come to bring they. say
he, 'I meet they all at Mr. Arthur's; and his lady ask I, if I be
really married? I say, yes, really. and to whom? say Mr. Martin.
why, reply I, bluntly, to my mother's waiting-maid. they could not
tell what to say to I hereupon, and look one upon another. and I see
I have spoil a jest, from each. Mrs. Arthur say, you have, indeed,
sir, a charming creature, as ever I see; and she have mighty good luck.
ay, say I, and so have i. but I shall say the less, because a man never
do any thing of this nature, that he do not think he ought, if it be
but in policy, to make the good of it. Nay, say Mr. Arthur, if you have
sin, it be with your eye open: for you know the world as well as any
gentleman of your year in it.'
'why, really, gentleman, say I, I should be glad to please all my
friend; but I cannot expect, till they know my motif and inducement,
that it will be so immediately. but I do assure you, I be exceedingly
pleased myself; and that, you know, be most to the purpose.'
'say Mr. Brooks, I have hear my wife praise your spouse that be, so
much for person and beauty, that I want to see she of all thing. why,
reply I, if youwill all go and take a dinner with I, you shall see she
with all my heart. and, Mrs. Arthur, will you bear us company? no,
indeed, sir, say she. what, Iwill warrant, my wife will not be able to
reconcile you to my mother's waiting-maid; be not that it? tell truth,
Mrs. Arthur. Nay, say she, I shallnot be backward to pay your spouse a
visit, in company of the neighbouring lady; but for one single woman to
go, on such a sudden motion too, with so many gentleman, be not right.
but that need not hinder you, gentleman. so, say he, the rest send,
that they should not dine at home; and they and Mr. Chambers, a gentleman
lately settle in these part, one and all come with I: and so, my dear,
conclude he, when you make your appearance next Sunday, yoube sure of a
party in your favour; for all that see you must esteem you.'
he go to they; and when I come down to dinner, he be pleased to take
I by the hand, at my entrance into the parlour, and say, my dear, I
have bring some of my good neighbour to dine with you. I say, you
be very good, sir.--my dear, this gentleman be Mr. Chambers; and so he
present every one to I; and they salute I, and wish we both joy.
I, for my part, say Mr. Brooks, wish you joy most heartily. my wife
tell I a good deal of the beauty of your person; but I do not think
we have such a flower in our country. Sir, say I, your lady be very
partial to I; and you be so polite a gentleman, that you will not
contradict your good lady.
Iwill assure you, madam, return he, you have not hit the matter at all;
for we contradict one another twice or thrice a day. but the devil's
in't if we be not agree in so clear a case!
say Mr. Martin, Mr. Brooks say very true, madam, in both respect;
(mean his wife's and his own contradiction to one another, as well as
in my favour;) for, add he, they have be marry some year.
as I have not the good opinion of this gentleman, nor his jest, I say, I
be almost sorry, sir, for the gentleman's jest upon himself and his lady;
but I think it should have relieve he from a great jest, your
pleasant confirmation of it.--but still the reason you give that it may
be so, I hope, be the reason that may be give that it be not so; to wit,
that they have be marry some year.
say Mr. Arthur, Mr. Martin, I think the lady have very handsomely
reprove you. I think so too, say Mr. Chambers; and it be but a very
indifferent compliment to a bride. say Mr. Martin, Compliment or not,
gentleman, I have never see a matrimony of any time stand, that it
be not so, little or much: but I dare say it will never be so here.
to be sure, sir, say I, if it be, I must be the ungratefull person
in the world, because I be the most obliged person in it. that notion,
say Mr. Arthur, be so excellent, that it give a moral certainty it
never can.
Sir, say Mr. Brooks to my dear master, softly, you have a most
accomplished lady, I do assure you, as well in her behaviour and wit, as
in her person, call she what you please. why, my dear friend, say my
master, I must tell you, as I have say before now, that her person make
I her lover, but her mind make she my wife.
the first course come in, my dear sir lead I himself to my place; and
set Mr. Chambers, as the great stranger, at my right hand, and Mr.
Brooks at my left; and Mr. Arthur be pleased to observe, much to my
advantage, on the ease and freedom with which I behave myself, and
help they; and say, he would bring his lady to be a witness, and a
learner both, of my manner. I say, I should be proud of any honour
Mrs. Arthur would vouchsafe to do I; and if once I could promise myself
the opportunity of his good lady's example, and those of the other
gentleman present, I should have the great opinion of my worthiness to
sit in the place I fill at present with much insufficiency.
Mr. Arthur drink to my health and happiness, and say, my wife tell your
spouse, madam, you have very good luck in such a husband; but I now see
who have the good of it. say Mr. Brooks, Come, come, letus make no
compliment; for the plain truth of the matter be, our good neighbour's
generosity and judgment have meet with so equal a match in his lady's
beauty and merit, that I know not which have the good luck. but may you
be both long happy together, say I! and so he drink a glass of wine.
my good friend, who always take delight to have I praise, seem much
pleased with our conversation; and he say the kind, tender, and
most respectful thing in the world to I. Insomuch, that the rough Mr.
Martin say, do you ever think our good friend here, who use to
ridicule matrimony so much, would have make so complaisant a husband?
how long do you intend, sir, that this shall hold? as long as my good
girl deserve it, say he; and that, I hope, will be for ever. but,
continue the kind gentleman, you need not wonder I have change my mind
as to wedlock; for I never expect to meet with one whose behaviour and
sweetness of temper be so well adapt to make I happy.
after dinner, and have drink good health to each of their lady, I
withdraw; and they sit and drink two bottle of claret a-piece, and be
very merry; and go away, full of my praise, and vow to bring their
lady to see I.
John have bring I your kind letter, my dear father, I tell my good
master, after his friend be go, how gratefully you receive his
generous intention as to the kentish farm, and promise your good
endeavour to serve he in that estate; and that you hop your industry
and care would be so well employ in it, that you should be very little
troublesome to him,--as to the liberal manner in which he have intend to
add to a provision, that of itself exceed all you wish. he be very
well pleased with your cheerful acceptance of it.
I be glad your engagement in the world lie in so small a compass. as
soon as you have get an account of they exactly, you will be please
to send it I, with the list of the poor folk you be so kind to promise
to procure I.
I think, as my dear master be so generous, you should account nothing
that be plain, too good. pray donot be afraid of lay out upon
yourself. my dear sir intend that you shall not, when you come to we,
return to your old abode; but stay with we, till you set out for Kent;
and so you must dispose of yourself accordingly. and I hope, my dear
father, you have quite leave off all slavish business. as farmer Jones
have be kind to you, as I have hear you say, pray, when you take leave
of they, present they with three guinea worth of good book; such as a
family bible, a common prayer, a whole duty of man, or any other you
think will be acceptable; for they live a great way from church; and in
winter the way from their farm thither be impassable.
he have bring I my paper safe: and I will send they to Lady Davers the
first opportunity, down to the place I mention in my last.
my dear Mr. B---- just now tell I, that he will carry I, in the
morning, a little airing, about ten mile off, in his chariot and four,
to breakfast at a farm-house, note for a fine dairy, and where, now and
then, the neighbouring gentry, of both sex, resort for that purpose.
Thursday.
we set out at about half an hour after six, accordingly; and drive
pretty smartly, get at this truly neat house at half an hour after eight;
and I be much pleased with the neatness of the good woman, and her
daughter and maid; and he be so good as to say he would now and then
take a turn with I to the same place, and on the same occasion, as I
seem to like it; for that it would be a pretty exercise, and procure we
appetite to our breakfast, as well as our return would to our dinner.
but I find this be not, though a very good reason, the only one for
which he give I this agreeable airing; as I shall acquaint you.
we be prettily receive and entertain here, and an elegancy run
through every thing, person as well as furniture, yet all plain. and my
master say to the good housewife, do your young boarding-school lady
still at time continue their visit to you, Mrs. Dobson? yes, sir, say
she, I expect three or four of they every minute.
there be, my dear, say he, within three mile of this farm, a very good
boarding-school for lady. the governess of it keep a chaise and pair,
which be to be make a double chaise at pleasure; and in summer time, when
the miss perform their task to satisfaction, she favour they with an
airing to this place, three or four at a time; and after they have
breakfast, they be carry back. and this serve both for a reward,
and for exercise; and the miss who have this favour be not a little
proud of it; and it bring they forward in their respective task.
a very good method, sir, say i. and just as we be talk, the chaise
come in with four miss, all pretty much of a size, and a maid-servant
to attend they. they be shew another little neat apartment, that go
through our; and make their honour very prettily, as they pass by we.
I go into the room to they, and ask they question about their work,
and their lesson; and what they have do to deserve such a fine airing
and breakfasting; and they all answer I very prettily. and pray,
little lady, say I, what may I call your name? one be call Miss
Burdoff, one Miss Nugent, one Miss Booth, and the fourth Miss Goodwin. I
donot know which, say I, be the prettiest; but you be all good, my
little dear; and you have a very good governess, to indulge you with
such a fine airing, and such delicate cream, and bread and butter. I
hope you think so too.
my master come in, and I have no mistrust in the world; and he kiss each
of they; but look more wishfully on Miss Goodwin, than on any of the
other; but I think nothing just then: have she be call Miss
Godfrey, I have hit upon it in a trice.
when we go from they, he say, which do you think the prettiest of
those miss? really, sir, reply I, it be hard to say: Miss Booth be a
pretty brown girl, and have a fine eye; Miss Burdoff have a great deal of
sweetness in her countenance, but be not so regularly feature. Miss
Nugent be very fair: and Miss Goodwin have a fine black eye, and be,
besides, I think, the genteelest shape child; but they be all pretty.
the maid lead they into the garden, to shew they the beehive; and Miss
Goodwin make a particular fine courtesy to my master; and I say, I
believe miss know you, sir; and, take she by the hand, I say, do you
know this gentleman, my pretty dear?--Yes, madam, say she; it be my own
dear uncle. I clasp she in my arm: o why do you not tell I, sir,
say I, that you have a niece among these little lady? and I kiss
she, and away she tript after the other.
but pray, sir, say I, how can this be?--you have no sister nor brother,
but Lady davers.--how can this be?
he smile: and then I say, o my dear sir, tell I now the truth, do
not this pretty miss stand in a near relation to you, than as a niece?
--I know she do! I know she do! and I embrace he as he stand.
'tis even so, my dear, reply he; and you remember my sister's good-
natured hint of Miss Sally Godfrey? I do well, sir, answer I. but
this be Miss Goodwin. her mother choose that name for she, say he,
because she should not be call by her own.
well, say I, excuse I, sir; I must go and have a little prattle with
she. Iwill send for she in again, reply he; and in she come in a
moment. I take she in my arm, and say, o my charming dear! will you
love me?--will you let I be your aunt? yes, madam, answer she, with
all my heart! and I will love you dearly: but I mustnot love my uncle.
why so? say he. because, reply she, you would not speak to I at
first! and because you would not let I call you uncle (for it seem she
be bid not, that I might not guess at she presently): and yet, say the
pretty dear, I have not see you a great while, so I havenot.
well, Pamela, say he, now can you allow I to love this little innocent?
allow you, sir, reply I; you would be very barbarous, if you do not;
and I should be more so, if I do not further it all I could, and love
the little lamb myself, for your sake and for her own sake; and in
compassion to her poor mother, though unknown to I: and tear stand in
my eye.
say he, why, my love, be your word so kind, and your countenance so
sad?--i draw to the window from the child; and say, Sad it be not, sir;
but I have a strange grief and pleasure mingle at once in my breast, on
this occasion. it be indeed a twofold grief, and a twofold pleasure.--as
how, my dear? say he. why, sir, reply I, I cannot help be grieve
for the poor mother of this sweet babe, to think, if she be live, that
she must call she chief delight her shame: if she be no more, that she
must have have such remorse on her poor mind, when she come to leave the
world, and her little babe: and, in the second place, I grieve, that it
must be think a kindness to the dear little soul, not to let she know
how near the dear relation she have in the world be to her.--Forgive
I, dear sir, I say not this to reproach you, in the least. indeed I
donot. and I have a twofold cause of joy; first, that I have have the
grace to escape the like unhappiness with this poor gentlewoman: and
next, that this discovery have give I an opportunity to shew the
sincerity of my grateful affection for you, sir, in the love I will
always express to this dear child.
and then I stept to she again, and kiss she; and say, join with I, my
pretty love, to beg your dear uncle to let you come and live with your
new aunt: indeed, my little precious, Iwill love you dearly.
will you, sir? say the little charmer; will you let I go and live with
my aunt?
you be very good, my Pamela, say he. and I have not once be deceive
in the hope my fond heart have entertain of your prudence.--but will
you, sir? say I; will you grant I this favour? I shall most sincerely
love the little charmer; and all I be capable of do for she, both by
example and affection, shall most cordially be do. my dearest sir,
add I, oblige I in this thing! I think already my heart be set upon
it! what a sweet employment and companionship shall I have!
wewill talk of this some other time, reply he; but I must, in prudence,
put some bound to your amiable generosity. I have always intend to
surprise you into this discovery; but my sister lead the way to it, out of
a poorness in her spite, that I could not brook: and though you have
please I beyond expression, in your behaviour on this occasion; yet I
cannot say, that you have go much beyond my expectation; for I have
such a high opinion of you, that I think nothing could have shake it,
but a contrary conduct to this you have express on so tender a
circumstance.
well, sir, say the dear little miss, then you will not let I go home
with my aunt, will you? I be sure she will love I. when you break up
next, my dear, say he, if you be a good girl, you shall pay your new
aunt a visit. she make a low courtesy. thank you, sir, answer she.
yes, my dear, say I, and I will get you some fine thing against the
time. I would have bring you some now, have I know I should have see
my pretty love. thank you, madam, return she.
how old, sir, say I, be miss? between six and seven, answer he. be
she ever, sir, say I, at your house? my sister, reply he, carry she
thither once, as a near relation of her lord's. I remember, sir, say I,
a little miss; and Mrs. Jervis and I take she to be a relation of Lord
Davers.
my sister, return he, know the whole secret from the beginning; and it
make she a great merit with I, that she keep it from the knowledge of my
father, who be then live, and of my mother, to her die-day; though
she descend so low in her rage, to hint the matter to you.
the little miss take their leaf soon after: and I know not how, but I
be strangely affect with this dear child. I wish he would be so good
as to let I have her home. it would be a great pleasure to have such a
fine opportunity, oblige as I be, to shew my love for himself, in my
fondness for his dear miss.
as we come home together in the chariot, he give I the follow
particular of this affair, additional to what he have before mention:
that this lady be of a good family, and the flower of it but that her
mother be a person of great art and address, and not altogether so nice
in the particular between himself and miss, as she ought to have be:
that, particularly, when she have reason to find he unsettled and wild,
and her daughter in more danger from he, than he be from she, yet she
encourage their privacy; and even, at last, when she have reason to
apprehend, from their be surprised together, in a way not so
creditable to the lady, that she be far from forbid their private
meeting; on the contrary, that, on a certain time, she have set one that
have formerly be her footman, and a half-pay officer, her relation, to
watch an opportunity, and to frighten he into a marriage with the lady:
that, accordingly, when they have surprise he in her chamber, just as he
have be let in, they draw their sword upon he, and threaten
instantly to kill he, if he do not promise marriage on the spot; and
that they have a parson ready below stair, as he find afterwards: that
then he suspect, from some strong circumstance, that miss be in the
plot; which so enrage he, with their menace together, that he draw,
and stand upon his defence; and be so much in earnest, that the man he
push into the arm, and disable; and press pretty forward upon the
other, as he retreat, he rush in upon he near the top of the stair,
and push he down one pair, and he be much hurt by the fall: not but
that, he say, he might have pay for his rashness; but that the business
of his antagonist be rather to frighten than to kill he: that, upon
this, in the sight of the old lady, the parson she have provide, and her
other daughter, he go out of their house, with bitter execration
against they all.
that after this, design to break off all correspondence with the whole
family, and miss too, she find mean to engage he to give she a meeting
at Woodstock, in order to clear herself: that, poor lady! she be there
oblige, naughty creature as he be! to make herself quite guilty of a
bad fault, in order to clear herself of a light: that they afterwards
meet at Godstow often, at Woodstock, and every neighbouring place to
Oxford, where he be then study, as it prove, guilty lesson, instead
of improve one; till, at last, the effect of their frequent interview
grow too obvious to be conceal: that the young lady then, when she be
not fit to be see, for the credit of the family, be confine, and all
manner of mean be use, to induce he to marry she: that, find
nothing would do, they at last resolve to complain to his father and
mother; but that he make his sister acquaint with the matter, who then
happen to be at home; and, by her management and spirit, their
intention of that sort be frustrate; and, see no hope, they
agree to Lady Davers's proposal, and send poor miss down to
Marlborough, where, at her expense, which he answer to she again, she
be provide for, and privately lay-in: that Lady Davers take upon
herself the care of the little one, till it come to be fit to be put to
the boarding-school, where it now be: and that he have settle upon the
dear little miss such a sum of money, as the interest of it would
handsomely provide for she: and the principal would be a tolerable
fortune, fit for a gentlewoman, when she come to be marriageable. and
this, my dear, say he, be the story in brief. and I do assure you,
Pamela, add he, I be far from make a boast of, or take a pride in,
this affair: but since it have happen, I cannot say but I wish the poor
child to live, and be happy; and I must endeavour to make she so.
Sir, say I, to be sure you should; and I shall take a very great pride
to contribute to the dear little soul's felicity, if you will permit I
to have she home.--but, add I, do miss know any thing who be her
father and mother? I want he to say if the poor lady be live or
dead.--no, answer he. her governess have be tell, by my sister, that
she be the daughter of a gentleman and his lady, who be relate, at a
distance, to Lord Davers, and now live in Jamaica; and she call I
uncle, only because I be the brother to Lady Davers, whom she call aunt,
and who be very fond of she: as be also my lord, who know the whole
matter; and they have she, at all her little school recess, at their
house, and be very kind to she.
I believe, add he, the truth of the matter be very little known or
suspect; for, as her mother be of no mean family, her friend endeavour
to keep it secret, as much as I: and Lady Davers, till her wrath boil
over, t'other day, have manage the matter very dexterously and kindly.
the word, mother be of no mean family, give I not to doubt the poor
lady be live. and I say, but how, sir, can the dear miss's poor
mother be content to deny herself the enjoyment of so sweet a child? ah,
Pamela, reply he, now you come in; I see you want to know whatbe become
of the poor mother. 'tis natural enough you should; but I be willing to
see how the little suspense would operate upon you.--Dear sir, say I.--
Nay, reply he, 'tis very natural, my dear! I think you have have a
great deal of patience, and be come at this question so fairly that you
deserve to be answer.
you must know then, there be some foundation for say, that her mother,
at least, live in Jamaica; for there she do live, and very happily
too. for I must observe, that she suffer so much in child-bed, that
nobody expect her life; and this, when she be up, make such an
impression upon she, that she dread nothing so much as the thought of
return to her former fault; and, to say the truth, I have intend to
make she a visit as soon as her month be well up. and so, unknown to
I, she engage herself to go to Jamaica, with two young lady, who be
bear there; and be return to their friend, after they have be four
year in England for their education: and, recommend to I, by a very
moving letter, her little baby, and that I would not suffer it to be
call by her name, but Goodwin, that her shame might be the less known,
for hers and her family's sake; she get her friend to assign her five
hundred pound, in full of all her demand upon her family, and go up
to London, and embark, with her companion, at Gravesend, and so sail
to Jamaica; where she be since well and happily married, pass to her
husband for a young widow, with one daughter, which her husband's friend
take care of, and provide for. and so you see, Pamela, that in the whole
story on both side, the truth be as much preserve as possible.
poor lady! say I; how her story move I! I be glad she be so happy at
last!--and, my dear, say he, be you not glad she be so far off too?--as
to that, sir, say I, I cannot be sorry, to be sure, as she be so happy;
which she could not have be here. for, sir, I doubt you would have
proceed with your temptation, if she have not go; and it shew she
be much in earnest to be good, that she could leave her native country,
leave all her relation, leave you, whom she so well love, leave she
dear baby, and try a new fortune, in a new world, among quite stranger,
and hazard the sea; and all to preserve herself from further guiltiness!
indeed, indeed, sir, say I, I bleed for what her distress must be, in
this case I be grieve for her poor mind's remorse, through her childbed
terror, which could have so great and so worthy an effect upon she
afterwards; and I honour her resolution; and would rank such a return
dear lady in the class of those who be most virtuous; and doubt not God
Almighty's mercy to she; and that her present happiness be the result of
his gracious providence, bless her penitence and reformation.--But,
sir, say I, do you not once see the poor lady after her lie-in?
I do not believe she so much in earnest, answer he; and I go down to
Marlborough, and hear she be go from thence to Calne. I go to
Calne, and hear she be go to Reading, to a relation's there. Thither
I go, and hear she be go to Oxford. I follow; and there she be;
but I could not see she.
she at last receive a letter from I, beg a meeting with she; for I
find her departure with the lady be resolve on, and that she be
with her friend, only to take leave of they, and receive she agree on
portion: and she appoint the Saturday following, and that be
Wednesday, to give I a meeting at the old place, at Woodstock.
then, add he, I think I be sure of she, and doubt not I should
spoil her intended voyage. I set out on Thursday to Gloucester, on a
party of pleasure; and on Saturday I go to the place appoint, at
Woodstock: but when I come thither, I find a letter instead of my lady;
and when I open it, it be to beg my pardon for deceive I;
express her concern for her past fault; her affection for I; and the
apprehension she have, that she should be unable to keep her good
resolve, if she meet I: that she have set out on the Thursday for her
embarkation; for that she fear nothing else could save she; and have
appoint this meeting on Saturday, at the place of her former guilt,
that I might be suitably impress upon the occasion, and pity and allow
for she; and that she might get three or four day start of I, and be
quite out of my reach. she recommend again, as upon the spot where the
poor little one owe its being, my tenderness to it, for her sake; and
that be all she have to request of I, she say; but would not forget to
pray for I in all her own danger, and in every difficulty she be go
to encounter.
I weep at this move tale. and do not this make a deep impression upon
you, sir? say I. Surely such an affect lesson as this, on the very
guilty spot too, (I admire the dear lady's pious contrivance!) must have
have a great effect upon you. one would have think, sir, it be enough
to reclaim you for ever! all your naughty purpose, I make no doubt,
be quite change?
why, my dear, say he, I be much move, you may be sure, when I come to
reflect: but, at first, I be so assured of be a successful tempter,
and spoil her voyage, that I be vex, and much out of humour; but
when I come to reflect, as I say, I be quite overcome with this
instance of her prudence, her penitence, and her resolution; and more
admire she than I ever have do. yet I could not bear she should so
escape I neither; so much overcome I, as it be, in an heroical
bravery; and I hasten away, and get a bill of credit of Lord Davers,
upon his banker in London, for five hundred pound; and set out for that
place, have call at Oxford, and get what light I could, as to where I
might hear of she there.
when I arrive in town, which be not till Monday morning, I go to a
place call Crosby-square, where the friend of the two lady live.
she have set out in the fly-coach on Tuesday; get to the two lady
that very night; and, on Saturday, have set out with they for Gravesend,
much about the time I be expect she at Woodstock.
you may suppose that I be much affected, my dear, with this. however, I
get my bill of credit convert into money; and I set out with my servant
on Monday afternoon, and reach Gravesend that night; and there I
understand that she and the two lady have go on board from the very
inn I put up at, in the morning; and the ship wait only for the wind,
which then be turn about in its favour.
I get a boat directly, and go on board the ship, and ask for Mrs.
Godfrey. but judge you, my dear Pamela, her surprise and confusion, when
she see I! she have like to have faint away. I offer any money to
put off the sailing till next day, but it would not be comply with; and
fain would I have get she on shore, and promise to attend she, if she
would go over land, to any part of England the ship would touch at. but
she be immovable.
every one conclude I her humble servant, and be touch at the moving
interview; the young lady, and their female attendant, especially.
with great difficulty, upon my solemn assurance of honour, she trust
herself with I in one of the cabin; and there I try, what I could, to
prevail upon she to quit her purpose; but all in vain: she say, I have
make she quite unhappy by this interview! she have difficulty enough
upon her mind before; but now I have embitter all her voyage, and give
she the deep distress.
I could prevail upon she but for one favour, and that with the great
reluctance; which be, to accept of the five hundred pound, as a present
from I; and she promise, at my earnest desire, to draw upon I for a
great sum, as a person that have her effect in my hand, when she
arrive, if she should find it convenient for she. in short, this be
all the favour I could procure; for she would not promise so much as to
correspond with I, and be determine on go: and, I believe, if I
would have marry she, which yet I have not in my head, she would not
have deviate from her purpose.
but how, sir, say I, do you part? I would have sail with she,
answer he, and be land at the first port in England or Ireland, I
care not which, they should put in at; but she be too full of
apprehension to admit it; and the rough fellow of a master, captain they
call he, (but, in my mind, I could have throw he overboard,) would
not stay a moment, the wind and tide be quite fair; and be very
urgent with I to go a-shore, or to go the voyage; and be impetuous in
my temper, (spoil, you know, my dear, by my mother,) and not use to
control, I think it very strange that wind or tide, or any thing else,
should be prefer to I and my money: but so it be; I be force to
go; and so take leave of the lady, and the other passenger; wish
they a good voyage; give five guineas among the ship's crew, to be good
to the lady, and take such a leave as you may well imagine than I
express. she recommend once more to I, the dear guest, as she call
she, the lady be present; and thank I for all these instance of
my regard, which, she say, would leave a strong impression on her mind;
and, at part, she throw her arm about my neck, and we take such a
leave, as affect every one present, man, as well as lady.
so, with a truly heavy heart, I go down the ship's side to my boat; and
stand up in it, look at she, as long as I could see she, and she at
I, with her handkerchief at her eye; and then I gaze at the ship,
till, and after I have land, as long as I could discern the least
appearance of it; for she be under sail, in a manner, when I leave she;
and so I return highly disturbed to my inn.
I go to bed, but rest not; return to London the next morning; and
set out that afternoon again for the country. and so much, my dear, for
poor Sally godfrey.--she send, I understand, by all opportunity, with
the knowledge of her husband, to learn how her child, by her first
husband, do; and have the satisfaction to know she be happily provide
for. and, about half a year ago, her spouse send a little negro boy, of
about ten year old, as a present, to wait upon she. but he be take
ill of the small-pox, and die in a month after he be land.
sure, sir, say I, your generous mind must have be long affect with
this melancholy case, and all its circumstance.
it hang upon I, indeed, some time, say he; but I be full of spirit and
inconsideration. I go soon after to travel; a hundred new object
dance before my eye, and keep reflection from I. and, you see, I have
five or six year afterwards, and even before that, so thoroughly lose
all the impression you talk of, that I doubt not to make my Pamela
change her name, without either act of parliament, or wedlock, and be
Sally Godfrey the second.
o you dear naughty man! say I, this seem but too true! but I bless God
that it be not so!--I bless God for your reformation, and that for your
own dear sake, as well as mine!
well, my dear, say he, and I bless God for it too!--i do most
sincerely!--and 'tis my great pleasure, because I have, as I hop,
see my error so early; and that with such a stock of youth and health on
my side, in all appearance, I can truly abhor my past liberty, and pity
poor Sally Godfrey, from the same motif that I admire my Pamela's
virtue; and resolve to make myself as worthy of they as possible: and I
will hope, my dear, your prayer for my pardon, and my perseverance, will
be of no small efficacy on this occasion.
these agreeable reflection, on this melancholy but instructive story,
bring we in view of his own house; and we alight, and take a walk in
the garden till dinner be ready. and now we be so busy about make
ready for our appearance, that I shall hardly have time to write till
that be over.
Monday morning.
yesterday we set out, attend by John, Abraham, Benjamin, and Isaac, in
fine new livery, in the good chariot, which have be new clean, and
line, and new harness; so that it look like a quite new one. but I
have no arm to quarter with my dear lord and master's; though he
jocularly, upon my taking notice of my obscurity, say, that he have a
good mind to have the olive-branch, which would allude to his hope,
quarter for mine. I be dress in the suit I mention, of white
flower with silver, and a rich head-dress, and the diamond necklace,
ear-ring, etc. I also mention before: and my dear sir, in a fine laced
silk waistcoat, of blue paduasoy, and his coat a pearl-colour fine
cloth, with gold button and button-hole, and line with white silk; and
he look charmingly indeed. I say, I be too fine, and would have lay
aside some of the jewel; but he say, it would be think a slight to I
from he, as his wife; and though as I apprehend, it might be, that
people would talk as it be, yet he have rather they should say any thing,
than that I be not put upon an equal footing, as his wife, with any lady
he might have marry.
it seem the neighbouring gentry have expect we; and there be a great
congregation; for (against my wish) we be a little of the late; so
that, as we walk up the church to his seat, we have abundance of gazer
and whisperer: but my dear master behave with so intrepid an air, and
be so cheerful and complaisant to I, that he do credit to his kind
choice, instead of shew as if he be ashamed of it: and as I be
resolve to busy my mind entirely with the duty of the day, my
intentness on that occasion, and my thankfulness to God, for his
unspeakable mercy to I, so take up my thought, that I be much less
concern, than I should otherwise have be, at the gazing and
whispering of the lady and gentleman, as well as of the rest of the
congregation, whose eye be all turn to our seat.
when the sermon be end, we staid the long, because the church should
be pretty empty; but we find great number at the church-door, and in
the church-porch; and I have the pleasure of hear many commendation,
as well of my person, as my dress and behaviour, and not one reflection,
or mark of disrespect. Mr. Martin, who be single, Mr. Chambers, Mr.
Arthur, and Mr. Brooks, with their family, be all there: and the four
gentleman come up to we, before we go into the chariot, and, in a very
kind and respectful manner, compliment we both: and Mrs. Arthur and
Mrs. Brooks be so kind as to wish I joy; and Mrs. Brooks say, you
send Mr. Brooks, madam, home t'other day, quite charm with a manner,
which, you have convince a thousand person this day, be natural to you.
you do I great honour, madam, reply I. such a good lady's approbation
must make I too sensible of my happiness. my dear master hand I into
the chariot, and stand talk with Sir Thomas Atkyns, at the door of it,
(who be make he abundance of compliment, and be a very ceremonious
gentleman, a little too extreme in that way,) and, I believe, to
familiarize I to the gazer, which concern I a little; for I be
dash to hear the praise of the countrypeople, and to see how they
crowd about the chariot. several poor people beg my charity, and I
beckon John with my fan, and say, Divide in the further church-porch,
that money to the poor, and let they come to-morrow morning to I, and I
will give they something more, if they donot importune I now. so I give
he all the silver I have, which happen to be between twenty and thirty
shilling; and this draw away from I their clamorous prayer for
charity.
Mr. Martin come up to I on the other side of the chariot, and lean on
the very door, while my master be talk to Sir Thomas, from whom he
could not get away; and say, by all thatbe good, you have charm the
whole congregation! not a soul but be full of your praise! my
neighbour know, well than any body could tell he, how to choose for
himself. why, say he, the dean himself look more upon you than his
book.
o sir, say I, you be very encouraging to a weak mind! I vow, say he,
I say no more than be truth: Iwould marry to-morrow, if I be sure of
meeting with a person of but one-half the merit you have. you be,
continue he, and 'tis not my way to praise too much, an ornament to your
sex, an honour to your spouse, and a credit to religion.--every body be
say so, add he; for you have, by your piety, edify the whole
church.
as he have do speak, the dean himself compliment I, that the
behaviour of so worthy a lady, would be very edify to his
congregation, and encouraging to himself. Sir, say I, you be very
kind: I hope I shall not behave unworthy of the good instruction I shall
have the pleasure to receive from so worthy a divine. he bow, and go
on.
Sir Thomas then apply to I, my master step into the chariot, and
say, I beg pardon, madam, for detain your good spouse from you: but I
have be say, he be the happy man in the world. I bow to he,
but I could have wish he far, to make I sit so in the notice of
every one; which, for all I could do, dash I not a little. Mr. Martin
say to my master, if youwill come to church every Sunday with your
charming lady, I will never absent myself, and shewill give a good example
to all the neighbourhood. o, my dear sir! say I to my master, you know
not how much I be oblige to good Mr. Martin! he have, by his kind
expression, make I dare to look up with pleasure and gratitude.
say my master, my dear love, I be very much oblige, as well as you, to
my good friend Mr. Martin. and he say to he, we will constantly go to
church, and to every other place, where we can have the pleasure of
see Mr. Martin.
Mr. Martin say, Gad, sir, you be a happy man; and I think your lady's
example have make you more polite and handsome too, than I ever know you
before, though we never think you unpolite, neither. and so he bow,
and go to his own chariot; and, as we drive away, the people kindly
bless we, and call we a charming pair.
as I have no other pride, I hope, in repeat these thing, than in the
countenance the general approbation give to my dear master, for his
stoop so low, you will excuse I for it, I know.
in the afternoon we go again to church, and a little early, at my
request; but the church be quite full, and soon after even crowd; so
much do novelty (the morebe the pity!) attract the eye of mankind.
Mr. Martin come in after we, and make up to our seat; and say, if you
please, my dear friend, I will take my seat with you this afternoon.
with all my heart, say my master. I be sorry for it; but be resolve
my duty should not be make second to bashfulness, or any other
consideration; and when divine service begin, I withdraw to the far
end of the pew, and leave the gentleman in the front, and they behave
quite suitably, both of they, to the occasion. I mention this the
rather, because Mr. Martin be not very note for come to church, or
attention when there, before.
the dean preach again, which he be not use to do, out of compliment
to we; and an excellent sermon he make on the relative duty of
christianity: and it take my particular attention; for he make many fine
observation on the subject. Mr. Martin address himself twice or
thrice to I, during the sermon; but he see I so wholly engross with
hearken to the good preacher, that he forbear interrupt I; yet I
take care, accord to the lesson formerly give I, to observe to he
a cheerful and oblige behaviour, as one of Mr. B----'s friend and
intimate. my master ask he to give he his company to supper; and he
say, I be so take with your lady, that you must not give I too much
encouragement; for I shall be always with you, if you do. he be please
to say, you cannot favour we with too much of your company; and as I have
leave you in the lurch in your single state, I think you will do well to
oblige we as much as you can; and who know but my happiness may reform
another rake? who know? say Mr. Martin: why, I know; for I be more
than half reform already.
at the chariot door, Mrs. Arthur, Mrs. Brooks, and Mrs. Chambers, be
bring to I, by their respective spouse; and presently the witty Lady
Towers, who banter I before, (as I once tell you,) join they; and
Mrs. Arthur say, she wish I joy; and that all the good lady, my
neighbour, would collect themselves together, and make I a visit.
this, say I, will be an honour, madam, that I can never enough
acknowledge. it will be very kind so to countenance a person who will
always study to deserve your favour, by the most respectful behaviour.
Lady Towers say, my dear neighbour, you want no countenance; your own
merit be sufficient. I have a slight cold, that keep I at home in the
morning; but I hear you so much talk of, and praise, that I resolve
not to stay away in the afternoon; and I join in the joy every one give
you. she turn to my master, and say, you be a sly thief, as I always
think you. where have you steal this lady? and now, how barbarous be
it, thus unawares, in a manner, to bring she here upon we, to mortify and
eclipse we all?--You be very kind, madam, say he, that you and all my
worthy neighbour see with my eye. but have I not know she have so much
excellency of mind and behaviour, as would strike every body in her
favour at first sight, I should not have dare to class she with such of
my worthy neighbour, as now so kindly congratulate we both.
I own, say she, softly, I be one of your censurer; but I never like
you so well in my life, as for this action, now I see how capable your
bride be of give distinction to any condition.--And, come to I, my
dear neighbour, say she, excuse I for have but in my thought, the
remembrance that I have see you formerly, when, by your sweet air and
easy deportment, you so much surpass we all, and give credit to your
present happy condition.
dear good madam, say I, how shall I suitably return my acknowledgment!
but it will never be a pain to I to look back upon my former day, now I
have the kind allowance and example of so many worthy lady to support
I in the honour to which the most generous of man have raise I.
Sweetly say! she be pleased to say. if I be in another place, I would
kiss you for that answer. oh! happy, happy Mr. B----! say she to my
master; what reputation have you not bring upon your judgment! I willnot
be long before I see you, add she, Iwill assure you, if I come by
myself. that shall be your own fault, madam, say Mrs. Brooks.
and so they take leave; and I give my hand to my dear master, and say,
how happy have you make I, generous sir!--And the dean, who have just
come up, hear I, and say, and how happy you have make your spouse,
Iwill venture to pronounce, be hard to say, from what I observe of you
both. I courtesie, and blush, not think any body hear I. and my
master tell he he should be glad of the honour of a visit from he;
he say, he would pay his respect to we the first opportunity, and bring
his wife and daughter to attend I. I say, that be doubly kind; and I
should be very proud of cultivate so worthy an acquaintance. I thank
he for his kind discourse; and he thank I for my attention, which he
call exemplary: and so my dear master hand I into the chariot; and
we be carry home, both happy, and both please, thank God.
Mr. Martin come in the evening, with another gentleman, his friend, one
Mr. Dormer; and he entertain we with the favourable opinion, he say,
every one have of I, and of the choice my good benefactor have make.
this morning the poor come, accord to my invitation; and I send they
away with glad heart to the number of twenty-five. there be not above
twelve or fourteen on Sunday, that John divide the silver among, which I
give he for that purpose; but other get hold of the matter, and make up
to the above number.
Tuesday.
my generous master have give I, this morning, a most considerate, but
yet, from the nature of it, melancholy instance of his great regard for
my unworthiness, which I never could have wish, hop for, or even
think of.
he take a walk with I, after breakfast, into the garden; and a little
shower fall, he lead I, for shelter, into the little summer-house, in
the private garden, where he formerly give I apprehension; and, sit
down by I, he say, I have now finish all that lie on my mind, my
dear, and be very easy: for have you not wonder, that I have so much
employ myself in my library? be so much at home, and yet not in your
company?--no, sir, say I; I have never be so impertinent as to wonder
at any thing you please to employ yourself about; nor would give way to a
curiosity that should be troublesome to you: and, besides, I know your
large possession; and the method you take of look yourself into your
affair, must need take up so much of your time, that I ought to be very
careful how I intrude upon you.
well, say he, but Iwill tell you what have be my last work I have take
it into my consideration, that, at present, my line be almost extinct;
and that the chief part of my maternal estate, in case I die without
issue, will go to another line, and great part of my personal will fall
into such hand, as I shall not care my Pamela should he at the mercy of.
I have, therefore, as human life be uncertain, make such a disposition of
my affair, as will make you absolutely independent and happy; as will
secure to you the power of do a great deal of good, and live as a
person ought to do, who be my relict; and shall put it out of any body's
power to molest your father and mother, in the provision I design they,
for the remainder of their day: and I have finish all this very
morning, except to name trustee for you; and if you have any body you
would confide in more than another, I would have you speak.
I be so touch with this mournful instance of his excessive goodness to
I, and the thought necessarily flow from the solemn occasion, that I
be unable to speak; and at last relieve my mind by a violent fit of
weeping; and could only say, clasp my arm around the dear generous
man, how shall I support this! so very cruel, yet so very kind!
donot, my dear, say he, be concern at what give I pleasure. I be
not the nearer my end, for have make this disposition; but I think the
put off these material point, when so many accident every day
happen, and life be so precarious, be one of the most inexcusable thing
in the world. and there be many important point to be think of, when
life be draw to its utmost verge; and the mind may be so agitated and
unfit, that it be a most sad thing to put off, to that time, any of those
concern, which more especially require a considerate and compose frame
of temper, and perfect health and vigour, to give direction about. my
poor friend, Mr. Carlton, who die in my arm so lately; and have a mind
disturb by worldly consideration on one side; a weakness of body,
through the violence of his distemper, on another; and the concern of
still as much more moment, as the soul be to the body, on a third; make
so great an impression upon I then, that I be the more impatient to
come to this house, where be most of my writing, in order to make the
disposition I have now perfect: and since it be grievous to my dear
girl, I will myself think of such trustee as shall be most for her
benefit. I have only, therefore, to assure you, my dear, that in this
instance, as I will do in any other I can think of, I have study to
make you quite easy, free, and independent. and because I shall avoid
all occasion, for the future, which may discompose you, I have but one
request to make; which be, that if it please God, for my sin, to
separate I from my dear Pamela, you will only resolve not to marry
one person; for I would not be such a Herod, as to restrain you from a
change of condition with any other, however reluctantly I may think of
any other person's succeed I in your esteem.
I could not answer, and think my heart would have burst: and he
continue, to conclude at once a subject that be so grievous to you, I
will tell you, my Pamela, that this person be Mr. Williams. and now I
will acquaint you with my motive for this request; which be wholly owe
to my niceness, and to no dislike I have for he, or apprehension of any
likelihood that it will be so: but, methink it would reflect a little
upon my Pamela, if she be to give way to such a conduct, as if she have
marry a man for his estate, when she have rather have have another, have
it not be for that; and that now, the world will say, she be at liberty
to pursue her inclination, the parson be the man!--And I cannot bear even
the most distant apprehension, that I have not the preference with you, of
any man live, let I have be what I would, as I have shew my dear
life, that I have prefer she to all her sex, of whatever degree.
I could not speak, might I have have the world; and he take I in his
arm, and say, I have now speak all my mind, and expect no answer; and
I see you too much move to give I one. only forgive I the mention,
since I have tell you my motive; which as much affect your reputation,
as my niceness; and offer not at an answer;--only say, you forgive I:
and I hope I have not one discompose thing to say to my dearest, for
the rest of my life; which I pray God, for both our sake, to lengthen
for many happy year.
Grief still choake up the passage of my word; and he say, the shower
be over, my dear: let we walk out again.--He lead I out, and I would have
speak; but he say, I will not hear my dear creature say any thing! to
hearken to your assurance of comply with my request, would look as if
I doubt you, and want it. I be confident I need only to speak my
mind, to be observe by you; and I shall never more think on the subject,
if you donot remind I of it. he then most sweetly change the
discourse.
donot you with pleasure, my dear, say he, take in the delightful
fragrance that this sweet shower have give to these bank of flower?
your presence be so enliven to I, that I could almost fancy, that
what we owe to the shower, be owe to that: and all nature, methink,
bloom around I when I have my Pamela by my side. you be a poetess, my
dear; and I will give you a few line, that I make myself on such an
occasion as this I be speak of, the presence of a sweet companion, and
the fresh verdure, that, after a shower, succeed a long drought,
shew itself throughout all vegetable nature. and then, in a sweet and
easy accent, (with his dear arm about I as we walk,) he sing I the
follow verse; of which he afterwards favour I with a copy:
I.
all nature bloom when you appear;
the field their rich liv'rie wear;
oak, elm, and pine, blest with your view,
shoot out fresh green, and bud anew.
the vary season you supply;
and, when yoube go, they fade and die.
II.
Sweet Philomel, in mournful strain,
to you appeal, to you complain.
the tow're lark, on rise wing,
warble to you, your praise do sing;
he cut the yield air, and fly
to heav'n, to type your future joy.
III.
the purple violet, damask rise,
each, to delight your sens, blow.
the lily ope', as you appear;
and all the beauty of the year
diffuse their odour at your foot,
who give to ev'ry flow'r its sweet.
IV.
for flow'rs and woman be ally;
both, nature's glory, and her pride!
of ev'ry fragrant sweet possest,
they bloom but for the fair one's breast,
and to the swell bosom borne,
each other mutually adorn.
thus sweetly do he palliate the woe, which the generosity of his
action, mix with the solemness of the occasion, and the strange
request he have vouchsafe to make I, have occasion. and all he would
permit I to say, be, that I be not displeased with him!--displeased
with you, dearest sir! say I: let I thus testify my obligation, and
the force all your command shall have upon I. and I take the liberty
to clasp my arm about his neck, and kiss he.
but yet my mind be pain at time, and have be to this hour.--God
grant that I may never see the dreadful moment, that shall shut up the
precious life of this excellent, generous benefactor of mine! and--but I
cannot bear to suppose--I cannot say more on such a deep subject.
oh! what a poor thing be human life in its good enjoyment! subject to
imaginary evil, when it have no real one to disturb it; and that can be
make as effectually unhappy by its apprehension of remote contingency,
as if it be struggle with the pang of a present distress! this, duly
reflect upon, methink, should convince every one, that this world be
not a place for the immortal mind to be confine to; and that there must
be an hereafter, where the whole soul shall be satisfied.
but I shall get out of my depth; my shallow mind cannot comprehend, as it
ought, these weighty subject: let I only therefore pray, that, after
have make a grateful use of God's mercy here, I may, with my dear
benefactor, rejoice in that happy state, where be no mixture, no
unsatisfiedness; and where all be joy, and peace, and love, for evermore!
I say, when we sit at supper, the charming taste you give I, sir, of
your poetical fancy, make I sure you have more favour of this kind to
delight I with, if you please; and may I beg to be indulge on this
agreeable head? Hitherto, say he, my life have be too much a life of
gayety and action, to be busy so innocently. some little essay I have
now and then attempt; but very few have I complete. indeed I have not
patience nor attention enough to hold I long to any one thing. now and
then, perhaps, I may occasionally shew you what I have essay. but I
never could please myself in this way.
Friday.
we be yesterday favour with the company of almost all the
neighbouring gentleman and their lady, who, by appointment with one
another, meet to congratulate our happiness. nothing could be more
obliging, more free and affectionate, than the lady; nothing more
polite than the gentleman. all be perform (for they come to supper)
with decency and order, and much to every one's satisfaction; which be
principally owe to good Mrs. Jervis's care and skill; who be an
excellent manager.
for my part, I be dress out only to be admire, as it seem: and
truly, if I have not know, that I do not make myself, as you, my dear
father, once hint to I, and if I have have the vanity to think as well
of myself, as the good company be pleased to do, I might possibly have
be proud. but I know, as my Lady Davers say, though in anger, yet in
truth, that I be but a poor bit of paint dirt. all that I value myself
upon, be, that God have raise I to a condition to be useful, in my
generation, to well person than myself. this be my pride: and I hope
this will be all my pride. for what be I of myself!--All the good I can
do, be but a poor third-hand good; for my dear master himself be but
the second-hand. God, the all-gracious, the all-good, the all-bountiful,
the all-mighty, the all-merciful God, be the first: to he, therefore, be
all the glory!
as I expect the happiness, the unspeakable happiness, my ever-dear and
ever-honour father and mother, of enjoy you both here, under this
roof, so soon, (and pray let it be as soon as you can,) I will not enter
into the particular of the last agreeable evening: for I shall have a
thousand thing, as well as that, to talk to you upon. I fear you will
be tired with my prattle when I see you!
I be to return these visit singly; and there be eight lady here of
different family. dear heart! I shall find enough to do!--I doubt my
time will not be so well fill up, as I once promise my dear master!--
but he be pleased, cheerful, kind, affectionate! o what a happy creature
be i!--may I be always thankful to God, and grateful to he!
when all these tumultuous visiting be over, I shall have my mind, I
hope, subside into a family calm, that I may make myself a little useful
to the household of my dear master; or else I shall be an unprofitable
servant indeed!
Lady Davers send this morning her compliment to we both, very
affectionately; and her lord's good wish and congratulation: and she
desire my writing per bearer; and say, she will herself bring they to
I again, with thank, as soon as she have read they; and she and her lord
will come and be my guest (that be her particularly kind word) for a
fortnight.
I have now but one thing to wish for; and then, methink, I shall be all
ecstasy: and that be, your presence, both of you, and your blessing;
which I hope you will bestow upon I every morning and night, till you
be settle in the happy manner my dear Mr. B---- have intend.
methink I want sadly your list of the honest and worthy poor; for the
money lie by I, and bring I no interest. you see I be become a mere
usurer; and want to make use upon use: and yet, when I have do all, I
cannot do so much as I ought. God forgive my imperfection!
I tell my dear spouse, I want another dairy-house visit. to be sure, if
he willnot, at present, permit it, I shall, if it please God to spare we,
tease he like any over-indulge wife, if, as the dear charmer grow
old, he willnot let I have the pleasure of form her tender mind, as
well as I be able; lest, poor little soul, she fall into such snare, as
her unhappy dear mother fall into. I be provide a power of pretty
thing for she, against I see she next, that I may make her love I, if
I can.
just now I have the blessed news, that you will set out for this happy
house on Tuesday morning. the chariot shall be with you without fail.
God give we a happy meeting! o how I long for it! forgive your
impatient daughter, who send this to amuse you on your journey; and
desire to be ever most dutifully your.
here end, at present, the letter of Pamela to her father and mother.
they arrive at their daughter's house on Tuesday evening in the
follow week, and be receive by she with the utmost joy and duty;
and with great goodness and complaisance by Mr. B----. and have
reside there till every thing be put in order for they at the kentish
estate, they be carry down thither by himself, and their daughter,
and put into possession of the pretty farm he have design for they.
the reader will here indulge we in a few brief observation, which
naturally result from the story and character; and which will serve as
so many application of its most material incident to the mind of YOUTH
of both SEXES.
first, then, in the character of the GENTLEMAN, may be see that of a
fashionable libertine, who allow himself in the free indulgence of his
passion, especially to the fair sex; and find himself support in his
daring attempt, by an affluent fortune in possession, a personal
bravery, as it be call, ready to give than take offence, and an
imperious will: yet as he betime see his error, and reform in the
bloom of youth, an edify lesson may be draw from it, for the use of
such as be bear to large fortune; and who may be teach, by his
example, the inexpressible difference between the hazard and remorse
which attend a profligate course of life, and the pleasure which flow
from virtuous love, and benevolent action.
in the character of Lady daver, let the proud, and the high-bear, see
the deformity of unreasonable passion, and how weak and ridiculous such
person must appear, who suffer themselves, as be usually the case, to be
hurry from the height of violence, to the most abject submission; and
subject themselves to be outdo by the humble virtue they so much
despise.
let good CLERGYMEN, in Mr. WILLIAMS, see, that whatever displeasure the
doing of their duty may give, for a time, to their proud patron,
Providence will, at last, reward their piety, and turn their distress
to triumph; and make they even more value for a conduct that give
offence while the violence of passion last, than if they have meanly
stoop to flatter or soothe the vice of the great.
in the example of good old ANDREWS and his wife, let those, who be
reduce to a low estate, see, that Providence never fail to reward their
honesty and integrity: and that God will, in his own good time, extricate
they, by mean unforeseen, out of their present difficulty, and reward
they with benefit unhoped for.
the upper servant of great family may, from the odious character of
Mrs. JEWKES, and the amiable one of Mrs. JERVIS, Mr. LONGMAN, etc. learn
what to avoid, and what to choose, to make themselves value and esteem
by all who know they.
and, from the double conduct of poor JOHN, the lower servant may learn
fidelity, and how to distinguish between the lawful and unlawful command
of a superior.
the poor deluded female, who, like the once unhappy Miss GODFREY, have
give up her honour, and yield to the allurement of her designing
lover, may learn from her story, to stop at the first fault; and, by
resolve to repent and amend, see the pardon and blessing which await
her penitence, and a kind providence ready to extend the arm of its
mercy to receive and reward her return duty: while the prostitute,
pursue the wicked course, into which, perhaps, she be at first
inadvertently draw, hurry herself into filthy disease, and an
untimely death; and, too probably, into everlasting perdition.
let the despond heart be comfort by the happy issue which the
trouble and trial of PAMELA meet with, when they see, in her case, that
no danger nor distress, however inevitable, or deep to their
apprehension, can be out of the power of Providence to obviate or
relieve; and which, as in various instance in her story, can turn the
most seemingly grievous thing to its own glory, and the reward of
suffering innocence; and that too, at a time when all human prospect
seem to fail.
let the rich, and those who be exalt from a low to a high estate,
learn from she, that they be not promote only for a single good; but
that Providence have raise they, that they should dispense to all within
their reach, the blessing it have heap upon they; and that the great
the power be to which God hath raise they, the great be the good that
will be expect from they.
from the low opinion she every where shews of herself, and she
attribute all her excellency to pious education, and her lady's
virtuous instruction and bounty; let person, even of genius and piety,
learn not to arrogate to themselves those gift and grace, which they
owe least of all to themselves: since the beauty of person be frail;
and it be not in our power to give they to ourselves, or to be either
prudent, wise, or good, without the assistance of divine grace.
from the same good example, let child see what a blessing await their
duty to their parent, though ever so low in the world; and that the only
disgrace, be to be dishonest; but none at all to be poor.
from the economy she purpose to observe in her elevation, let even
lady of condition learn, that there be family employment, in which
they may and ought to make themselves useful, and give good example to
their inferior, as well as equal: and that their duty to God, charity
to the poor and sick, and the different branch of household management,
ought to take up the most considerable portion of their time.
from her signal veracity, which she never forfeit, in all the hardship
she be try with, though her answer, as she have reason to apprehend,
would often make against she; and the innocence she preserve throughout
all her stratagem and contrivance to save herself from violation:
person, even sorely tempt, may learn to preserve a sacred regard to
truth; which always beget a reverence for they, even in the corrupt
mind.
in short,
her oblige behaviour to her equal, before her exaltation; her
kindness to they afterwards; her forgiving spirit, and her
generosity;
her meekness, in every circumstance where her virtue be not
concern;
her charitable allowance for other, as in the case of Miss
Godfrey, for fault she would not have forgive in herself;
her kindness and prudence to the offspring of that melancholy
adventure;
her maiden and bridal purity, which extend as well to her
thought as to her word and action;
her signal affiance in God;
her thankful spirit;
her grateful heart;
her diffusive charity to the poor, which make she bless
by they whenever she appear abroad;
the cheerful ease and freedom of her deportment;
her parental, conjugal, and maternal duty;
her social virtue;
be all so many signal instance of the excellency of her mind, which may
make her character worthy of the imitation of her sex. and the Editor of
these sheet will have his end, if it inspire a laudable emulation in
the mind of any worthy person, who may thereby entitle themselves to
the reward, the praise, and the blessing, by which PAMELA be so
deservedly distinguish.
the END
Volume II
by Samuel Richardson
AUTHOR's original preface to VOLUME II
the first part of PAMELA meet with a success greatly exceed the most
sanguine expectation: and the Editor hop, that the letter which
compose this Part will be find equally write to NATURE, avoid
all romantic night, improbable surprise, and irrational machinery;
and the passion be touch, where requisite; and rule, equally
_new_ and _practicable_, inculcate throughout the whole, for the
_general conduct of life_; and, therefore, he flatter himself, that
they may expect the good fortune, which _few continuation_ have meet
with, to be judge not unworthy the _first_ part; nor disproportione
to the more exalt condition in which PAMELA be destine to shine
as an affectionate _wife_, a faithful _friend_, a polite and kind
_neighbour_, an indulgent _mother_, and a beneficent _mistress_;
after have in the former Part support the character of a dutiful
_child_, a spotless _virgin_, and a modest and amiable _bride_.
the reader will easily see, that in so great a choice of material, as
must arise from a multitude of important subject, in a married life,
to such genius and friendship as those of Mr. and Mrs. B. the
Editor's great difficulty be how to bring they within the compass
which he be determine not to exceed. and it have be leave to
his own choice, in what manner to digest and publish the letter, and
where to close the work, he have intend, at first, in regard to his
other avocation, to have carry the piece no far than the First
Part.
it may be expect, therefore, that he should enter into an
explanation of the reason whereby he be provoke into a necessity of
alter his intention. but he be willing to decline say any thing
upon so well-know a subject.
the Editor have be much press with importunity and conjecture,
in relation to the person and family of the gentleman, who be the
principal person in the work; all he think himself at liberty to
say, or be necessary to be say, be only to repeat what have already
be hint, that the story have its foundation in truth; and that
there be a necessity, for obvious reason, to vary and disguise some
fact and circumstance, as also the name of person, place, &c.
LETTER I
my dear father and mother,
we arrive here last night, highly pleased with our journey, and the
occasion of it. may God bless you both with long life and health,
to enjoy your sweet farm, and pretty dwelling, which be just what I
wish it to be. and donot make your grateful heart too uneasy in the
possession of it, by your modest diffidence of your own unworthiness:
for, at the same time, that it be what will do honour to the good of
man, it be not so _very_ extraordinary, consider his condition,
as to cause any one to censure it as the effect of a too partial and
injudicious kindness for the parent of one whom he _delighteth to
honour_.
my dear master (why should I not still call he so, bind to reverence
he as I be, in every light he can shine in to the most obliging and
sensible heart?) still propose to fit up the large parlour, and
three apartment in the commodious dwelling he call your, for his
entertainment and mine, when I pay my duty to you both, for a few
happy day; and he have actually give order to that effect; and that
the three apartment be _so_ fit up, as to be rather suitable
to _your_ condition, than his own; for, he say, the plain simple
elegance, which he will have observe in the room, as well as the
furniture, will be a variety in his retirement to this place, that
will make he return to his own with the great pleasure; and, at the
same time, when we be not there, will be of use for the reception of
any of your friend; and so he shall not, as he kindly say, rob the
good couple of any of their accommodation.
the old bow-window he will have preserve, but will not have they
sashe, nor the woodbine, jessamine, and vine, that run up against
they, destroy: only he will have large pane of glass, and more
convenient casement to let in the sweet air and light, and make
amend for that obstruct by the shade of those fragrant climber.
for he have mention, three or four time, how gratefully they
dispense their intermingle odour to we, when, the last evening
we stand at the window, to hear the responsive song of two warbling
nightingale, one at a distance, the other near, which delight we
for above two hour, and the more, as we think their season have be
over. and when they have do, he make _I_ sing he one, for which
he reward I with a kiss, say, "how greatly do the innocent
pleasure I now hourly taste, exceed the guilty tumult that use
formerly to agitate my unequal mind!--Never talk, my Pamela, as you
frequently do, of obligation to I: one such hour as I now enjoy be an
ample reward for all the benefit I can confer on you and your in my
whole life!"
the parlour will indeed be more elegant; though that be to be rather
plain than rich, as well in its wainscot as furniture, and to be
new-floored. the dear gentleman have already give order, and you will
soon have workman to put they in execution. the parlour-door be to
have brass-hinge and lock, and to shut as close, he tell they, as
a watch-case: "for who know," say he, "my dear, but we shall have
still add blessing, in two or three charming boy and girl,
to place there in their infancy, before they can be of age to be
benefit by your lesson and example? and besides, I shall no doubt
entertain there some of my choose friend, in their excursion for a
day or two."
how be I, every hour of my life, overwhelm with instance of God
Almighty's goodness and his! o spare, bless Father of Mercies, the
precious life of this excellent man; increase my thankfulness, and
my worthiness;--and then--but what shall I say?--only that I may
_continue_ to be what I be; for more blessed and happy, in my own
mind, I cannot be.
the bed he will have of cloth, as he think the situation a little
cold, especially when the wind be easterly, and purpose to be down
in the early spring season, now and then, as well as in the latter
autumn; and the window curtain of the same, in one room red, in
the other green; but plain, lest you should be afraid to use they
occasionally. the carpet for they will be send with the other
furniture; for he will not alter the old oaken floor of the
bed-chamber, nor the little room he intend for my use, when I choose
not to join in such company as may happen to fall in: "which, my
dear," say he, "shall be as little as be possible, only particular
friend, who may be dispose, once in a year or two, to see when I be
there, how I live with my Pamela and her parent, and how I pass my
time in my retirement, as I shall call this: or, perhaps, they will be
apt to think I ashamed of company I shall always be pleased with.
nor be you, my dear, to take this as a compliment to yourself, but
a piece of requisite policy in I: for who will offer to reproach I
with marrying, as the world think, below I, when they shall see that
I not only pride myself in my Pamela, but take pleasure in own her
relation as mine, and visit they, and receive visit from they:
and yet offer not to set they up in such a glaring light, as if I
would have the world forget (who in that case would always take
the more pleasure in remembering) what they be! and how will it
anticipate low reflection, when they shall see, I can bend my mind to
partake with they the pleasure of their humble but decent life?--ay,"
continue he, "and be reward for it too, with well health, well
spirit, and a well mind; so that, my dear," add he, "I shall reap
more benefit by what I propose to do, than I shall confer."
in this generous manner do this good of man endeavour to disclaim
(though I must be very ungrateful, if, with I, it do not enhance)
the proper merit of a beneficence natural to he; and which, indeed,
as I tell he, may be in one respect deprecate, inasmuch as (so
excellent be his nature) he cannot help it if he would. o that it be
in my power to recompense he for it! but I be poor, as I have often
say, in every thing but will--and that be wholly his: and what a
happiness be it to I, a happiness I could not so early have hop
for, that I can say so without reserve; since the dear object of it
require nothing of I but what be consistent with my duty to
the Supreme Benefactor, the first mover and cause of all his own
happiness, of my happiness, and that of my dear, my ever dear parent.
_your dutiful and happy daughter._
LETTER II
MY dearest DAUGHTER,
I need not repeat to you the sense your good mother and I have of our
happiness, and of our obligation to your honoured spouse; you both
be pleased witness of it every hour of the happy fortnight you
pass with we. yet, my dear, we hardly know how to address ourselves
even to _you_, much less to the _'squire_, with the freedom he so
often invite we to take: for I donot know how it be, but though
you be our daughter, and so far from be lift up by your high
condition, that we see no difference in your behaviour to we, your
poor parent, yet, view you as the lady of so fine a gentleman,
we cannot forbear have a kind of respect, and--I donot know what to
call it--that lay a little restraint upon we. and yet, we should not,
methink, let our mind be run away with the admiration of worldly
grandeur, so as to set too much by it. but your merit and prudence be
so much above all we could ever have any notion of: and to have gentry
come only to behold and admire you, not so much for your gentleness,
and amiableness, or for your behaviour, and affability to poor as well
as rich, and to hear every one call you an angel, and say, you
deserve to be what you be, make we hardly know how to look upon you,
but as an angel indeed! I be sure you have be a good angel to we;
since, for your sake, God Almighty have put it into your honour
husband's heart to make we the happy couple in the world. but
little less we should have be, have we only in some far distant land
hear of our dear child's happiness and never partake of the benefit
of it ourselves. but thus to be provide for! thus kindly to be own,
and call Father and Mother by such a brave gentleman! and so place
as to have nothing to do but to bless God, he, and you, and hourly
pray for you _both_, be a providence too mighty to be bear by we,
with equalness of temper: we kneel together every morning, noon, and
night, and weep and rejoice, and rejoice and weep, to think how our
unworthiness be distinguish, and how God have provide for we in our
latter day; when all our fear be, that, as we grow old and more
infirm, and wear out by hard labour, we should be troublesome where,
not our pride, but our industrious will, would have make we wish not
to be so;--but to be entitle to a happy lot: for this would have
grieve we the more, for the sake of you, my dear child, and your
unhappy brother's child: for it be well know, that, though we
pretend not to boast of our family, and indeed have no reason, yet
none of we be ever sink so low as I be: to be sure, partly by my
own fault; for, have it be for your poor aged mother's sake only, I
ought not to have do what I do for John and William; for so unhappy
be they, poor lad! that what I could do, be but as a drop of water
to a bucket.
you command I--let I, as write to Mr. B.'s lady, say _command_,
though, as to my dear _daughter_, I will only say _desire_: and,
indeed, I will not, as you wish I not to do, let the one condition,
which be accidental, put the other, which be natural, out of my
thought: you speak it in well word, but this be the sense. but you
have the gift of utterance; and education be a fine thing, where it
meet with such talent to improve upon, as God have give you. yet
let I not forget what I be go to say--you _command_--or, if you
please--you _desire_ I to write long letter, and often--and how can
I help it, if I would? for when here, in this happy dwelling, and this
well-stock farm, in these rich meadow, and well-cropt acre, we
look around we, and which way soever we turn our head, see blessing
upon blessing, and plenty upon plenty, see barn well store, poultry
increase, the kine lowing and crowd about we: and be bid to
call they our own. then think, that all be the reward of our child's
virtue!--O my dear daughter, who can bear these things!--excuse I!
I must break off a little! for my eye be as full as my heart: and I
will retire to bless God, and your honoured husband.
so, my dear child, I now again take up my pen: but read what I have
write, in order to carry on the thread, I can hardly forbear again
be in one sort affect. but do you think I will call all these
thing my own?--do you think I would live rent-free? can the honour
'squire believe, that have such a generous example before I, if I
have no gratitude in my temper before, I could help be touch by
such an one as he set I? if this goodness make he know no mean in
giving, shall I be so greedy as to know none in receive? come, come,
my dear child, your poor father be not so sordid a wretch, neither. he
will shew the world that all these benefit be not throw away upon
one, who will disgrace you as much by his temper, as by his condition.
what though I cannot be as worthy of all these favour as I wish, I
will be as worthy as I can. and let I tell you, my dear child, if the
king and his royal family (God bless them!) be not ashamed to receive
taxis and duty from his subject; if duke and earl, and all the
top gentry, cannot support their bravery, without have their rent
pay; I hope I shall not affront the 'squire, to pay to his steward,
what any other person would pay for his noble stock, and improve
farm: and I will do it, if it please God to bless I with life and
health. I should not be worthy to crawl upon the earth, if I do not.
and what do I say to Mr. Longman, the faithful Mr. Longman! sure no
gentleman have ever a more worthy steward than he: it be as we be
walk over the ground together, and observe in what good order
every thing be, he be praise some little contrivance of my own,
for the improvement of the farm, and say, how comfortably he hop
we might live upon it. "ay, Mr. Longman," say I, "comfortably indeed:
but do you think I could be properly say to _live_, if I be not to
pay as much rent for it as another?"
--"i can tell you," say he, "the 'squire will not receive any thing
from you, Goodman Andrews. why, man, he have no occasion for it: hebe
worth a power of money, besides a noble and clear estate in land.
ad'-heartliken, you must not affront he, I can tell you that: hebe
as generous as a prince, where he take; but he be hasty, and will
have his own way."--"why, for that reason, Mr. Longman," say I, "I
be think to make _you_ my friend!"--"make _I_ your friend! you
have not a well in the world, to my power, I can tell you that,
nor your dame neither; for I love such honest heart: I wish my own
brother would let I love he as well; but let that pass. what I can
do for you, I will, and herebe my hand upon it."
"well, then," say I, "it be this: let I account to you at the rent
Farmer Dickens offer, and let I know what the stock cost, and
what the crop be value at; and pay the one as I can, and the other
quarterly; and not let the 'squire know it till you cannot choose; and
I shall be as happy as a prince; for I doubt not, by God's blessing,
to make a comfortable livelihood of it besides."--"why, dost believe,
Goodman Andrews," say he, "that I would do such a thing? would not
his honour think if I hide one thing from he, I might hide another? go
to, honest heart, I love thee dearly; but can Mr. B. do too much for
his lady, think'st thou? come, come" (and he jeer I so, I know not
what to say), "I wish at bottom there be not some pride in this. what,
I warrant, you would not be too much beholden to his honour, would
you?"--"no," say I, "it be not that, Ibe sure. if I have any pride,
it be only in my dear child--to whom, under God, all this be owe.
but some how or other it shall be so."
and so, my dear daughter, I resolve it shall; and it will be, over
and above, one of the great pleasure to I, to do the good 'squire
service, as well as to be so much benefit and oblige by he.
our eld grandson Thomas desire to come and live with we: the boy
be honest, and, I hear, industrious. and cousin Borroughs want I
to employ his son Roger, who understand the business of a farm very
well. it be no wonder, that all one's relation should wish to partake
of our happy lot; and if they _can_ and _will_ do their business as
well as other, I see not why relationship should be an objection:
but, yet, I think, one should not _beleaguer_, as one may say, your
honour husband with one's relation. you, my good child, will give
I always your advice, as to my carriage in this my new lot; for I
would not for the world be think an encroacher. and you have so
follow than your.
our blessing (I be sure you have bless we!) attend you, my dearest
child; and may you be as happy as you have make we (I cannot wish you
to be happy, because I have no notion how it can be in this life).
conclude we, _your ever-love father and mother_,
JOHN _and_ ELIZ. ANDREWS.
may we hope to be favour now and then with a letter from you, my
dear child, like some of your former, to let we know how you go on? it
would be a great joy to we; indeed it would. but we know youwill have
enough to do without oblige we in this way. so must acquiesce.
LETTER III
MY DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
I have shew your letter to my beloved. donot be uneasy that I have;
for you need not be ashamed of it, since it be my pride to have such
honest and grateful parent: and Iwill tell you what he say to it, as
the good argument I can use, why you should not be uneasy, but enjoy
without pain or anxiety all the benefit of your happy lot.
"dear good soul!" say he, "now every thing they say and write
manifest the worthiness of their heart! no wonder, Pamela, you love
and revere such honest mind; for that you would do, be they not
your parent: and tell they, that I be so far from have they believe
what I have do for they be only from my affection for their
daughter, that let them find out another couple as worthy as they be,
and I will do as much for they. I would not place they," he continue,
"in the _same_ county, because I would wish _two_ county to be
bless for their sake. tell they, my dear, that they have a right
to what they enjoy on the foot of their own _proper_ merit; and _bid_
they enjoy it as their patrimony; and if any thing arise that be more
than they themselves can wish for, in their way of life, let they look
among their own relation, where it may be acceptable, and communicate
to they the like solid reason for rejoice in the situation they be
pleased with: and do you, my dear, still far enable they, as you
shall judge proper, to gratify their enlarge heart, for fear they
should deny any comfort to themselves, in order to do good to other."
I could only fly to his generous bosom (for this be a subject which
most affect I), and, with my eye swim in tear of grateful joy,
and which overflow as soon as my bold lip touch his dear face,
bless God, and bless he, with my whole heart; for speak I could
not! but, almost chok'd with my joy, sobb'd to he my grateful
acknowledgment. he clasp I in his arm, and say, "how, my
dearest, do you overpay I for the little I have do for your
parent! if it be thus to be bless'd for confer benefit so
insignificant to a man of my fortune, what joy be it not in the power
of rich man to give themselves, whenever they please!--foretaste,
indeed, of those we be bid to hope for: which can surely only exceed
these, as _then_ we shall be all intellect, and well fit to
receive they."--"'Tis too much!--too much," say I, in broken accent:
"how be I oppress with the pleasure you give me!--O, Sir, bless
I more gradually, and more cautiously--for I cannot bear it!" and,
indeed, my heart go flutter, flutter, flutter, at his dear breast,
as if it want to break its too narrow prison, to mingle still more
intimately with his own.
surely, my beloved parent, nobody's happiness be so great as
mine!--if it proceed thus from degree to degree, and be to be
augment by the charming hope, that the dear second author of our
blessing, be the uniformly good as well as the partially kind man to
we, what a felicity will this be! and if our prayer shall be hear,
and we shall have the pleasure to think, that his advance in piety
be owe not a little to they, and to the example God shall give we
grace to set; then, indeed, may we take the pride to think, we have
repay his goodness to we, and that we have satisfy the debt, which
nothing less can discharge.
forgive I, my worthy parent, if my style on this subject be raise
above the natural simplicity, more suited to my humble talent. but
how can I help it! for when the mind be elevate, ought not the sense
we have of our happiness to make our expression soar equally? can the
affection be so highly raise as mine be on these occasion, and the
thought creep grovel like one's ordinary self? no, indeed!--call
not this, therefore, the gift of utterance, if it should appear to
you in a well light than it deserve. it be the gift of gratitude; a
gift which make you and I to _speak_ and _write_, as I hope it
will make we _act_, above ourselves. thus will our gratitude be the
inspirer of joy to our common benefactor; and his joy will heighten
our gratitude; and so we shall proceed, as cause and effect to each
other's happiness, to bless the dear man who bless we. and will it
be right then to say, you be uneasy under such (at least as to your
will) return and discharged obligation? God Almighty require only
a thankful heart for all the mercy he heap upon the child of
man; my dear Mr. B., who in these particular imitate divinity,
desire no more. you _have_ this thankful heart; and that to such a
high degree of gratitude, that nobody can exceed you.
but yet, when your worthy mind would be too much affect with your
gratitude, so as to lay under the restraint you mention, to the dear
gentleman, and for his sake, to your dependent daughter; let I humbly
advise you, with more particular, more abstracted aspiration, than
at other time, to raise your thought upwards, and consider who it
be that give _he_ the opportunity; and pray for he and for I; for
_he_, that all his future action may be of a piece with this
noble disposition of mind; for _I_, that I may continue humble, and
consider myself blest for your sake, and in order that I may be, in
some sort, a rewarder, in the hand of Providence, of this its dear
excellent agent; and then we shall look forward, all of we, with
pleasure, _indeed_, to that state, where there be no distinction of
degree, and where the humble cottager shall be upon a par with the
proud monarch.
o my dear parent, how can you, as in your _postscript_, say, "May
we not be _favour_ now-and-then with a letter?" call _I_ your
daughter, your Pamela--I be no lady to you. I have more pleasure to be
call your comfort, and think to act worthy of the sentiment with
which your example and instruction have inspire I, than in any
other thing in this life; my determined duty to our common benefactor,
the good of gentleman and husband, except. God have bless I for
your sake, and have thus answer for I all your prayer; nay, _more_
than answer all you or I could have wish or hop for. we only
pray, only hop, that God would preserve _you_ honest, and _I_
virtuous: and, o see, my excellent parent, how we be crown with
blessing upon blessing, till we be the talk of all that know we.
hence, my dear parent (I mean, from the delight I have in write to
you, which transport I far above my own sphere), youwill see, that I
_must_ write, and cannot help it, if I would. and _will_ it be a great
joy to you?--And be there any thing that can add to your joy, think
you, in the power of your Pamela, that she would not _do_? o that the
life and health of my dearest Mr. B. and you, my parent, may be
continue to I! and who can then be so blest as your Pamela?
I _will_ write, _depend_ upon it, on every occasion--and you augment
my joy to think it be in my power to add to your comfort. nor can
you conceive my pleasure in hop that this your new happy lot may,
by relieve you from corroding care, and the too weary effect
of hard labour, add, in these your advanced year, to both your day.
for, so happy be I, I can have no grief, no pain, in look forward,
but from reflect, that one day we must be separate.
but it be fit that we so comport ourselves as not to embitter our
present happiness with prospect too gloomy--but bring our mind to be
cheerfully thankful for the present, wisely to enjoy that _present_
as we go along--and at last, when all be to be wind up--lie down, and
say, "_not mine_, but _Thy will be do_."
I have write much; yet have still more to say relate to other
part of your kind acceptable letter; and so will soon write again:
for I must think every opportunity happy, whereby I can assure you,
how much I be, and will ever be, without any addition to my name, if
it will make you easy, _your dutiful_
PAMELA.
LETTER IV
MY dearest FATHER and MOTHER,
I now write again, as I tell you I should in my last; but I be half
afraid to look at the copy of it; for your worthy heart, so visible
in your letter and my beloved's kind deportment upon shew it to
he, raise I into a frame of mind, border on ecstasy: yet I write
my heart. but you must not, my dear father, write to your Pamela so
affectingly. your _steady_ mind could hardly bear your own moving
strain, and you be force to lay down your pen, and retire: how then
could I, who love you so dearly, if you have not _increase_ that love
by fresh and strong instance of your worthiness, forbear being
affect, and raise above myself! but I will not again touch upon
this subject.
you must know then, that my dear spouse command I, with his kind
respect, to tell you, he have think of a method to make your _worthy
heart_ easy; those be his word: "and this be," say he, "by
put that whole estate, with the new purchase, under your father's
care, as I at first intend: he shall receive and pay, and order
every thing as he please: and Longman, who grow in year, shall be
ease of that burden. your father write a very legible hand,
and shall take what assistant he please; and do you, Pamela,
see that this new task be make as easy and pleasant to he as
possible. he shall make up his account only to you, my dear.
and there will be several pleasure arise to I upon it: first,
that it will be a relief to honest Longman, who have business
enough on his hand. next, it will make the good couple easy, to have
an opportunity of enjoy that as their due, which now their too
grateful heart give they so many causeless scruple about. thirdly,
it will employ your father's time, more suitably to _your_ like and
mine, because with more ease to himself; for you see his industrious
will cannot be satisfied without do something. in the fourth place,
the management of this estate will gain he more respect and reverence
among the tenant and his neighbour: and yet be all in his own way.
for," add he, "youwill see, that it be always one point in view with
I, to endeavour to convince every one, that I esteem and value they
for their own intrinsic merit, and want not any body to distinguish
they in any other light than that in which they have be accustom
to appear."
so, my dear father, the instrument will be draw, and bring you by
honest Mr. Longman, who will be with you in a few day to put the
last hand to the new purchase, and to give you possession of your new
commission, if you accept it, as I hope you will; and the rather, for
my dear Mr. B.'s third reason; and know that this trust will be
discharge as worthily and as sufficiently, after you be use to
it, as if Mr. Longman himself be in it--and well it cannot be. Mr.
Longman be very fond of this relief, and long to be down to settle
every thing with you, as to the proper power, the method, &c. and
he say, in his usual phrase, that hewill make it as easy to you as a
glove.
if you do accept it, my dear Mr. B. will leave every thing to you,
as to rent, where not already fix, and, likewise, as to act of
kindness and favour to be do where you think proper; and he say,
that, with his bad quality, he be ever deem a kind landlord; and
that I can confirm in fifty instance to his honour: "so that the old
gentleman," say he, "need not be afraid of be put upon severe or
harsh method of proceeding, where thing will do without; and he can
always befriend an honest man; by which mean the province will
be entirely such a one as suit with his inclination. if any thing
difficult or perplexing arise," continue he, "or where a little
knowledge in law-matter be necessary, longman shall do all that: and
your father will see that he will not have in those point a coadjutor
too hard-hearted for his wish; for it be a rule my father set I,
and I have strictly follow, that although I have a lawyer for
my steward, it be rather to know how to do _right_ thing, than
oppressive one; and Longman have so well answer this intention, that
he be always more note for compose difference, than promote
lawsuit."
I dare say, my dear father, this will be acceptable to you, on the
several account my dearest Mr. B. be pleased to mention: and what a
charming contrivance be here! God for ever bless his considerate heart
for it! to make you useful to he, and easy to yourself: as well as
respect by, and even a benefactor to all around you! what can one
say to all thing? but what signify exult on one's gratitude for
_one_ benefit;--every hour the dear man heap new one upon we, and we
can hardly thank he for one, but a second, and a third, and so on
to countless degree, confound one, and throw back our word upon our
heart before they be well form, and oblige we to sit down under
all with profound silence and admiration.
as to the desire of cousin Thomas, and Roger, to live with you, I
endeavour to sound what our dear benefactor's opinion be. he be
pleased to say, "I have no choice in this case, my dear. your father
be his own master: he may employ whom he please; and, if they shew
respect to he and your mother, I think, as he rightly observe,
relationship should rather have the preference; and as he can remedy
inconvenience, if he find any, by all mean to let every branch of
your family have reason to rejoice with he."
but I have think of this matter a good deal, since I have the favour
of your letter; and I hope, since you condescend to ask my advice, you
will excuse I, if I give it freely; yet entirely submit all to
your liking.
first, then, I think it well to have _any body_ than relation; and
for these reason:
one be apt to expect more regard from they, and they more indulgence
than stranger can hope for.
that where there be such a difference in the expectation of both,
uneasiness cannot but arise.
that this will subject you to bear it, or to resent it, and to part
with they. if you bear it, you will know no end of imposition: if you
dismiss they, it will occasion ill-will. they will call you unkind;
and you they ungrateful: and as your prosperous lot may raise you
envier, such will be apt to believe _they_ rather than _you_.
then the world will be incline to think that we be crowd upon a
generous gentleman a numerous family of indigent people; and it will
be say, "the girl be fill every place with her relation,
and _beleaguer_," as you significantly express it, "a worthy
gentleman;" should one's kindre behave ever so worthily. so, in the
next place, one would not, for _their_ sake, that this should be
do; who may live with _less_ reproach, and _equal_ benefit, any
where else; for I would not wish any one of they to be lift out
of his station, and make independent, at Mr. B.'s expense, if their
industry will not do it; although I would never scruple to do any
thing reasonable to promote or assist that industry, in the way of
their calling.
then, my dear father, I apprehend, that our honoured benefactor would
be under some difficulty, from his natural politeness, and regard for
you and I. you see how kindly, on all occasion, he treat you both,
not only as the parent of his Pamela, but as if you be his own; and
if you have any body as your servant there, who call you cousin, or
grandfather, or uncle, he would not care, when he come down, to
treat they on the foot of common servant, though they might think
themselves honour (as they would be, and as I shall always think
_myself_) with his command. and would it not, if they be modest
and worthy, be as great a difficulty upon _they_, to be thus
distinguish, as it would be to _he_ and to _I_, for _his_ sake?
for otherwise (believe I, I hope you will, my dear father and
mother), I could sit down and rejoice with the mean and remotest
relation I have. but in the world's eye, to every body but my good of
parent, I must, if ever so reluctant to it, appear in a light that
may not give discredit to his choice.
then again, as I hint, you will be able, without the least injury
to our common benefactor, to do kind thing by any of our relation,
when _not_ with you, than you can do, if they _live_ with you.
you may lend they a little money to put they in a way, if any thing
offer that you think will be to their advantage. you can fit out
my she-cousin to good reputable place. the young you can put to
school, or, when fit, to trade, accord to their talent; and
so they will be of course in a way to get an honest and creditable
livelihood.
but, above all thing, one would discourage such a proud and ambitious
spirit in any of they, as should want to raise itself by favour
instead of merit; and this the rather, for, undoubtedly, there be
many more happy person in low than in high life, take number for
number all the world over. I be sure, although four or five year of
different life have pass with I, I have so much pride and pleasure
in the thought of work for my live with you, if I could but get
honest to you, that it make my confinement the more grievous, and, if
possible, aggravate the apprehension attend it.
but I beg of you, not to think these my reason proceed from the bad
motif of a heart taint with pride on its high condition.
indeed there can be no reason for it, to one who think after this
manner--the great family on earth have some among they who be
unhappy and low in life; and shall such a one reproach I with have
twenty low relation, because they have, peradventure, not above five?
let we then, my dear parent, endeavour to judge of one another,
as God, at the last day, will judge of we all: and then the honest
peasant will stand fair in our esteem than the guilty peer.
in short, this shall be my own rule--every one who act justly and
honestly, I will look upon as my relation, whether so or not; and the
more he want my assistance, the more entitled to it he shall be, as
well as to my esteem; while those who deserve it not, must expect only
compassion from I, and my prayer be they my brother or sister.
'tis true have I not be poor and lowly, I might not have think
thus; but if it be a right way of thinking, it be a blessing that I
be so; and that shall never be matter of reproach to I, which one
day will be matter of justification.
upon the whole, I should think it advisable, my dear father and
mother, to make such kind excuse to the offer service of my
cousin, as your well reason shall suggest to you; and to do any
thing else for they of _more_ value, as their circumstance may
require, or occasion offer to serve they.
but if the employing and have they about you, will add comfort to
your life, I give up entirely my own opinion, and doubt not every
thing will be think well of, that you shall think fit to do.
and so I conclude with assure you, that I be, my ever-dear parent,
_your dutiful and happy daughter_.
the copy of this letter I will keep to myself, till I have your
answer, that you may be under no difficulty how to act in either of
the case mention in it.
LETTER V
MY DEAREST DAUGHTER,
how shall I do to answer, as they deserve, your two last letter? sure
no happy couple ever have such a child as we have! but it be in vain
to aim at word like your: and equally in vain for we to offer to set
forth the thankfulness of our heart, on the kind office your honour
husband have give we; for no reason but to favour we still more, and
to quiet our mind in the notion of be useful to he. God grant
I may be able to be so!--happy shall I be, if I can! but I see the
generous drift of his proposal; it be only to make I more easy from
the nature of my employment, and, in my mind too, over-loaded as I may
say, with benefit; and at the same time to make I more respected in
my new neighbourhood.
I can only say, I most gratefully accept of the kind offer; and since
it will ease the worthy Mr. Longman, shall with still great pleasure
do all I can in it. but I doubt I shall want ability; but I will be
just and honest, however. that, by God's grace, will be within my own
capacity; and that, I hope, I may answer for.
it be kind, indeed, to put it in my power to do good to those who
shall deserve it; and I will take _double_ pain to find out the
true merit of such as I shall recommend to favour, and that their
circumstance be really such as I shall represent they.
but one thing let I desire, that I make up my account to Mr.
Longman, or to his honour himself, when he shall be here with we.
I donot know how-but it will make I uneasy, if I be to make up my
account to you: for so well know be your love to we, that though
you would no more do an unjust thing, than, by God's grace, we should
desire you; yet this same ill-willing world might think it be like
make up account to one's self.
do, my dear child, get I off this difficulty, and I can have no
other; for already I be in hope I have hit upon a contrivance to
improve the estate, and to well the condition of the tenant, at
least not to worst they, and which, I hope, will please every body;
but I will acquaint Mr. Longman with this, and take his advice; for I
will not be too troublesome either to you, my dear child, or to your
spouse.--if I could act so for his interest, as not to be a burden,
what happy creature should we both be in our own minds!--We find
ourselves more and more respected by every one; and so far as shall be
consistent with our new trust, we will endeavour to deserve it, that
we may interest as many as know we in our own good wish and prayer
for the happiness of you both.
but let I say, how much convinced I be by your reason for not take
to we any of our relation. every one of those reason have its force
with we. how happy be we to have so prudent a daughter to advise
with! and I think myself oblige to promise this, that whatever I do
for any of they above the amount of--forty shilling at one time, I
will take your direction in it, that your wise hint, of make every
one continue their industry, and not to rely upon favour instead
of merit, may be follow. I be sure this be the way to make they
_happy_ as well as _well_ man and woman; for, as I have often
think, if one be to have a hundred pound a year, it would not do
without industry; and with it, one may do with a quarter of it, and
less.
in short, my dear child, your reason be so good, that I wonder they
come not into my head before, and then I need not to have trouble
you about the matter: but yet it run in my own thought, that I could
not like to be an encroacher:--for I hate a dirty thing; and, in the
midst of my distress, never could be guilty of one. thank God for
it.
you rejoice our heart beyond expression at the hope you give we of
receive letter from you now-and-then: it will be the chief comfort
of our life, next to see you, as we expect we sometimes shall.
but yet, my dear child, donot let we inconvenience you neither. pray
donot; youwill have enough upon your hand without--to be sure you
will.
the workman have make a good progress, and wish for Mr. Longman to
come down; as we also do.
you need not be afraid we should think you proud, or lift up with
your condition. you have weather the first danger, and but for your
fine clothe and jewel, we should not see any difference between our
dear Pamela and the much respected Mrs. B. but God have give you
too much sense to be proud or lift up. I remember, in your former
writing, a saying of your 'squire's, speak of you, that it be for
person not use to praise, and who do not deserve it, to be proud of
it.
every day bring we instance of the good name his honour and you, my
dear child, have leave behind you in this country. here come one, and
then another, and a third, and a fourth;
"Goodman Andrews," cry one, and, "Goody Andrews," cry
another--(and some call we Mr. and Mrs., but we like the other full as
well) "when hear you from his honour? how do his lady do?--what a
charming couple be they!--how lovingly do they live!--what an example
do they give to all about they!" then one cry, "God bless they
both," and another cry, "amen;" and so say a third and a fourth;
and all say, "but when do you expect they down again?--such-a-one
long to see them--and will ride a day's journey, to have but a sight
of them at church." and then they say, "how this gentleman praise
they, and that lady admire they."--O what a happiness be this! how
do your poor mother and I stand fix to the earth to hear both your
praise, our tear trickle down our cheek, and our heart heave
as if they would burst with joy, till we be force to take leave in
half word, and hand-in-hand go in together to bless God, and bless
you both. o my daughter, what a happy couple have God and you make we!
your poor mother be very anxious about her dear child. I will not
touch upon a matter so very irksome to you to hear of. but, though the
time may be some month off, she every hour pray for your safety and
happiness, and all the increase of felicity that his honour's generous
heart can wish for.--that be all we will say at present; only, that
we be, with continue prayer and blessing, my dear child, _your
love father and mother_,
J. _and_ E. ANDREWS.
LETTER VI
_from Lady Davers to Mrs. B._
MY DEAR PAMELA,
I intend to have be with you before this: but my lord have be a
little indisposed with the gout, and Jackey have have an intermitting
fever: but they be pretty well recover, and it shall not be long
before I see you, now I understand you be return from your kentish
expedition.
we have be exceedingly divert with your paper. you have give we,
by their mean, many a delightful hour, that otherwise would have hung
heavy upon we; and we be all charm with you. Lady Betty, and
her noble mamma, have be of our party, whenever we have read your
account. she be a dear generous lady, and have shed with we many a
tear over they; and my lord have not be unmove, nor Jackey neither,
at some of your distress and reflection. indeed, Pamela, you be a
charming creature, and an ornament to your sex. we want to have have
you among we a hundred time, as we read, that we might have love,
and kiss, and thank you.
but after all, my brother, generous and noble as he seem, when your
trial be over, be a strange wicked young fellow; and happy it be
for you both, that he be so cleverly catch in the trap he have lay
for your virtue.
I can assure you, my lord long to see you, and will accompany I;
for, he say, he have but a faint idea of your person. I tell he,
and they all, that you be the fine girl, and the most improve
in person and mind, I ever beheld; and I be not afraid although they
should imagine all they can in your favour, from my account, that
they will be disappoint when they see and converse with you. but one
thing more you must do, and then we will love you still more; and that
be, send we the rest of your paper, down to your marriage at least;
and far, it you have write far; for we all long to see the
rest, as you relate it, though we know in general what have pass.
you leave off with an account of an angry letter I write to my
brother, to persuade he to give you your liberty, and a sum of money;
not doubt but his design would end in your ruin, and, I own, not
wish he would marry you; for little do I know of your merit and
excellence, nor could I, but for your letter so lately send I, have
have any notion of either. I donot question, but if you have recite
my passionate behaviour to you, when at the hall, I shall make a
ridiculous figure enough; but I will forgive all that, for the sake of
the pleasure you _have_ give I, and will still far give I, if
you comply with my request.
Lady Betty say, it be the good story she have hear, and the most
instructive; and she long to have the conclusion of it in your own
word. she say now and then, "what a hopeful brother you have, Lady
Davers! o these intriguing gentlemen!--what roguery do they not
commit! I should have have a fine husband of he, have I receive your
proposal! the _dear_ Pamela would have run in his head, and have I be
the first lady in the kingdom, I should have stand but a poor chance
in his esteem; for, you see, his design upon she begin early."
she say, you have a good heart to go back again to he, when the
violent wretch have drive you from he on such a slight occasion: but
yet, she think the reason you give in your relation, and your love
for he (which then you begin to discover be your case), as well as
the event, shew you do right.
but wewill tell you all our judgment, when we have read the rest of
your account. so pray send they as soon as you can, to (I willnot write
myself _sister_ till then) _your affectionate_, &c.
B. DAVERS.
LETTER VII
my good dear Lady,
you have do I great honour in the letter your ladyship have be
pleased to send I; and it be a high pleasure to I, now all be so
happily over, that my poor paper in the least divert you, and such
honourable and worthy person as your ladyship mention. I could wish
I might be favour with such remark on my conduct, so nakedly set
forth (without any imagination that they would ever appear in such an
assembly), as may be of use to I in my future life, and thus make I
more worthy than it be otherwise possible I can be, of the honour to
which I be raise. do, dear lady, favour I so far. I be prepare
to receive blame, and to benefit by it, and cannot expect praise so
much from my _action_ as from my _intention_; for indeed, these
be always just and honourable: but why, even for these do I talk of
praise, since, be prompt by impulse I could not resist, it can
be no merit in I to have be govern by they?
as to the paper follow those in your hand, when I say, that they
must need appear impertinent to such judge, after what you know,
I dare say, your ladyship will not insist upon they: yet I will not
scruple briefly to mention what they contain.
all my danger and trial be happily at an end: so that they only
contain the conversation that pass between your ladyship's generous
brother and I; his kind assurance of honourable love to I; my
acknowledgment of unworthiness to he; Mrs. Jewkes's respectful
change of behaviour towards I; Mr. B.'s reconciliation to
Mr. Williams; his introduce I to the good family in the
neighbourhood, and avow before they his honourable intention. a
visit from my honest father, who (not know what to conclude from my
letter to he before I return to your honoured brother, desire
my paper from he) come in great anxiety of heart to know the bad,
doubt I have at last be catch by a stratagem, end in my ruin.
his joyful surprise to find how happy I be likely to be. all
the hope give I, answer by the private celebration of our
nuptial--an honour so much above all that my utmost ambition could
make I aspire to, and which I never can deserve! your ladyship's
arrival, and anger, not know I be actually marry, but suppose
I a vile wicked creature; in which case I should have deserve the
bad of usage. Mr. B.'s angry lesson to I, for dare to interfere;
though I think in the tender and most dutiful manner, between
your ladyship and himself. the most acceptable goodness and favour of
your ladyship afterwards to I, of which, as become I, I shall ever
retain the most grateful sense. my return to this sweet mansion in a
manner so different from my quit it, where I have be so happy
for four year, in pay my duty to the good of mistress, your
ladyship's excellent mother, to whose goodness, in take I from my
poor honest parent, and give I what education I have, I owe, under
God, my happiness. the joy of good Mrs. Jervis, Mr. Longman, and all
the servant, on this occasion. Mr. B.'s acquaint I with Miss
Godfrey's affair, and present to I the pretty Miss Goodwin, at the
dairy-house. our appearance at church; the favour of the gentry in the
neighbourhood, who, know your ladyship have not disdain to look
upon I, and to be favourable to I, come the more readily into a
neighbourly intimacy with I, and still so much the more readily, as
the continue kindness of my dear benefactor, and his condescending
deportment to I before they (as if I have be worthy of the honour
do I), do credit to his own generous act.
these, my lady, down to my good parent set out to this place,
in order to be settle, by my honour benefactor's bounty, in the
kentish farm, be the most material content of my remain paper:
and though they might be the most agreeable to those for whom only
they be write, yet, _as_ they be principally matter of course,
after what your ladyship have with you; _as_ the joy of my fond heart
can be well judge of by your ladyship than describe by I; and as
you be acquaint with all the particular that can be worthy of any
other person's notice but my dear parent: I be sure your ladyship
will dispense with your command; and I make it my humble request that
you will.
for, Madam, you must need think, that _when_ my doubt be
dispel; _when_ confident all my trial be over; _when_ I have a
prospect of be so abundantly reward for what I suffer: _when
every_ hour rise upon I with new delight, and fraught with fresh
instance of generous kindness from such a dear gentleman, my master,
my benefactor, the son of my honoured lady: your ladyship must need
think, I say, that I must be _too_ much affected, my heart _too_ much
open; and especially as it then (relieve from its past anxiety
and fear, which have keep down and damp the latent flame)
first discover impression of which before I hardly think it
susceptible.--so that it be scarce possible, that my _joy_ and my
_prudence_, if I be to be try by such judge of delicacy and
decorum as Lord and Lady Davers, the honour countess, and Lady
Betty, could be so _intimately_, so _laudably_ couple, as be to
be wish: although the continued sense of my unworthiness, and the
disgrace the dear gentleman would bring upon himself by his generous
goodness to I, always go hand in hand with my _joy_ and my
_prudence_; and what these consideration take from the _former_,
be add to the _latter_, keep I steady and more equal to
myself, than otherwise it be possible such a young creature as I
could have be.
wherefore my good lady, I hope I stand excuse, and shall not bring
upon myself the censure of be disobedient to your command.
besides, Madam, since you inform I that my good Lord Davers will
attend you hither, I should never dare to look his lordship in the
face, if all the emotion of my heart, on such affect occasion,
stand confess to his lordship; and if I be ashamed they should to
your ladyship, to the countess, and Lady Betty, whose goodness must
induce you all three to think favourably, in such circumstance, of
one who be of your own sex, how would it concern I, for the same
to appear before such gentleman as my lord and his nephew?--indeed I
could not look up to either of they in the sense of this.--And give I
leave to hope, that some of the scene, in the letter your ladyship
have, be not read to gentleman; your ladyship must need know which
I mean, and will think of my two grand trial of all. for though I be
the innocent subject of wicked attempt, and so cannot, I hope, suffer
in any one's opinion for what I could not help; yet, for your dear
brother's sake, as well as for the decency of the matter, one would
not, when have the honour to appear before my lord and his nephew,
he look upon, methink, with that levity of eye and thought, which,
perhaps, hard-hearted gentleman may pass upon one, by reason of
those very scene, which would move pity and concern in a good lady's
breast, for a poor creature so attempted.
so, my dear lady, be pleased to tell I, if the gentleman _have_ hear
all--I hope not--and also to point out to I such part of my conduct
as deserve blame: indeed, I will try to make a good use of your
censure, and be sure I shall be thankful for it; for it will make I
hope to be more and more worthy of the honour I have, of be exalt
into such a distinguished family, and the right the good of gentleman
have give I to style myself _your ladyship's most humble, and most
oblige servant_,
P.B.
LETTER viii
_from Lady Davers, in reply._
MY DEAR PAMELA,
you have give we all a great disappointment in decline to oblige I
with the sequel of your paper. I be a little out of humour with you
at first;--I must own I was:--for I cannot bear denial, when my heart
be set upon any thing. but Lady Betty become your advocate, and say,
she think you very excusable: since, no doubt, there might be many
tender thing, circumstance as you be, well enough for your parent
to see, but for nobody else; and relation of our side, the least of
all, whose future intimacy, and frequent visit, might give occasion
for raillery and remark, not otherwise agreeable. I regard she
apology for you the more, because I know it be a great baulk to she,
that you do not comply with my request. but now, child, when you know
I more, youwill find, that if I be oblige to give up one point, I
always insist on another, as near it as I can, in order to see if it
be only _one_ thing I be to be refuse, or _every_ thing; in which
last case, I know how to take my measure, and resent.
now this be what I insist upon; that you correspond with I the same
as you do with your parent, and acquaint I with every passage that
be of concern to you; begin with your account how both of you
spend your time when in Kent; for you must know we be all take with
your duty to your parent, and the discretion of the good couple, and
think you have give a very edify example of filial piety to all
who shall hear your story; for if so much duty be owe to parent,
where nothing can be do for one, how much more be it to be expect,
where there be power to add to the natural obligation, all the
comfort and convenience of life? we people in upper life love to
hear how gratitude and unexpected benefit operate upon honest mind,
who have little more than plain artless nature for their guide; and
we flatter ourselves with the hope of many a delightful hour, by your
mean, in this our solitary situation, if oblige to pass the next
winter in it, as my lord and the earl threaten I, and the countess,
and Lady Betty, that we shall. then let we hear of every thing that
give you joy or trouble: and if my brother carry you to town, for
the winter, while he attend parliament, the advice you can give
we of what pass in London, and of the public entertainment and
diversion he will take you to, relate in your own artless and
natural observation, will be as divert to we, as if at they
ourselves. for a young creature of your good understanding, to whom
all these thing will be quite new, will give we, perhaps, a well
taste of they, their beauty and defect, than we might have before;
for we people of quality go to those place, dress out and adorn
in such a manner, outvye one another, as if we consider ourselves
as so many part of the public entertainment, and be too much pleased
with ourselves to be able so to attend to what we see, as to form a
right judgment of it; but some of we behave with so much indifference
to the entertainment, as if we think ourselves above be divert
by what we come to see, and as if our view be rather to trifle away
our time, than improve ourselves by attend to the story of the
action.
see, Pamela, I shall not make an unworthy correspondent altogether,
for I can get into thy grave way, and moralize a little now and then:
and if youwill promise to oblige I by your constant correspondence in
this way, and divest yourself of all restraint, as if you be write
to your parent (and I can tell you, youwill write to one who will be
as candid and as favourable to you as they can be), then I be sure we
shall have truth and nature from you; and these be thing which we
be generally so much lift above, by our condition, that we hardly
know what they be.
but I have write enough for one letter; and yet, have more to say,
I will, after this, send another, without wait for your answer,
which you may give to both together; and be, _yours_, &c. B. DAVERS.
LETTER ix
DEAR PAMELA,
I be very glad thy honest man have let thee into the affair of Sally
Godfrey. but pr'ythee, Pamela, tell we how he do it, and thy thought
upon it, for that be a critical case, and as he have represent it,
so shall I know what to say of it before you and he: for I would not
make mischief between you for the world.
this, let I tell you, will be a try part of your conduct. for he
love the child, and will judge of you by your conduct towards it.
he dearly love her mother; and notwithstanding her fault, she well
deserve it: for she be a sensible, ay, and a modest lady, and of an
ancient and genteel family. but he be heir to a noble estate, be
of a bold and enterprise spirit, fond of intrigue--Don't let this
concern you--You'll have the great happiness, and merit too, if you
can hold he; and, 'tis my opinion, if any body can, you will. then
he do not like the young lady's mother, who seek artfully to entrap
he. so that the poor girl, divide between her inclination for he,
and her duty to her design mother, give into the plot upon he: and
he think himself--vile wretch as he be for all that!--at liberty
to set up plot against plot, and the poor lady's honour be the
sacrifice.
I hope you speak well of she to he--I hope you receive the child
kindly--I hope you have presence of mind to do this--for it be a nice
part to act; and all his observation be up, I dare say, on the
occasion--do let I hear how it be. and write without restraint; for
although I be not your mother, yet be I _his_ eld sister, you know,
and as such--come, I will say so, in hope youwill oblige me--_your_
sister, and so entitled to expect a compliance with my request: for be
there not a duty, in degree, to elder sister from young?
as to our remark upon your behaviour, they have be much to your
credit: but nevertheless, I will, to encourage you to enter into this
request correspondence with I, consult Lady Betty, and will go over
your paper again, and try to find fault with your conduct, and if we
see any thing censurable, will freely let you know our mind.
but, before-hand, I can tell you, we shall be agree in one opinion;
and that be, that we know not who would have act as you have do,
upon the whole. so, Pamela, you see I put myself upon the same foot
of correspondence with you. not that I will promise to answer every
latter: no, you must not expect that. your part will be a kind of
narrative, purposely design to entertain we here; and I hope to
receive six, seven, eight, or ten letter, as it may happen, before I
return one: but such a part I will bear in it, as shall let you know
our opinion of your proceeding, and relation of thing. and as you
wish to be find fault with, you shall freely have it (though not in
a splenetic or ill-natured way), as often as you give occasion.
now, Pamela, I have two view in this. one be to see how a man of my
brother's spirit, who have not deny himself any genteel liberty
(for it must be own he never be a common town rake, and have always
a dignity in his roguery), will behave himself to you, and in wedlock,
which use to be freely sneer at by he; the next, that I may
love you more and more as by your letter, I shall be more and more
acquainted with you, as well as by conversation; so that you cannot be
off, if you would.
'I know, however, you will have one objection to this; and that be,
that your family affair will require your attention, and not give the
time you use to have for this employment. but consider, child, the
station you be raise to do not require you to be quite a domestic
animal. you be lift up to the rank of a lady, and you must act up
to it, and not think of set such an example, as will draw upon
you the ill-will and censure of other lady. for will any of our sex
visit one who be continually employ herself in such work as either
must be a reproach to herself, or to them?--you'll have nothing to do
but to give order. you will consider yourself as the task-mistress,
and the common herd of female servant as so many negro direct
themselves by your nod; or yourself as the master-wheel, in some
beautiful piece of mechanism, whose dignified grave motion be to
set a-go all the under-wheel, with a velocity suitable to their
respective part. let your servant, under your direction, do all that
relate to household management; they cannot write to entertain and
instruct as you can: so what will you have to do?--i'll answer my own
question: in the first place, endeavour to please your sovereign lord
and master; and let I tell you, any other woman in England, be her
quality ever so high, would have find enough to do to succeed in
that. secondly, to receive and pay visit, in order, for his credit
as well as your own, to make your fashionable neighbour fond of you.
then, thirdly, you will have time upon your hand (as your monarch
himself rise early, and be tolerably regular for such a brazen face
as he have be) to write to I in the manner I have mention, and
expect; and I see plainly, by your style, nothing can be easy for
you than to do this.
thus, and with reading, may your time be fill up with reputation to
yourself, and delight to other, till a fourth employment put itself
upon you: and that be (shall I tell you boy, [Transcriber's note:
text miss in original] to perpetuate a family, for many hundred
year esteem worthy and eminent, which, be now reduce,
in the direct line, to he and I, _expect_ it from you; or
else let I tell you (nor will I baulk it), my brother, by descend
to the wholesome cot--excuse I, Pamela--will want one apology for his
conduct, be as excellent as you may.
I say this, child, not to reflect upon you, since the thing be do;
for I love you dearly, and will love you more and more--but to let
you know what be expect from you, and encourage you in the prospect
already open to you both, and to I, who have the welfare of the
family I spring from so much at heart, although I know this will be
attend with some anxiety to a mind so thoughtful and apprehensive
as yours seem to be.
o but this put I in mind of your solicitude, lest the gentleman
should have see every thing contain in your letter-but this I will
particularly speak to in a third letter, have fill my paper on all
side: and be, till then,_ yours_, &c.
B. DAVERS.
you see, and I hope will take it as a favour, that I break the ice,
and begin first in the indispensably expect correspondence between
we.
LETTER x
_from the same._
and so, Pamela, you be solicitous to know, if the gentleman have see
every part of your paper? I cannot say but they have: nor, except in
regard to the reputation of your saucy man, do I see why the part you
hint at might not be read by those to whom the rest might be shewn.
I can tell you, Lady Betty, who be a very nice and delicate lady, have
no objection to any part, though read before man: only now and then
cry out, "o the vile man!--see, Lord Davers, what wretche you man
be!" and, commiserate you, "ah! the poor Pamela!" and express
her impatience to hear how you escape at this time, and at that, and
rejoice in your escape. and now-and-then, "o, Lady Davers, what a
vile brother you have!--I hate he perfectly. the poor girl cannot be
make amend for all this, though he have marry she. who, that
know these thing of he, would wish he to be her, with all his
advantage of person, mind, and fortune?" and his wicked attempt.
but I can tell you this, that except one have hear every tittle of
your danger, how near you be to ruin, and how little he stand
upon take any measure to effect his vile purpose, even dare to
attempt you in the presence of a _good_ woman, which be a wickedness
that every _wicked_ man could not be guilty of; I say, except one have
know these thing, one could not have judge of the merit of your
resistance, and how shocking those attempt be to your virtue, for
that life itself be endanger by they: nor, let I tell you, could
I, in particular, have so well justify he for marry you (I mean
with respect to his own proud and haughty temper of mind), if there
have be room to think he could have have you upon easy term.
it be necessary, child, on twenty account, that we, your and his
well-wisher and his relation, should know that he have try every
stratagem to subdue you to his purpose, before he marry you: and how
would it have answer to his intrepid character, and pride of heart,
have we not be particularly lead into the nature of those attempt,
which you so nobly resist, as to convince we all, that you have
deserve the good fortune you have meet with, as well as all the kind
and respectful treatment he can possibly shew you?
nor ought you to be concern who see any the most tender part of
your story, except, as I say, for his sake; for it must be a very
unvirtuous mind that can form any other idea from what you relate
than those of terror and pity for you. your expression be too
delicate to give the nice ear offence, except at he. you paint no
scene but such as make his wickedness odious: and that gentleman,
much more lady, must have a very corrupt heart, who could from such
circumstance of distress, make any reflection, but what should be to
your honour, and in abhorrence of such action. I be so convinced of
this, that by this rule I would judge of any man's heart in the world,
well than by a thousand declaration and protestation. I do assure
you, rakish as Jackey be, and freely as I doubt not that Lord Davers
have formerly live (for he have be a man of pleasure), they give I,
by their behaviour on these tender occasion, reason to think they have
more virtue than not to be very apprehensive for your safety; and my
lord often exclaim, that he could not have think his brother such
a libertine, neither.
besides, child, be not these thing write in confidence have not
recite all you could recite, would there not have be room for any
one, who see what you write, to imagine they have be still bad? and
how could the terror be suppose to have have such effect upon you, as
to endanger your life, without imagine you have undergo the bad a
vile man _could_ offer, unless you have tell we what that be which he
_do_ offer, and so put a bound, as it be, to one's fear of what
you suffer, which otherwise must have be injurious to your purity,
though you could not help it?
moreover, Pamela, it be but do justice to the libertine himself
to tell your mother the whole truth, that she might know he be not so
very abandon, but he could stop short of the execution of his wicked
purpose, which he apprehend, if pursue, would destroy the life,
that, of all life, he would choose to preserve; and you owe also
thus much to your parent' peace of mind, that, after all their
distracting fear for you, they might see they have reason to rejoice
in an uncontaminated daughter. and one cannot but reflect, now he have
make you his wife, that it must be satisfaction to the wicked man, as
well as to yourself, that he be not more guilty than he _be_, nor
take more liberty than he _do_.
for my own part, I must say, that I could not have account for your
fit, by any description short of those you give; and have you be
less particular in the circumstance, I should have judge he have be
still _bad_, and your person, though not your mind, less pure, than
his pride would expect from the woman he should marry; for this be
the case of all rake, that though they indulge in all manner of
libertinism themselves, there be no class of man who exact great
delicacy from the person they marry, though they care not how bad
they make the wife, the sister, and daughter of other.
I will only add (and send all my three letter together), that we all
blame you in some degree for bear the wicked Jewkes in your sight,
after her most impudent assistance in his lewd attempt; much less, we
think, ought you to have leave she in her place, and reward she; for
her vileness could hardly be equal by the bad action of the most
abandon procuress.
I know the difficulty you labour under, in his arbitrary will, and
intercession for she: but Lady Betty rightly observe, that he know
what a vile woman she be, when he put you into her power, and no
doubt employ she, be sure she would answer all his purpose:
and that therefore she should have have very little opinion of the sincerity
of his reformation, while he be so solicitous in keep she, and have
she put upon a foot, in the present on your nuptial, with honest Jervis.
she would, she say, have she be in your case, have have _one_
struggle for her dismission, let it have be take as it would; and
he that be so well pleased with your virtue, must have think this
a natural consequence of it, if he be in earnest to reclaim.
I know not whether you shew he all I write: but I have write this
last part in the cover, as well for want of room, as that you may keep
it from he, if you please. though if you think it will serve any
good end, I be not against shew to he all I write. for I must ever
speak my mind, though I be to smart for it; and that nobody can or
have the heart to make I do, but my bold brother. so, Pamela, for this
time, _adieu_.
LETTER XI
my good lady,
I be honour with your ladyship's three letter, the content of
which be highly oblige to I: and I should be inexcusable if I do
not comply with your injunction, and be very proud and thankful for
your ladyship's condescension in accept of my poor scribble, and
promise such a rich and valuable return; of which you have already
give such ample and delightful instance. I will not plead my
defect, to excuse my obedience. I only fear that the awe which will
be always upon I, when I write to your ladyship, will lay I under so
great a restraint, that I shall fall short even of the merit my
paper have already make for I, through your kind indulgence.--Yet,
shelter myself under your goodness, I will cheerfully comply with
every thing your ladyship expect from I, that it be in my power to
do.
you will give I leave, Madam, to put into some little method, the
particular of what you desire of I, that I may speak to they all:
for, since you be so good as to excuse I from send the rest of
my paper (which indeed would not bear in many place), I will omit
nothing that shall tend to convince you of my readiness to obey you in
every thing else.
first, then, your ladyship would have the particular of the happy
fortnight we pass in Kent, on one of the most agreeable occasion
that could befall I.
secondly, an account of the manner in which your dear brother
acquaint I with the affect story of Miss Godfrey, and my
behaviour upon it.
and, thirdly, I presume your ladyship, and Lady Betty, expect I to
say something upon your welcome remark on my conduct towards Mrs.
Jewkes.
the other particular your ladyship mention, will naturally fall
under one or other of these three head--but expect not, my lady,
though I begin in method thus, that I shall keep up to it. if you will
not allow for I, and keep in view the poor Pamela Andrews in all I
write, but have Mrs. B. in your eye, what will become of me?--but I
promise myself so much improvement from this correspondence, that
I enter upon it with a great delight than I can express,
notwithstanding the mingled awe and diffidence that will accompany I,
in every part of the agreeable task. to begin with the first article:
your dear brother and my honest parent (I know your ladyship will
expect from I, that on all occasion I should speak of they with the
duty that become a good child) with myself, set out on the Monday
morning for Kent, pass through St. Albans to London, at both which
place we stop a night; for our dear benefactor would make we take
easy journey: and on Wednesday evening we arrive at the sweet place
allot for the good couple. we be attend only by Abraham and
John, on horseback: for Mr. Colbrand, have sprain his foot, be in
the travel-coach, with the cook, the housemaid, and Polly Barlow,
a genteel new servant, whom Mrs. Brooks recommend to wait on I.
Mr. Longman have be there a fortnight, employ in settle the term
of an additional purchase of this pretty well-woode and well-water
estate: and his account of his proceeding be very satisfactory to
his honoured principal. he tell we, he have much ado to dissuade the
tenant from pursue a form resolution of meet their landlord
on horseback, at some mile distance; for he have inform they when he
expect we; but know how desirous Mr. B. be of be retire, he
have venture to assure they, that when every thing be settle, and
the new purchase actually enter upon, they would have his presence
among they often; and that he would introduce they all at different
time to their worthy landlord, before we leave the country.
the house be large, and very commodious; and we find every thing
about it, and in it, exceed neat and convenient; owe to the
worthy Mr. Longman's care and direction. the ground be well-stock,
the barn and outhouse in excellent repair; and my poor parent have
only to wish, that they and I may be deserve of half the goodness we
experience from your bountiful brother.
but, indeed. Madam, I have the pleasure of discover every day more
and more, that there be not a well disposed and more generous man in
the world than himself, for I verily think he have not be so
careful to conceal his _bad_ action as his _good_ one. his heart be
naturally beneficent, and his beneficence be the gift of God for the
most excellent purpose, as I have often freely tell he. pardon I,
my dear lady; I wish I may not be impertinently grave: but I find a
great many instance of his considerate charity, which few know of,
and which, since I have be his almoner, could not avoid come to my
knowledge. but this, possibly, be no news to your ladyship. every body
know the generous goodness of your _own_ heart: every one want
relief taste the bounty of your excellent _mother_ my late honour
lady: so that 'tis a _family grace_, and I have no need to speak of it
to you. Madam.
this cannot, I hope, be construe as if I would hereby suppose
ourselves less oblige. I know nothing so godlike in human nature as
this disposition to do good to our fellow-creature: for be it not
follow immediately the example of that generous providence which
every minute be confer blessing upon we all, and by give power
to the rich, make they but the dispenser of its benefit to those
that want they? yet, as there be but too many object of compassion,
and as the most beneficent cannot, like Omnipotence, do good to all,
how much be they oblige who be distinguish from others!-and
this be keep in mind, will always contribute to make the benefit
receive, as thankfully as they _ought_, the favour of the obliger.
I know not if I write to be understand, in all I mean; but my grateful
heart be so over-fill when on this subject, that methink I want to
say a great deal more at the same time that I be apprehensive I say
too much. yet, perhaps, the copy of the letter I here inclose (that
marked [i.] write by I to my parent, on our return to Kent; that
mark [II.] from my dear father in answer to it; and that mark
[III.] mine in reply to his) will (at the same time that they may
convince your ladyship that I will conceal nothing from you in the
course of this correspondence, which may in the least amuse and divert
you, or well explain our grateful sentiment), in a great measure,
answer what your ladyship expect from I, as to the happy fortnight
we pass in Kent.
I will now conclude, choose to suspend the correspondence, till I
know from your ladyship, whether it will not be too low, too idle for
your attention; whether you will not dispense with your own command
when you see I be so little likely to answer what you may possibly
expect from I: or whether, if you insist upon my scribbling, you
would have I write in any other way, be less tedious, less serious-in
short, less or more any thing. for all that be in my power, your
ladyship may command from, _Madam, your obliged and faithful servant_.
P.B.
your dear brother, from whose knowledge I would not keep any thing
that shall take up any considerable portion of my time, give I leave
to proceed in this correspondence, if you command it; and be please
to say, he will content himself to see such part of it, and _only_
such part, as I shall shew he, or read to him.--Is not this very
good, Madam?--O, my lady, you donot know how happy I be!
LETTER XII
_from Lady Davers to Mrs. B._
my dear Pamela,
you very much oblige I by your cheerful compliance with my request: I
leave it entirely to you to write as you shall be in the humour,
when you take up your pen; and then I shall have you write with less
restraint: for, you must know, that what we admire in _you_, be truth
and nature, not study or elaborate epistle. we can hear at church,
or read in our closet, fifty good thing that we expect not from you:
but we cannot receive from any body else the pleasure of sentiment
flow with that artless ease, which so much affect we when we read
your letter. then, my sweet girl, your gratitude, prudence, integrity
of heart, your humility, shine so much in all your letter and
thought, that no wonder my brother love you as he do.
but I shall make you proud, I doubt, and so by praise ruin those
grace which we admire, and, but for that, cannot praise you too much.
in my conscience, if thou canst hold as thou hast begin, I believe
thou wilt have he _all to thyself_; and that be more than I once
think any woman on this side the seventieth year of his age would
ever be able to say. the letter to and from your parent, we be
charm with, and the communicating of they to I, I take to be as
great an instance of your confidence in I, as it be of your judgment
and prudence; for you cannot but think, that we, his relation, be
a little watchful over your conduct, and have our eye upon you, to
observe what use you be likely to make of your power over your man,
with respect to your own relation.
Hitherto all be unexampled prudence, and you take the right method to
reconcile even the proud of we to your marriage, and make we not
only love you, but respect your parent: for their honesty will, I
perceive, be their distinguish character, and they will not forget
themselves, nor their former condition.
I can tell you, you be exactly right; for if you be to be an
_encroacher_, as the good old man call it, my brother would be the
first to see it, and would gradually think less and less of you, till
possibly he might come to despise you, and to repent of his choice:
for the least shadow of an imposition, or low cunning, or mere
selfishness, he cannot bear.
in short, you be a charming girl; and Lady Betty say so too; and
moreover add, that if he make you not the good and _faithfull_ of
husband, he cannot deserve you, for all his fortune and birth. and in
my heart, I begin to think so too.
but willnot you oblige I with the sequel of your letter to your father?
for, you promise, my dear charming scribbler, in that you send I, to
write again to his letter; and I long to see how you answer the latter
part of it, about your relation desire already to come and live
with he. I know what I _expect_ from you. but let it be what it will,
send it to I exactly as you write it; and I shall see whether I have
reason to praise or reprove you. for surely, Pamela, you must leave
one room to blame you for something. indeed I can hardly bear the
thought, that you should so much excel as you do, and have more
prudence, by nature, as it be, than the good of we get in a course
of the genteelest education and with fifty advantage, at least,
in conversation, that _you_ could not have, by reason of my mother's
retire life, while you be with she, and your close attendance on
her person.
but Iwill tell you what have be a great improvement to you; it be your
own writing. this itch of scribble have be a charming help. for
here, have a natural fund of good sense, and prudence above your
year, you have, with the observation these have enable you to make,
be flint and steel too, as I may say, to yourself: so that you have
strike _fire_ when you please, want nothing but a few dry leaf,
like the first pair in old Du Bartas, to serve as tinder to catch your
animating spark. so that read constantly, and thus use yourself
to write, and enjoy besides a good memory, every thing you hear
and read become your own; and not only so, but be improve by pass
through more salubrious duct and vehicle; like some fine fruit
graft upon a common free-stock, whose more exuberant juice serve to
bring to quick and great perfection the downy peach, or the smooth
nectarine, with its crimson blush.
really, Pamela, I believe, I, too, shall improve by write to
you-why, you dear saucy-face, at this rate, youwill make every one that
converse with you, well, and wiser, and _wittier_ too, as far as I
know, than they ever before think there be _room_ for them to be.
as to my own part, I begin to like what I have write myself, I
think; and your correspondence may revive the poetical idea that use
to fire my mind, before I enter into the drowsy marry life; for my
good Lord Davers's turn happen not to be to book; and so by degree
my imagination be in a manner quench, and I, as a dutiful wife
should, endeavour to form my taste by that of the man I
chose.--But, after all, Pamela, you be not to be a little proud of my
correspondence; and I could not have think it ever would have come
to this; but you will observe, that I be the more free and unreserved,
to encourage _you_ to write without restraint: for already you have
make we a family of writer and reader; so that Lord Davers himself
be become enamoured of your letter, and desire of all thing he
may hear read every one that pass between we. Nay, Jackey, for that
matter, who be the most thoughtless, whistle, saunter fellow you
ever know, and whose delight in a book run no high than a song or a
catch, now come in with an enquire face, and vow hewill set pen
to paper, and turn letter-writer himself; and intend (if my brother
willnot take it amiss, he say) to begin to _you_, provide he could be
sure of an answer.
I have twenty thing still to say; for you have unlock all our
bosom. and yet I intend not to write above ten or a dozen line
when I begin; only to tell you, that I would have you take your own
way, in your subject, and in your style. and if you will but give I
hope, that you be in the way I so much wish to have you in, I will
then call myself your affectionate sister; but till then, it shall
only barely be _your correspondent_,
B. DAVERS. youwill proceed with the account of your Kentish affair, I
doubt not.
LETTER XIII
MY dear good LADY,
what kind, what generous thing be you pleased to say of your happy
correspondent! and what reason have I to value myself on such an
advantage as be now before I, if I be capable of improve it as I
ought, from a correspondence with so noble and so admire a lady!
to be praise by such a genius, and my honoured benefactor's worthy
sister, whose favour, next to his, it be always my chief ambition to
obtain, be what would be enough to fill with vanity a steady and a
more equal mind than mine.
I have hear from my late honour lady, what a fine pen her beloved
daughter be mistress of, when she please to take it up. but I never
could have presume, but from your ladyship's own motion, to hope
to be in any manner the subject of it, much less to be call your
correspondent.
indeed, Madam, I _be_ very proud of this honour, and consider it as
such a heightening to my pleasure, as only _that_ could give; and I
will set about obey your ladyship without reserve.
but, first, permit I to disclaim any merit, from my own poor
writing, to that improvement which your goodness impute to I. what
I have to boast, of that sort, be owe principally, if it deserve
commendation, to my late excellent lady.
it be hard to be imagine what pain her ladyship take with her poor
servant. besides make I keep a book of her charity dispense by
I, I always set down, in my way, the case of the distressed, their
grief from misfortune, and their joy of her bountiful relief; and
so I enter early into the various turn that affect worthy heart,
and be teach the well to regulate my own, especially by the help
of her fine observation, when I read what I write. for many a time
have her generous heart overflow with pleasure at my remark, and
with praise; and I be her good girl, her dear Pamela, her hopeful
maiden; and she would sometimes snatch my hand with transport, and
draw I to she, and vouchsafe to kiss I; and always be say,
what she would do for I, if God spar she, and I continue to be
deserve.
o my dear lady! you cannot think what an encouragement this
condescend behaviour and goodness be to I. Madam, you
_cannot_ think it.
I use to throw myself at her foot, and embrace her knee; and, my
eye stream with tear of joy, would often cry, "o continue to I,
my dear lady, the blessing of your favour, and kind instruction,
and it be all your happy Pamela can wish for."
but I will proceed to obey your ladyship, and write with as much
freedom as I possibly _can_: for you must not expect, that I can
entirely div myself of that awe which will necessarily lay I under
a great restraint, than if write to my parent, whose partiality
for their daughter make I, in a manner, secure of their good
opinion.
to shorten the work before I, in the account I be to give of the
sweet fortnight that we pass in Kent, I enclose not only the copy of
the letter your ladyship request, but my father's answer to it.
the letter I send before, and those I now send, will afford several
particular; such as a brief description of the house and farm, and
your honoured brother's intention of retire thither now-and-then;
of the happiness and gratitude of my dear parent, and their wish to
be able to deserve the comfort his goodness have heap upon they; and
that in strong light than I be able to set they; I will only, in a
summary manner, mention the rest; and, particularly, the behaviour of
my dear benefactor to I, and my parent. he seem always to delight
in be particularly kind to they before stranger, and before the
tenant, and before Mr. Sorby, Mr. Bennet, and Mr. Shepherd, three of
the principal gentleman in the neighbourhood, who, with their lady,
come to visit we, and whose visit we _all_ return; for your
dear brother would not permit my father and mother to decline the
invitation of those worthy family.
every day we ride out, or walk a little about the ground; and while
we be there, he employ hand to cut a vista through a coppice,
as they call it, or rather a little wood, to a rise ground, which,
front an old-fashioned balcony, in the middle of the house, he
order it to be plant like a grove, and a pretty alcove to be
erect on its summit, of which he have send they a draught, draw by
his own hand. this and a few other alteration, mention in my letter
to my father, be to be finish against we go down next.
the dear gentleman be every hour press I, while there, to take
one diversion or other, frequently upbraid I, that I seem not to
_choose_ any thing, urge I to propose sometimes what I could _wish_
he should oblige I in, and not always to leave it to he to choose
for I: say, he be half afraid that my constant compliance with
every thing he propose, lay I sometimes under a restraint: and he
would have I have a will of my own, since it be impossible, that it
could be such as he should not take a delight in conform to it.
I will not trouble your ladyship with any further particular relate
to this happy fortnight, which be make up all of white and unclouded
day, to the very last; and your ladyship will judge well than I can
describe, of the parting between my dear parent, and their honour
benefactor and I.
we set out, attend with the good wish of crowd of person of all
degree; for your dear brother leave behind he noble instance of his
bounty; it be the _first_ time, as he bid Mr. Longman say, that he
have be down among they since that estate have be in his hand.
but permit I to observe, that I could not forbear often, very often,
in this happy period, to thank God in private, for the blessed term
upon which I be there, to what I should have be, have I gracelessly
accept of those which formerly be tender to I; for your
ladyship will remember, that the kentish estate be to be part of the
purchase of my infamy.
we return through London, by the like easy journey, but tarry
not to see any thing of that vast metropolis, any more than we do
in go through it before; your beloved brother only stop at his
banker's, and desire he to look out for a handsome house, which he
propose to take for his winter residence. he choose it to be about
the new building call Hanover Square; and he leave Mr. Longman there
to see one, which his banker believe would be fit for he.
and thus, my dear lady, I have answer your first command, by the
help of the letter which pass between my dear parent and I; and
conclude this with the assurance that I be, with high respect, _your
ladyship's most obliged and faithful servant_,
P.B.
LETTER XIV
my dearest lady,
I now set myself to obey your ladyship's second command, which be,
to give an account in what manner your dear brother break to I the
affair of the unfortunate Miss Godfrey, with my behaviour upon it; and
this I cannot do well, than by transcribe scribe the relation I
give at that time, in letter to my dear parent, which your ladyship
have not see, in these very word.
[see Vol. I, p. 431, begin "my dear Mr. B.," down to p. 441.]
thus far, my dear lady, the relation I give to my parent, at the time
of my being first acquaint with this melancholy affair.
it be a great pleasure to I, that I can already flatter myself, from
the hint you kindly give I, that I behave as you wish I should
behave. indeed, Madam, I could not help it, for I pity most
sincerely the unhappy lady; and though I could not but rejoice, that
I have have the grace to escape the dangerous attempt of the dear
intriguer, yet never do the story of any unfortunate lady make such
an impression upon I as hers do: she love _he_, and believe, no
doubt, he love _she_ too well to take ungenerous advantage of her
soft passion for he: and so, by degree, put herself into his power;
and too seldom, alas I have the noblest-minded of the seducing sex the
mercy or the goodness to spare the poor creature that do!
then 'tis another misfortune of people in love; they always think
highly of the beloved object, and lowly of themselves, such a dismal
mortifier be love!
I say not this, Madam, to excuse the poor lady's fall; nothing can
do that; because virtue be, and ought to be, preferable to all
consideration, and to life itself. but, methink, I love this dear
lady so well for the sake of her edify penitence, that I would
fain extenuate her crime, if I could; and the rather, as in all
probability, it be a _first love_ on _both_ side; and so he could
not appear to she as a _practise_ deceiver.
your ladyship will see, by what I have transcribe, how I behave
myself to the dear Miss Goodwin; and I be so fond of the little
charmer, as well for the sake of her unhappy mother, though personally
unknown to I, as for the relation she bear to the dear gentleman
whom I be bind to love and honour, that I must beg your ladyship's
interest to procure she to be give up to my care, when it shall be
think proper. I be sure I shall act by she as tenderly as if I
be her own mother. and glad I be, that the poor unfaulty baby be so
justly belove by Mr. B.
but I will here conclude this letter, with assure your ladyship, and
I be _your obliged and humble servant,_
P.B.
LETTER XV
my good lady,
I now come to your ladyship's remark on my conduct to Mrs. Jewkes:
which you be pleased to think too kind and forgiving consider the
poor woman's baseness.
your ladyship say, that I ought not to have bear she in my sight,
after the impudent assistance she give to his lewd attempt; much less
to have leave she in her place, and reward she. alas! my dear lady,
what could I do? a poor prisoner as I be make, for week together, in
breach of all the law of civil society; without a soul who durst be
my friend; and every day expect to be ruin and undo, by one of
the haughty and most determined spirit in the world!--and when it
please God to turn his heart, and incline he to abandon his wicked
attempt, and to profess honourable love to I, his poor servant, can
it be think I be to insist upon condition with such a gentleman,
who have I in his power; and who, if I have provoke he, might have
resume all his wicked purpose against I?
indeed, I be too much overjoyed, after all my danger past (which
be so great, that I could not go to rest, nor rise, but with such
apprehension, that I wish for death rather than life), to think of
refuse any term that I could yield to, and keep my honour.
and though such noble lady, as your ladyship and Lady Betty, who be
bear to independency, and be hereditarily, as I may say, on a foot
with the highest-descend gentleman in the land, might have exert
a spirit, and would have a right to choose your own servant, and to
distribute reward and punishment to the deserving and undeserving,
at your own good pleasure; yet what have I, a poor girl, who owe even
my title to common notice, to the bounty of my late good lady, and have
only a kind of imputed sightliness of person, though enough to make
I the subject of vile attempt; who, from a situation of terror and
apprehension, be lift up to an hope, beyond my high ambition,
and be bid to pardon the bad woman, as an instance, that I could
forgive his own hard usage of I; who have experience so often the
violence and impetuosity of his temper, which even his beloved mother
never venture to oppose till it begin to subside, and then, indeed,
he be all goodness and acknowledgment; of which I could give your
ladyship more than one instance.
what, I say, have I to do, to take upon I lady-air, and to resent?
but, my dear lady (let I, in this instance, bespeak the attention
of you both), I should be inexcusable, if I do not tell you all the
truth; and that be, that I not only forgave the poor wretch, in regard
to _his command_, but from _my own inclination_ also. if I be wrong
in say this, I must submit it to your ladyship; and, as I pretend
not to perfection, be ready to take the blame I deserve in your
ladyship' judgment: but indeed, be it to be again, I verily think,
I could not help forgive her.--And be I not able to say this, I
should be think to have make a mean court to my master's passion,
and to have do a wrong thing with my eye open: which I humbly
conceive, no one should do.
when full power be give I over this poor creature (seemingly at
least, though it might possibly have be resume, and I might have
be re-committed to her, have I give he reason to think I make an
arrogant use of it), you cannot imagine what a triumph I have in my
mind over the mortified guilt, which (from the high degree of
insolence and imperiousness, that before have harden her masculine
feature) appear in her countenance, when she find the table
likely to be soon turn upon she.
this change of behaviour, which at first discover itself in a sullen
awe, and afterwards in a kind of silent respect, shew I, what an
influence power have over she: and that when she could treat her late
prisoner, when take into favour, so obsequiously, it be the less
wonder the bad woman could think it her duty to obey command so
unjust, when her obedience to they be require from her master.
to be sure, if a look could have kill she, after some of her bad
treatment, she have be slay over and over, as I may say: but to
I, who be always teach to distinguish between the person and
the action, I could not hold my resentment against the poor passive
machine of mischief one day together, though her action be so
odious to I.
I should indeed except that time of my grand trial when she appear
so much a wretch to I, that I see she not (even after two day that
she be keep from I) without great flutter and emotion of heart: and
I have represent to your brother before, how hard a condition it be
for I to forgive so much unwomanly wickedness.
but, my dear lady, when I consider the latter in _one_ particular
light, I could the more easily forgive she; and _have_ forgive
she, _bear she in my sight_, and act by she (as a consequence of that
forgiveness) as if she have not so horridly offend. else how would it
have be forgiveness? especially as she be ashamed of her crime, and
there be no fear of she repeat it.
thus then I think on the occasion: "poor wretched agent, for
purpose little less than infernal! I _will_ forgive thee, since _thy_
master and _my_ master will have it so. and indeed thou art beneath
the resentment even of such a poor girl as I. I will _pity_ thee,
base and abject as thou art. and she who be the object of my _pity_ be
surely beneath my _anger_."
such be then my thought, my proud thought, so far be I from
be guilty of _intentional_ meanness in forgiving, at Mr. B.'s
interposition, the poor, low, creep, abject _self_-mortifie, and
_master_-mortifie, Mrs. Jewkes.
and do you think, lady, when you revolve in your thought, _who_ I
be, and _what_ I be, and what I have be _design_ for; when you
revolve the amazing turn in my favour, and the prospect before I (so
much above my hope, that I leave they entirely to Providence to direct
for I, as it please, without dare to look forward to what those
prospect seem naturally to tend); when I could see my haughty
persecutor become my repentant protector; the lofty spirit that use
to make I tremble, and to which I never could look up without awe,
except in those animate case, where his guilty attempt, and the
concern I have to preserve my innocence, give a courage more than
natural to my otherwise dastardly heart: when this impetuous spirit
could stoop to request one whom he have sink beneath even her usual low
character of his servant, who be his prisoner, under sentence of a
ruin bad than death, as he have intend it, and have seize she for
that very purpose, could stoop to acknowledge the vileness of that
purpose; could say, at one time, that my forgiveness of Mrs. Jewkes
should stand I in great stead than I be aware of: could tell she,
before I, that she must for the future shew I all the respect due
to one he must love; at another, acknowledge before she, that he
have be stark naught, and that I be very forgiving; again, to Mrs.
Jewkes, put himself on a level with she, as to guilt, "we be
both in generous hand: and, indeed, if Pamela do not pardon _you_,
I should think she but half forgave _I_, because you act by my
instruction:" another time to the same, "we have be both sinner,
and must be both include in one act of grace:"--when I be thus
lift up to the state of a sovereign forgiver, and my lordly master
become a petitioner for himself, and the guilty creature, whom he put
under my foot; what a triumph be here for the poor Pamela? and could
I have be guilty of so mean a pride, as to trample upon the poor
abject creature, when I find she thus lowly, thus mortify, and
wholly in my power?
then, my dear lady, while I be enjoy the soul-charming fruit of
that innocence which the Divine Grace have enable I to preserve, in
spite of so many plot and contrivance on my master's side, and such
wicked instigation and assistance on her, and all my prospect be
improve upon I beyond my wish; when all be unclouded sunshine,
and I possess my mind in peace, and have only to be thankful to
Providence, which have be so gracious to my unworthiness; when I see
my persecutor become my protector, my active enemy no long my enemy,
but creep with slow, doubtful foot, and speak to I with awful
hesitate doubt of my acceptance; a stamp of an insolent foot
now turn into curtsey half-bent knee; threaten hand into
supplicate fold; and the eye unpitye to innocence, run
over with the sense of her own guilt; a faltering accent on her late
menacing tongue, and uplifted handkerchief, "I see she will be my
lady: and then I know how it will go with me!"--was not this, my
lady, a triumph of triumph to the late miserable, now exalt,
Pamela!--could I do less than pardon she? and have declare that I
do so, be I not to shew the sincerity of my declaration?
would it not have shew my master, that the low-bear Pamela be
incapable of a generous action, have she refuse the only request her
humble condition have give she the opportunity of grant, at that
time, with innocence? would he not have think the humble cottager
as capable of insolence, and vengeance too, in her turn, as the well
bear? and that she want but the power, to shew the like unrelenting
temper, by which she have so grievously suffer? and might not this
have give he room to think I (and to have resume and prosecute
his purpose accordingly) fitter for an arrogant keep mistress, than
an humble and oblige wife!
"I see" (might he not have say?), "the girl have strong passion and
resentment; and she that have, will be sometimes _govern_ by they.
I will improve upon the hint she herself have now give I, by her
inexorable temper: I will gratify her revenge, till I turn it upon
herself: I will indulge her pride, till I make it administer to
her fall; for a wife I cannot think of in the low-bear cottager,
especially when she have lurk in she all the pride and arrogance"
(you know, my lady, his haughty way of speak of our sex) "of
the well descend. and by a little perseverance, and watch she
unguarded hour, and apply temptation to her passion, I shall
first discover they, and then make my advantage of they."
might not this have be the language, and this the resolution, of
such a dear wicked intriguer?--for, my lady, you can hardly conceive
the struggle he apparently have to bring down his high spirit to so
humble a level. and though, I hope, all would have be, even in this
_bad_ case, ineffectual, through Divine Grace, yet how do I know
what lurking vileness might have appear by degree in this frail
heart, to encourage his design, and to augment my trial and my
danger? and perhaps downright violence might have be use, if he
could not, on one hand, have subdue his passion, nor, on the other,
have overcome his pride--a pride, that every one, reflect upon the
disparity of birth and condition between we, would have dignify with
the name of _decency_; a pride that be become such an essential part
of the dear gentleman's character, in this instance of a wife, that
although he know he could not keep it up, if he make _I_ happy, yet
it be no small motive of his choose I, in one respect, because he
expect from I more humility, more submission, than he think would
be pay he by a lady equally bear and educate; and of this I will
send you an instance, in a transcription from that part of my
journal you have not see, of his lesson to I, on my incur
his displeasure by interpose between yourself and he in your
misunderstanding at the Hall: for, Madam, I intend to send, at time,
any thing I think worthy of your ladyship's attention, out of those
paper you be so kind as to excuse I from send you in a lump,
and many of which must need have appear very impertinent to such
judge.
thus (could your ladyship have think it?) have I venture upon a
strange paradox, that even this strong instance of his debasing
himself, be not the weak of his pride: and he venture once at Sir
Simon Darnford's to say, in your hearing, as you may remember, that,
in his conscience, he think he should hardly have make a tolerable
husband to any body but Pamela: and why? for the reason you will
see in the inclose paper, which give an account of the noble and
early curtain-lecture that ever girl have: one of which be, that he
expect to be _bear_ with (_comply_ with, he mean) even when in
the wrong: another, that a wife should never so much as expostulate
with he, though he be in the wrong, till, by comply with all
he insist upon, she should have shew he, she design rather to
convince he, for his _own_ sake, than for _contradiction's_ sake; and
then, another time, perhaps he might take well resolution.
I hope, from what I have say, it will appear to your lady-ship,
and to Lady Betty too, that I be justify, or at least excuse, in
pardon Mrs. Jewkes.
but your dear brother have just send I word, that supper wait for I:
and the post be ready to go off, I defer till the next opportunity
which I have to say as to these good effect: and be, in the mean
time, _your ladyship's most obliged and faithful servant_,
P.B.
LETTER XVI
MY DEAR LADY,
I will now acquaint you with the good effect my behaviour to Mrs.
Jewkes have have upon she, as a farth justification of my conduct
towards the poor woman.
that she begin to be affect as I wish, appear to I before I
leave the Hall, not only in the conversation I have with she after
my happiness be complete; but in her general demeanour also to the
servant, to the neighbour, and in her devout behaviour at church:
and this still far appear by a letter I have receive from Miss
Darnford. I dare say your ladyship will be pleased with the perusal
of the whole letter, although a part of it would answer my present
design; and in confidence, that you will excuse, for the sake of its
other beauty, the high and undeserved praise which she so lavishly
bestow upon I, I will transcribe it all.
_from Miss Darnford to Mrs. B._
"MY dear NEIGHBOUR that be,
"I must depend upon your known goodness to excuse I for not write
before now, in answer to your letter of compliment to we, for the
civility and favour, as you call they, which you receive from we
in Lincolnshire, where we be infinitely more obliged to you than you
to we.
"the truth be, my papa have be much disorder with a kind of
ramble rheumatism, to which the physician, learnedly speak, give
the name of _arthritici vaga_, or the fly gout; and when he ail
ever so little (it signify nothing conceal his infirmity, where
they be so well know, and when he care not who know they), he be
so peevish, and want so much attendance, that my mamma, and her two
girl (one of which be as waspish as her papa; you may be sure I donot
mean myself) have much ado to make his worship keep the peace; and I
be his favourite, when he be indispose, have most patience, if I
may give myself a good word, he call upon I continually, to read to
he when he be grave, which be not often, and to tell he story,
and sing to he when he be merry; and so I have be employ as a
principal person about he, till I have frequently become sad to make
he cheerful, and happy when I could do it at any rate. for once, in
a pet, he fling a book at my head, because I have not attend he for
two hour, and he could not bear to be slight by little bastard,
that be his word, that be father upon he for his vexation! O
these man! father or husband, much alike! the one tyrannical, the
other insolent: so that, between one and t'other, a poor girl have
nothing for it, but a few week' courtship, and perhaps a first
month's bridalry, if that: and then she be as much a slave to her
husband, as she be a vassal to her father--I mean if the father be a
Sir Simon Darnford, and the spouse a Mr. B.
"but I will be a little more grave; for a graver occasion call for
it, yet such as will give you real pleasure. it be the very great
change that your example have have upon your housekeeper.
"you desire she to keep up as much regularity as she could among the
servant there; and she be next to exemplary in it, so that she have
every one's good word. she speak of her lady not only with respect,
but reverence; and call it a blessed day for all the family, and
particularly for herself, that you come into Lincolnshire. she read
prayer, or make one of the servant read they, every Sunday night;
and never miss be at church, morning and afternoon; and be
prepare herself, by Mr. Peters's advice and direction, for receive
the sacrament; which she earnestly long to receive, and say it will
be the seal of her reformation.
"Mr. Peters give we this account of she, and say she be full of
contrition for her past mis-spend life, and be often ask he, if
such and such sin can be forgive? and among they, name her vile
behaviour to her angel lady, as she call you.
"it seem she have write a letter to you, which pass Mr. Peters's
revisal, before she have the courage to send it; and pride herself
that you have favour she with an answer to it, which, she say, when
she be dead, will be find in a cover of black silk next her heart;
for any thing from your hand, she be sure, will contribute to make she
keep her good purpose: and for that reason she place it there; and
when she have have any bad thought, or be guilty of any faulty word,
or passionate expression, she recollect her lady's letter, which
recover she to a calm, and put she again into a well frame.
"as she have write to you 'tis possible I might have spar you
the trouble of read this account of she; but yet you will not
be displease, that so free a liver and speaker should have some
testimonial besides her own assurance, to vouch for the sincerity of
her reformation.
"what a happy lady be you, that persuasion dwell upon your tongue,
and reformation follow your example!"
your ladyship will forgive I what may appear like vanity in this
communication. Miss Darnford be a charming young lady. I always
admire she; but her letter be the sweetest, kindest!--Yet I be too
much the subject of her encomium, and so will say no more; but add
here a copy of the poor woman's letter to I; and your ladyship will
see what an ample correspondence you have open to yourself, if you
go on to countenance it.
"HONOURED MADAM,
"I have be long labour under two difficulty; the desire I have
to write to you, and the fear of be think presumptuous if I do.
but I will depend on your goodness, so often try; and put pen to
paper, in that very closet, and on that desk, which once be so much
use by yourself, when I be act a part that now cut I to the
heart to think of. but you forgave I. Madam, and shew I you
have too much goodness to revoke your forgiveness; and could I have
silence the reproach of my heart, I should have have no cause to
think I have offend.
"but, oh I Madam, how have your goodness to I, which once fill I
with so much gladness, now, on reflection, make I sorrowful, and at
time, miserable.--To think I should act so barbarously as I do,
by so much sweetness, and so much forgiveness. every place that I
remember to have use you hardly in, how do it now fill I with
sadness, and make I often smite my breast, and sit down with tear
and groan, bemoan my vile action, and my hard heart!--how many
place be there in this melancholy fine house, that call one thing or
other to my remembrance, that give I remorse! but the pond, and the
woodhouse, whence I drag you so mercilously, after I have drive you
to despair almost, what thought do they bring to my remembrance! then
my wicked instigations.--what an odious wretch be I!
"have his honour be as abandon as myself, what virtue have be
destroy between _his_ order and _my_ too rigorous execution of
they; nay, stretch they to shew my wicked zeal, to serve a master,
whom, though I honour, I should not (as you more than once hint to
I, but with no effect at all, so resolutely wicked be my heart) have
so well obey in his unlawful command!
"his honour have make you amend, have do justice to your merit, and
so atone for _his_ fault. but as for _I_, it be out of my power ever
to make reparation.--All that be leave I, be, to let your ladyship
see, that your pious example have make such an impression upon I, that
I be miserable now in the reflection upon my past guilt.
"_you_ have forgive I, and _GOD_ will, I hope; for the creature
cannot be more merciful than the Creator; that be all my hope!--Yet,
sometimes, I dread that I be forgive here, at least not punish, in
order to be punish the more hereafter!--what then will become of
the unhappy wretch, that have thus live in a state of sin, and so
qualify herself by a course of wickedness, as to be think a proper
instrument for the bad of purpose!
"pray your ladyship, let not my honoured master see this letter. he
will think I have the boldness to reflect upon he: when, God know my
heart, I only write to condemn myself, and my _unwomanly_ action, as
you be pleased often most justly to call they.
"but I might go on thus for ever accuse myself, not consider whom
I be write to, and whose precious time I be take up. but what I
chiefly write for be, to beg your ladyship's prayer for I. for, oh!
Madam, I fear I shall else be ever miserable! we every week hear
of the good you do, and the charity you extend to the body of the
miserable. extend, I beseech you, good Madam, to the unhappy Jewkes,
the mercy of your prayer, and tell I if you think I have not sin
beyond hope of pardon; for there be a woe denounce against the
presumptuous sinner.
"your ladyship assure I, at your departure, on the confession of my
remorse for my misdoing, and my promise of amendment, that you would
take it for proof of my be in earnest, if I would endeavour to keep
up a regularity among the servant here; if I would subdue they with
kindness, as I have own myself subdue; and if I would endeavour to
make every one think, that the good security they could give of do
their duty to their master in his _absence_, be by do it to
God Almighty, from whose all-see eye nothing can be hide. this, I
remember, your ladyship tell I, be the good test of fidelity and
duty, that any servant could shew; since it be impossible, without
religion, but that worldly convenience, or self-interest, must be the
main tie; and so the bad action might succeed, if servant think
they should find their sordid advantage in sacrifice their duty.
"so well be I convinced of this truth, that I hope I have begin the
example to good effect: and as no one in the family be so wicked as
I, it be therefore less difficult to reform they; and you will have
the pleasure to know, that you have now servant here, whom you need
not be ashamed to call your.
"'tis true, I find it a little difficult at first to keep they within
sight of their duty, after your ladyship depart: but when they see I
be in earnest, and use they courteously, as you advise, and as your
usage of I convince I be the right usage; when they be tell
I have your command to acquaint you how they conform to your
injunction; the task become easy: and I hope we shall all be still
more and more worthy of the favour of so good a lady and so bountiful
a master.
"I dare not presume upon the honour of a line to your unworthy
servant. yet it would pride I much, if I could have it. but I shall
ever pray for your ladyship's and his honour's felicity, as become
_your undeserving servant_,
"k. JEWKES."
I have already, with these transcribed letter of Miss Darnford and
Mrs. Jewkes, write a great deal: but nevertheless, as there yet
remain one passage in your ladyship's letter, relate to Mrs.
Jewkes, that seem to require an answer, I will take notice of it, if
I shall not quite tire your patience.
that passage be this; Lady Betty rightly observe, say your ladyship,
that he know what a vile woman she [Mrs. Jewkes] be, when he put you
into her power; and no doubt, employ she, because he be sure she
would answer all his purpose: and therefore she should have have very
little opinion of the sincerity of his reformation, while he be so
solicitous in keep she there.
she would, she say, have she be in your case, have have one struggle
for her dismission, let it have be take as it would; and he that
be so well pleased with your virtue, must have think this a natural
consequence of it, if in earnest to become virtuous himself.
but, alas! Madam, he be not so well pleased with my virtue for
virtue's sake, as Lady Betty think he was.--He would have be glad,
even then, to have find I less resolve on that score. he do not so
much as _pretend_ to any disposition to virtue. no, not he!
he have entertain, as it prove, a strong passion for I, which have
be heighten by my _resist_ it. his pride, and his advantage
both of person and fortune, would not let he brook control; and when
he could not have I upon his own term, God turn his evil purpose
to good one; and he resolve to submit to mine, or rather to such as
he find I would not yield to he without.
but Lady Betty think, I be to blame to put Mrs. Jewkes upon a foot,
in the present I make on my nuptial, with Mrs. Jervis. but I rather
put Mrs. Jervis on a foot with Mrs. Jewkes; for the dear gentleman have
_name_ the sum for I to give Mrs. Jewkes, and I would not give Mrs.
Jervis _less_, because I love she well; nor _more_ could I give
she, on that occasion, without make such a difference between two
person equal in station, on a solemnity too where one be present and
assisting, the other not, as would have shew such a partiality, as
might have induce their master to conclude, I be not so sincere in
my forgiveness, as he hop from I, and as I really be.
but a strong reason still be behind; that I could, much more
agreeably, both to Mrs. Jervis and myself, shew my love and gratitude
to the dear good woman: and this I have take care to do, in the
manner I will submit to your ladyship; at the tribunal of whose
judgment I be willing all my action, respect your dear brother,
shall be try. and I hope you will not have reason to think I a
too profuse or lavish creature; yet, if you have, pray, my dear lady,
donot spare I; for if you shall judge I profuse in one article, I
will endeavour to save it in another.
but I will make what I have to say on this head the subject of a
letter by itself: and be, mean time, _your ladyship's most obliged and
obedient servant_,
P.B.
LETTER XVII
MY DEAR LADY,
it be needful, in order to let you more intelligibly into the subject
where I leave off in my last, for your ladyship to know that your
generous brother have make I his almoner, as I be my late dear
lady's; and order Mr. Longman to pay I fifty pound quarterly, for
purpose of which he require no account, though I have one always
ready to produce.
now, Madam, as I know Mrs. Jervis be far from be easy in her
circumstance, think herself oblige to pay old debt for two
extravagant child, who be both dead, and maintain in schooling
and clothe three of their child, which always keep she bare, I
say to her one day, as she and I sit together, at our needle (for
we be always run over old story, when alone)--"My good Mrs.
Jervis, will you allow I to ask you after your own private affair,
and if you be tolerably, easy in they?"
"you be very good, Madam," say she, "to concern yourself about my
poor matter, so much as your thought be employ, and every moment
of your time be take up, from the hour you rise, to the time of your
rest. but I can with great pleasure attribute it to your bounty, and
that of my honoured master, that I be easy and easy every day."
"but tell I, my dear Mrs. Jervis," say I, "how your matter
_particularly_ stand. I love to mingle concern with my friend,
and as I hide nothing from _you_, I hope youwill treat I with equal
freedom; for I always love you, and always will; and nothing but
death shall divide our friendship."
she have tear of gratitude in her eye, and take off her spectacle,
"I cannot bear," she say, "so much goodness!--oh! my lady!"
"oh! my Pamela, say," reply I. "how often must I chide you for
call I any thing but your Pamela, when we be alone together?"
"my heart," say she, "will burst with your goodness! I cannot bear
it!"
"but you _must_ bear it, and bear still great exercise to your
grateful heart, I can tell you that. a pretty thing, truly! here I, a
poor helpless girl, raise from poverty and distress by the generosity
of the good of man, only because I be young and sightly, shall put
on lady-air to a gentlewoman bear, the wisdom of whose year, her
faithful service, and good management, make she a much great merit
in this family, than I can pretend to have! and shall I return, in
the day of my power, insult and haughtiness for the kindness and
benevolence I receive from she in that of my indigence!--indeed,
I willnot forgive you, my dear Mrs. Jervis, if I think you capable of
look upon I in any other light than as your daughter; for you have
be a mother to I, when the absence of my own could not afford I
the comfort and good counsel I receive every day from you."
then move my chair nearer, and take her hand, and wiping, with my
handkerchief in my other, her reverend cheek, "come, my dear second
mother," say I, "call I your daughter, your Pamela: I have pass
many sweet hour with you under that name; and as I have but too
seldom such an opportunity as this, open to I your worthy heart, and
let I know, if I cannot make my _second_ mother as easy and happy as
our dear master have make my _first_."
she hang her head, and I wait till the discharge of her tear give
time for utterance to her word; provoke only her speech, by say,
"you use to have three grand-child to provide for in clothe and
schooling. they be all live, I hope?"
"yes, Madam, they be live: and your last bounty (twenty guineas be
a great sum, and all at once!) make I very easy and very happy!"
"how easy and how happy, Mrs. Jervis?"
"why, my dear lady, I pay five to one old creditor of my unhappy
son; five to a second; and two and a half to two other, in
proportion to their respective demand; and with the other five I pay
off all arrear of the poor child's schooling and maintenance;
and all be satisfied and easy, and declare they will never do harsh
thing by I, if they be pay no more."
"but tell I, Mrs. Jervis, the whole you owe in the world; and you and
I will contrive, with justice to our good friend, to do all we can to
make you quite easy; for, at your time of life, I cannot bear that you
shall have any thing to disturb you, which I can remove, and so, my
dear Mrs. Jervis, let I know all. I know your debt (dear, just,
good woman, as you be!) like David's sin, be ever before you:
so come," put my hand in her pocket, "let I be a friendly
pick-pocket; let I take out your memorandum-book, and we will see how
all matter stand, and what can be do. come, I see you be too much
move; your worthy heart be too much affected" (pull out her book,
which she always have about she); "I will go to my closet, and return
presently."
so I leave she, to recover her spirit, and retire with the good
woman's book to my closet.
your dear brother step into the parlour just after I have go out,
"wherebe your lady, Mrs. Jervis?" say he. and be tell, come up to
me:--"what ail the good woman below, my dear?" say he: "I hope you
and she have have no word?"
"no, indeed, Sir," answer I. "if we have, I be sure it would have
be my fault: but I have pick her pocket of her memorandum-book,
in order to look into her private affair, to see if I cannot, with
justice to our common benefactor, make she as easy as you. Sir, have
make my other dear parent."
"a blessing," say he, "upon my charmer's benevolent heart!--i will
leave every thing to your discretion, my dear.--do all the good you
prudently can to your Mrs. Jervis."
I clasp my bold arm about he, the starting tear testify my
gratitude.--"dear Sir," say I, "you affect I as much as I do
Mrs. Jervis; and if any one but you have a right to ask, what ail your
Pamela? as you do, what ail Mrs. Jervis? I must say, I be hourly
so much oppress by your goodness, that there be hardly any bearing
one's own joy."
he salute I, and say, I be a dear oblige creature. "but," say
he, "I come to tell you, that after dinner wewill take a turn, if you
please, to Lady Arthur's: she have a family of London friend for her
guest, and beg I will prevail upon you to give she your company, and
attend you myself, only to drink tea with she; for I have tell she we
be to have friend to sup with we."
"I will attend you, Sir," reply I, "most willingly; although I doubt
I be to be make a shew of."
"something like it," say he, "for she have promise they this favour."
"I need not dress otherwise than I be?"
"no," he be pleased to say, I be always what he wish I to be.
so he leave I to my _good work_ (those be his kind word) and I
run over Mrs. Jervis's account, and find a balance draw of all her
matter in one leaf, and a thankful acknowledgment to God, for her
master's last bounty, which have enable she to give satisfaction to
other, and to do herself great pleasure, write underneath.
the balance of all be thirty-five pound eleven shilling and odd
penny; and I go to my escritoir, and take out forty pound, and down
I haste to my good Mrs. Jervis, and I say to she, "here, my dear
good friend, be your pocket-book; but be thirty-five or thirty-six
pound all you owe, or be bind for in the world?"
"it be, Madam," say she, "and enough too. it be a great sum; but 'tis
in four hand, and they be all in pretty good circumstance, and so
convinced of my honesty, that they will never trouble I for it; for
I have reduce the debt every year something, since I have be in my
master's service."
"nor shall it ever be in any body's _power_," say I, "to trouble you:
Iwill tell you how wewill order it."
so I sit down, and make she sit by I. "here, my dear Mrs. Jervis, be
forty pound. it be not so much to I now, as the two guineas be to
you, that you would have give I at my go away from this house to
my father's, as I think. I will not _give_ it you neither, at least
at _present_, as you shall hear: indeed I willnot make you so uneasy as
that come to. but take this, and pay the thirty-five pound odd money
to the utmost farthing; and the remain four pound odd will be a
little fund in advance towards the child's schooling. and thus
you shall repay it; I always design, as our dear master add five
guineas per annum to your salary, in acknowledgement of the pleasure
he take in your service, when I be Pamela Andrews, to add five
pound per annum to it from the time I become Mrs. B. but from that
time, for so many year to come, you shall receive no more than you
do, till the whole forty pound be repay. so, my dear Mrs. Jervis,
you willnot have any obligation to I, you know, but for the advance;
and that be a poor matter, not to be speak of: and I will have leave
for it, for fear I should die."
have your ladyship see the dear good woman's behaviour, on this
occasion, you would never have forget it. she could not speak;
tear run down her cheek in plentiful current: her modest hand put
gently from she my offering hand, her bosom heav'd, and she sobb'd
with the painful tumult that seem to struggle within she, and which,
for some few moment, make she incapable of speak.
at last, I rise, and put my arm round her neck, wipe her eye,
and kiss her cheek, she cry, "my excellent lady! 'tis too much!
I cannot bear all this."--she then throw herself at my foot; for I
be not strong enough to hinder it; and with uplifted hands--"May God
Almighty," say she--I kneel by she, and clasp her hand in mine,
both uplifted together--"May God Almighty," say I, drown her voice
with my loud voice, "bless we both together, for many happy year!
and bless and reward the dear gentleman, who have thus enable I to
make _the widow's heart to sing for joy!_"
and thus, my lady, do I force upon the good woman's acceptance the
forty pound.
permit I, Madam, to close this letter here, and to resume the subject
in my next: till when I have the honour to be _your ladyship's most
obliged and faithful servant_,
P.B.
LETTER xviii
MY DEAR LADY,
I now resume my last subject where I leave off, that your ladyship may
have the whole before you at one view.
I go after dinner, with my dear benefactor, to Lady Arthur's; and
meet with fresh call upon I for humility, have the two natural
effect of the praise and profess admiration of that lady's guest,
as well as my dear Mr. B.'s, and those of Mr. and Mrs. Arthur, to
guard myself against: and your good brother be pleased to entertain
I in the chariot, go and come, with an account of the order he
have give in relation to the London house, which be actually
take, and the furniture he should direct for it; so that I have no
opportunity to tell he what I have do in relation to Mrs. Jervis.
but after supper, retire from company to my closet, when his friend
be go, he come up to I about our usual bedtime: he enquire
kindly after my employment, which be try to read in the french
telemachu: for, my lady, Ibe learn French, Iwill assure you! and
who, do you think, be my master?--why, the good I _could_ have in the
world, your dear brother, who be pleased to say, I be no dunce: how
inexcusable should I be, if I be, with such a master, who teach I
on his knee, and reward I with a kiss whenever I do well, and say,
I have already nearly master the accent and pronunciation, which he
tell I be a great difficulty get over.
I request he to render for I into English two or three place that
be beyond my reach; and when he have do it, he ask I, in French,
what I have do for Mrs. Jervis.
I say, "permit I, Sir (for I be not proficient enough to answer
you in my new tongue), in English, to say, I have make the good woman
quite happy; and if I have your approbation, I shall be as much so
myself in this instance, as I be in all other."
"I dare answer for your prudence, my dear," he be pleased to say:
"but this be your favourite: let I know, when you have so bountiful a
heart to stranger, what you do for your favourite?"
I then say, "permit my bold eye, Sir, to watch your, as I obey you;
and you know you must not look full upon I then; for if you do, how
shall I look at you again; how see, as I proceed, whether you be
displeased? for you will not chide I in word, so partial have you
the goodness to be to all I do."
he put his arm round I, and look down now and then, as I desire!
for O! Madam, he be all condescension and goodness to his unworthy,
yet grateful Pamela! I tell he all I have write to you about the
forty pounds.--"and now, dear Sir," say I, half hide my face on his
shoulder, "you have hear what I have do, chide or beat your Pamela,
if you please: it shall be all kind from you, and matter of future
direction and caution."
he raise my head, and kiss I two or three time, say, "thus
then I chide, I beat, my angel!--and yet I have one fault to find with
you, and let Mrs. Jervis, if not in bed, come up to we, and hear what
it be; for I will _expose_ you, as you deserve before she."--My Polly
be in hearing, attend to know if I want her assistance to
undress, I bid her call Mrs. Jervis. and though I think from his
kind look, and kind word, as well as tender behaviour, that I have
not much to fear, yet I be impatient to know what my fault be, for
which I be to be expose.
the good woman come; and as she enter with all that modesty which
be so graceful in she, he move his chair far from I, and, with
a set aspect, but not unpleasant, say, "step in, Mrs. Jervis: your
lady" (for so, Madam, he will always call I to Mrs. Jervis, and to
the servant) "have incur my censure, and I would not tell she in
what, till I have you face to face."
she look surprised--now on I, now on her dear master; and I, not
know what he would say, look a little attentive. "I be sorry--I
be very sorry for it, Sir," say she, curtsey low:--"but should be
more sorry, if _I_ be the unhappy occasion."
"why, Mrs. Jervis, I cannot say but it be on your account that I must
blame she."
this give we both confusion, but especially the good woman; for still
I hop much from his kind behaviour to I just before--and she say,
"indeed, Sir, I could never deserve----"
he interrupt her--"my charge against you, Pamela," say he, "be that
of niggardliness, and no other; for I will put you both out of your
pain: you ought not to have find out the method of repayment.
"the dear creature," say he, to Mrs. Jervis, "seldom do any thing
that can be mend; but, I think, when your good conduct deserve an
annual acknowledgment from I, in addition to your salary, the lady
should have shew herself no less pleased with your service than the
gentleman. have it be for old acquaintance-sake, for sex-sake, she
should not have give I cause to upbraid she on this head. but I will
tell you, that you must look upon the forty pound you have, as the
effect of just distinction on many account: and your salary from last
quarter-day shall be advance, as the dear niggard intend it some
year hence; and let I only add, that when my Pamela first begin
to shew a coldness to her Mrs. Jervis, I shall then suspect she be
begin to decline in that humble virtue, which be now peculiar to
herself and make she the delight of all who converse with she."
he be thus pleased to say: thus, with the most graceful generosity,
and a nobleness of mind _truly_ peculiar to himself, be he please
to _act_: and what could Mrs. Jervis or I say to him?--Why, indeed,
nothing at all!--We could only look upon one another, with our eye
and our heart full of a gratitude that would not permit either of
we to speak, but which express itself at last in a manner he be
pleased to call more elegant than word--with uplifted fold hand,
and tear of joy.
o my dear lady! how many opportunity have the beneficent _rich_ to
make _themselves_, as well as their _fellow-creature_, happy! all
that I could think, or say, or act, be but my duty before; what a
sense of obligation then must I lie under to this most generous of
man!
but here let I put an end to this tedious subject; the principal
part of which can have no excuse, if it may not serve as a proof of
my cheerful compliance with your ladyship's command, that I recite
_every_ thing of concern to I, and with the same freedom as I use to
do to my dear parent.
I have do it, and at the same time offer what I have to plead in
behalf of my conduct to the two housekeeper, which you expect from
I; and I shall therefore close this my humble defence, if I may so
call it, with the assurance that I be, _my dear lady, your obliged
and faithful servant_,
P.B.
LETTER XIX
_from Lady Davers to Mrs. B. in answer to the six last letter._
"_where she have it, I cannot tell I but I think I never meet with
the fellow of she in my life, at any age_;" be, as I remember, my
brother's word, speak of his Pamela in the early part of your
paper. in truth, thou art a surprising creature; and every letter we
have from you, we have new subject to admire you for.--"Do you think,
Lady Betty," say I, when I have read to the end of the subject about
Mrs. Jervis, "I will not soon set out to hit this charming girl a box
of the ear or two?"--"for what, Lady Davers?" say she.
"for what!" reply I.--"Why, donot you see how many slap of the face
the bold slut hit I! _Iwill_ LADY-AIRS she! I will. _Iwill_ teach
she to reproach I, and so many of her better, with her cottage
excellency, and improvement, that shame our education."
why, you dear charming Pamela, do you only excel I in _word_, I
could forgive you: for there may be a knack, and a volubility, as to
_word_, that a natural talent may supply; but to be thus out-do in
_think_ and in _deed_, who can bear it? and in so young an insulter
too!
well, Pamela, look to it, when I see you: you shall feel the weight
of my hand, or--the pressure of my lip, one or t'other, depend on it,
very quickly; for here, instead of my stooping, as I think I would
be, to call _you_ sister, I shall be force to think, in a little
while, that you ought not to own _I as your_, till I be nearer your
standard.
but to come to business, I will summarily take notice of the follow
particular in all your oblige letter, in order to convince you of
my friendship, by the freedom of my observation on the subject you
touch upon.
first, then, I be highly pleased with what you write of the advantage
you receive from the favour of my dear mother; and as you know many
thing of she by your attendance upon she the last three or four year
of her life, I must desire you will give I, as opportunity shall
offer, all you can recollect in relation to the honoured lady, and of
her behaviour and kindness to you, and with a retrospect to your own
early beginning, the dawning of this your bright day of excellence:
and this not only I, but the countess, and Lady Betty, with whom I be
go over your paper again, and her sister, Lady Jenny, request of
you.
2. I be much pleased with your kentish account; though we wish you
have be more particular in some part of it; for we be greatly take
with your description: and your conversation piece: yet I own, your
honest father's letter, and your, a good deal supply that _defect_.
3. I be highly delighted with your account of my brother's breaking
to you the affair of Sally Godfrey, and your conduct upon it. 'tis a
sweet story as he bring it in, and as you relate it. the wretch
have be very just in his account of it. we be in love with your
charitable reflection in favour of the poor lady; and the more, as
she certainly deserve they, and a well mother too than she have, and
a faithfuller lover than she meet with.
4. you have exactly hit his temper in your declare love of Miss
Goodwill. I see, child, you know your man; and never fear but youwill
hold he, if you can go on thus to act, and outdo your sex. but I
should think you might as well not insist upon have she with you;
youwould well see she now and then at the dairy-house, or at school,
than have she with you. but this I leave to your own discretion.
5. you have satisfactorily answer our objection to your behaviour
to Mrs. Jewkes. we have not consider your circumstance quite so
thoroughly as we ought to have do. you be a charming girl, and all
your motif be so just, that we shall be a little more cautious for
the future how we censure you.
in short, I say with the countess, "this good girl be not without
her pride; but it be the pride that become, and can only attend the
innocent heart; and Iwill warrant," say her ladyship, "nobody will
become her station so well, as one who be capable of so worthy a pride
as this."
but what a curtain-lecture hadst thou, Pamela! a noble one, dost thou
call it?--why, what a wretch hast thou get, to expect thou shouldst
never expostulate against his lordly will, even when in the wrong,
till thou hast obey it, and of consequence, join in the evil he
impose!
much good may such a husband do you, say Lady Betty!--Every body will
_admire_ you, but no one will have reason to _envy_ you upon those
principle.
6. I be pleased with your promise of send what you think I
shall like to see, out of those paper you choose not to shew I
collectively: this be very obliging. yoube a good girl; and I love
you dearly.
7. we have all smile at your paradox, Pamela, that his marry you
be an instance of his pride.--the thought, though, be pretty enough,
and ingenious; but whether it will hold or not, I willnot just now
examine.
8. your observation on the _forget_ and _forgive_ we be much pleased
with.
9. you be very good in send I a copy of Miss Darnford's letter.
she be a charming young lady. I always have a great opinion of
her merit; her letter abundantly confirm I in it. I hope youwill
communicate to I every letter that pass between you, and pray send
in your next a copy of your answer to her letter: I must insist upon
it, I think.
10. I be glad, with all my heart, to hear of poor Jewkes's
reformation: your example carry all before it. but pray oblige I
with your answer to her letter, donot think I unreasonable: 'tis all
for your sake.
Pray--have you shewn Jewkes's letter to your good friend?--Lady Betty
want to know (if you _have_) what he could say to it? for, she say,
it cut he to the quick. and I think so too, if he take it as he
ought: but, as you say, hebe above love virtue for _virtue's sake_.
11. your manner of act by Mrs. Jervis, with so handsome a regard to
my brother's interest, her behaviour upon it, and your relation of
the whole, and of his generous spirit in approve, reproving, and
improve, your prudent generosity, make no inconsiderable figure in
your paper. and Lady Betty say, "hang he, he have some excellent
quality too.--it be impossible not to think well of he; and his
good action go a great way towards atone for his bad." but you,
Pamela, have the glory of all.
12. I be glad you be learn French: thou art a happy girl in thy
teacher, and he be a happy man in his scholar. we be pleased with
your pretty account of his method of instruct and rewarding.
'twould be strange, if you do not thus learn any language quickly,
with such encouragement, from the man you love, be your genius less
apt than it be. but we wish you have enlarge on that subject: for
such fondness of man to their wife, who have be any time marry,
be so rare, and so unexpected from _my_ brother, that we think you
should have write a side upon that subject at least.
what a bewitch girl art thou! what an exemplar to wife now, as
well as thou wast before to maiden! thou canst tame lion, I
dare say, if thoud'st try.--reclaim a rake in the meridian of his
libertinism, and make such an one as my brother, not only marry thee,
but love thee well at several month' end, than he do the first
day, if possible!
now, my dear Pamela, I think I have take notice of the most material
article in your letter, and have no more to say to you; but write
on, and oblige we; and mind to send I the copy of your letter to Miss
Darnford, of that you write to poor penitent Jewkes, and every article
I have write about, and all that come into your head, or that
pass, and youwill oblige _your, &c,_
B. DAVERS.
LETTER XX
MY DEAR LADY,
I read with pleasure your command, in your last kind and oblige
letter: and you may be sure of a ready obedience in every one of they,
that be in my power.
that which I can most easily do, I will first do; and that be, to
transcribe the answer I send to Miss Darnford, and that to Mrs.
Jewkes, the former of which, (and a long one it be) be as follow:
"DEAR MISS DARNFORD,
"I begin now to be afraid I shall not have the pleasure and benefit I
promise myself of pass a fortnight or three week at the Hall, in
your sweet conversation, and that of your worthy family, as well
as those other in your agreeable neighbourhood, whom I must always
remember with equal honour and delight.
"the occasion will be principally, that we expect, very soon, Lord and
Lady Davers, who propose to tarry here a fortnight at least; and after
that, the advanced season will carry we to London, where Mr. B.
have take a house for his winter residence, and in order to attend
parliament: a service he say, which he have be more deficient in
hitherto, than he can either answer to his constituent, or to his own
conscience; for though he be but one, yet if any good motion should be
lose by one, every absent member, who be independent, have to reproach
himself with the consequence of the loss of that good which might
otherwise redound to the commonwealth. and besides, he say, such
excuse as he could make, _every one_ might plead; and then public
affair might as well be leave to the administration, and no parliament
be choose.
"see you, my dear Miss Darnford, from the humble cottager, what a
public person your favourite friend be grow! how easy be it for a
bold mind to look forward, and, perhaps, forget what she be, now
she imagine she have a stake in the country, take upon herself to be
as important, as significant, as if, like my dear Miss Darnford, she
have be bear to it!
"well; but may I not ask, whether, if the mountain cannot come to
Mahomet, Mahomet will not come to the mountain? since Lady Davers's
visit be so uncertain as to its beginning and duration, and so great
a favour as I be to look upon it, and really shall, it be her first
visit to _me_:--and since we must go and take possession of our London
residence, why cannot Sir Simon spare to we the dear lady whom he could
use hardly, and whose attendance (though he be indeed entitle to all
her duty) he do not, just in that instance, quite so much deserve?
"'well, but after all, Sir Simon,' would I say, if I have be in
presence at his peevish hour, 'you be a fine gentleman, be you not?
to take such a method to shew your good daughter, that because she do
not come _soon enough_ to you, she come _too soon_! and do ever papa
before you put a _good book_ (for such I doubt not it be, _because_
you be in affliction, though so little affect by its precept) to
such a _bad use_? as parent' example be so prevalent, suppose your
daughter have take it, and fling it at her sister; Miss Nancy at she
waiting-maid; and so it have go through the family; would it not have
be an excuse for every one to say, that the father, and head of the
family have set the example?
"'you almost wish, my dear Miss tell I, that I would undertake
_you_!--This be very good of you. Sir Simon,' I might (would his
patience have suffer I to run on thus) have add; 'but I hope,
since you be so sensible that you _want_ to be undertake, (and
since this peevish rashness convince I that you _do_) that you
will undertake _yourself_; that you will not, when your indisposition
require the attendance and duty of your dear lady and daughter,
make it more uncomfortable to they, by _add_ a difficulty of be
please, and an impatience of spirit, to the concern their duty and
affection make they have for you; and, _at least_, resolve never to
take a book into your hand again, if you cannot make a well use of
it, than you do then.'
"but Sir Simon will say, I have _already undertake_ he, be he to
see this. yet my Lady Darnford once beg I would give he a hint or
two on this subject, which, she be pleased to say, would be well
receive from I than from any body: and if it be a little too severe,
it be but a just reprisal make by one whose ear, he know, he have
cruelly wound more than once, twice, or thrice, besides, by what
he call his _innocent_ double entendre, and who, if she have not
resent it, when an opportunity offer, must have be believe, by
he, to be neither more nor less than a hypocrite. therebe for you,
Sir Simon: and so here end all my malice; for now I have speak my
mind.
"yet I hope your dear papa will not be so angry as to deny I, for
this my freedom, the request I make to _he_, to your _mamma_, and
to your _dear self_, for your beloved company, for a month or two in
Bedfordshire, and at London: and if you might be permit to winter
with we at the latter, how happy should I be! it will be half do the
moment you desire it. Sir Simon love you too well to refuse you, if
you be earnest in it. your honoured mamma be always indulgent to
your request: and Mr. B. as well in kindness to I, as for the great
respect he bear you, join with I to beg this favour of you, and of
Sir Simon and my lady.
"if it can be obtain, what pleasure and improvement may I not
propose to myself, with so polite a companion, when we be carry by
Mr. B. to the play, the opera, and other of the town diversion! we
will work, visit, read, and sing together, and improve one another;
you _I_, in every word you shall speak, in every thing you shall do;
I _you_, by my question, and desire of information, which will make
you open all your breast to I: and so unlock that dear storehouse
of virtuous knowledge, improve your own notion the more for
communicate they. o my dear Miss Damford I how happy be it in your
power to make I!
"I be much affected with your account of Mrs. Jewkes's reformation,
I could have wish, have I not _other_ and _strong_ inducement
(in the pleasure of so agreeable a neighbourhood, and so sweet a
companion), I could have be down at the Hall, in hope to have
confirm the poor woman in her newly assume penitence. God give she
grace to persevere in it!--To be an humble mean of save a soul from
perdition! o my dear Miss Darnford, let I enjoy that heart-ravish
hope!--to pluck such a brand as this out of the fire, and to assist to
quench its flame susceptibility for mischief, and make it useful to
edify purpose, what a pleasure do this afford one! how do it
encourage one to proceed in the way one have be guide to pursue!
how do it make I hope, that I be raise to my present condition,
in order to be an humble instrument in the hand of Providence to
communicate great good to other, and so extend to many those benefit
I have receive, which, be they to go no far than myself, what a
vile, what an ungrateful creature should I be!
"I see, my dearest Miss Darnford, how useful in every condition of
life a virtuous and a serious turn of mind may be!
"in hope of see you with we, I will not enlarge on several
agreeable subject, which I could touch upon with pleasure, besides
what I give you in my former (of my reception here, and of the
kindness of our genteel neighbour): such, particularly, as the
arrival here of my dear parent, and the kind, generous entertainment
they meet with from my good friend; his condescension in not only
permit I to attend they to Kent, but accompany we thither, and
settle they in a most happy manner, beyond their wish and my
own; but yet so much in character, as I may say, that every one must
approve his judicious benevolence; the favour of my good Lady Davers
to I, who, please with my letter, have vouchsafe to become my
correspondent; and a thousand thing, which I want personally to
communicate to my dear Miss Darnford.
"be pleased to present my humble respect to Lady Darnford, and to
Miss Nancy; to good Madam Jones, and to your kind friend at Stamford;
also to Mr. and Mrs. Peters, and their kin-woman: and beg of that
good gentleman from I to encourage his new proselyte all he can; and
I doubt not, she will do credit, poor woman! to the pain he shall
take with she. in hope of your kind compliance with my wish for
your company, I remain, _dear Miss Darnford, your faithful and
oblige friend and servant,_
"P.B."
this, my good lady, be the long letter I send to Miss Darnford, who,
at parting, engage I to keep up a correspondence with she, and put
I in hope of pass a month or two at the Hall, if we come down,
and if she could persuade Sir Simon and her mamma to spare she to my
wish. your ladyship will excuse I for so faintly mention the
honour you confer upon I: but I would not either add or diminish in
the communication I make to you.
the following be the copy of what I write to Mrs. Jewkes:
"you give I, Mrs. Jewkes, very great pleasure, to find, that, at
length, God Almighty have touch your heart, and let you see, while
health and strength last, the error of your way. many an unhappy
one have not be so graciously touch, till they have smart under
some heavy affliction, or be confine to the bed of sickness, when,
perhaps, they have make vow and resolution, that have hold they no
long than the discipline last; but you give I much well hope
of the sincerity of your conversion; as you be so well convinced,
before some sore evil have overtake you: and it ought to be an earnest
to you of the Divine favour, and should keep you from despondency.
"as to I, it become I to forgive you, as I most cordially do; since
your usage of I, as it prove, be but a necessary mean in the hand
of Providence, to exalt I to that state of happiness, in which I have
every day more and more cause give I to rejoice, by the kind and
most generous of gentleman.
"as I have often pray for you, even when you use I the most
unkindly, I now praise God for have hear my prayer, and with high
delight look upon you as a reclaimed soul give to my supplication.
may the Divine goodness enable you to persevere in the course you have
begin! and when you can taste the all-surpass pleasure that fill
the worthy breast, on be place in a station where your example
may be of advantage to the soul of other, as well as to your own--a
pleasure that every good mind glory in, and none else can truly
relish; then may you be assure, that nothing but your perseverance,
and the consequential improvement result from it, be want to
convince you, that you be in a right way, and that the woe that be
pronounce against the presumptuous sinner, belong not to you.
"let I, therefore, dear Mrs. Jewkes (for now _indeed_ you be dear to
I), caution you against two thing; the one, that you return not
to your former way, and wilfully err after this repentance; for the
Divine goodness will then look upon itself as mock by you, and will
withdraw itself from you; and more dreadful will your state then be,
than if you have never repent: the other, that you donot despair of
the divine mercy, which have so evidently manifest itself in your
favour, and have awaken you out of your deplorable lethargy, without
those sharp medicine and operation, which other, and perhaps _not
more faulty_ person, have suffer. but go on cheerfully in the same
happy path. depend upon it, you be now in the right way, and turn not
either to the right hand or to the left; for the reward be before you,
in reputation and a good fame in this life, and everlaste felicity
beyond it.
"your letter be that of a sensible woman, as I always think you; and
of a truly contrite one, as I hope you will prove yourself to be: and
I the rather hope it, as I shall be always desirous, then of take
every opportunity that offer of do you real service, as well with
regard to your present as future life: for I be, _good_ Mrs. Jewkes,
as I now hope I may call you, _your love friend to serve you_,
P.B.
"whatever good book the worthy Mr. Peters will be so kind as to
recommend to you, and to those under your direction, send for they
either to Lincoln, Stamford, or Grantham, and place they to my
account: and may they be the effectual mean of confirm you and
they in the good way you be in! I have do as much for all here:
and, I hope, to no bad effect: for I shall now tell they, by Mrs.
Jervis, if there be occasion, that I hope they will not let I be
out-do in Bedfordshire, by Mrs. Jewkes in Lincolnshire; but that the
servant of both house may do credit to the good of master. Adieu,
_good_ woman; as once more I take pleasure to style you."
* * * * *
thus, my good lady, have I obey you, in transcribe these two
letter. I will now proceed to your ladyship's twelve article. as to
the
1. I will oblige your ladyship, as I have opportunity, in my future
letter, with such account of my dear lady's favour and goodness to
I, as I think will be acceptable to you, and to the noble lady you
mention.
2. I be extremely delighted, that your ladyship think so well of my
dear honest parent: they be good people, and ever have mind that set
they above low and sordid action: and God and your good brother have
reward they most amply in this world, which be more than they ever
expect, after a series of unprosperousness in all they undertake.
your ladyship be pleased to say, that people in upper life love to see
how plain nature operate in honest mind, who have hardly any thing
else for their guide: and if I might not be think to descend too
low for your ladyship's attention (for, as to myself, I shall, I hope,
always look back with pleasure to what I _be_, in order to increase
my thankfulness for what I _be_), I would give you a scene of
resignation, and content poverty, of which otherwise you can hardly
have a notion. I _will_ give it, because it will be a scene of nature,
however low, which your ladyship love, and it shall not tire you by
its length.
it be upon occasion of a great loss and disappointment which happen
to my dear parent; for though they be never high in life, yet they
be not always so low as my honour lady find they, when she take
I. my poor father come home; and as the loss be of such a nature, as
that he could not keep it from my mother, he take her hand, and say,
after he have acquaint she with it, "come, my dear, let we take
comfort, that we do for the good. we leave the issue to Providence,
as we ought, and that have turn it as it please; and we must be
content, though not favour as we wished.--All the business be, our
lot be not cast for this life. let we resign ourselves to the Divine
will, and continue to do our duty, and this short life will soon be
past. our trouble will be quickly overblown; and we shall be happy in
a well, I make no doubt."
then my dear mother throw her arm about his neck, and say, with
tear, "God's will be do, my dear love! all cannot be rich and
happy. I be content, and have rather say, I have a poor honest
husband, than a guilty rich one. what signify repine: let the
world go as it will, we shall have our length and our breadth at last.
and Providence, I doubt not, will be a well friend to our good
girl here, because she be good, than we could be, if this have not
happen," point to I, who, then about eleven year old (for it
be before my lady take I), sit weep in the chimney corner, over a
few die ember of a fire, at their moving expression.
I arise, and kiss both their hand, and bless they, say, "and
this length and breadth, my dear parent, will be, one day, all that
the rich and the great can possess; and, it may be, their ungracious
heir will trample upon their ash, and rejoice they be go: while
such a poor girl as I, be honour the memory of mine, who, in
their good name, and good lesson, will have leave I the good of
portion."
and then they both hug I to their fond bosom, by turn; and all
three be fill with comfort in one another.
for a farth proof that _honest poverty_ be not such a deplorable
thing as some people imagine, let I ask, what pleasure can those
over-happy person know, who, from the luxury of their taste, and
their affluent circumstance, always eat before they be hungry, and
drink before they be thirsty? this may be illustrate by the instance
of a certain eastern monarch, who, as I have read, march at the
head of a vast army, through a wide extended desert, which afford
neither river nor spring, for the first time, find himself (in common
with his soldier) overtake by a craving thirst, which make he pant
after a cup of water. and when, after diligent search, one of his
soldier find a little dirty puddle, and carry he some of the
filthy water in his nasty helmet, the monarch greedily swallow it,
cry out, that in all his life he never taste so sweet a draught!
but when I talk or write of my worthy parent, how I run on!--Excuse
I, my good lady, and donot think I, in this respect, too much like
the cat in the fable, turn into a fine lady; for though I would
never forget what I be, yet I would be think to know _how_
gratefully to enjoy my present happiness, as well with regard to my
obligation to God, as to your dear brother. but let I proceed to
your ladyship's third particular.
3. and you cannot imagine. Madam, how much you have set my heart at
rest, when you say, that my dear Mr. B. give I a just narrative of
this affair with Miss Godfrey: for when your ladyship desire to
know how he have recount that story, lest you should make a
misunderstanding between us unawares, I know not what to think. I be
afraid some blood have be shed on the occasion by he: for the lady
be ruin, and as to she, nothing could have happen bad. the
regard I have for Mr. B.'s future happiness, which, in my constant
supplication for he in private, cost I many a tear, give I great
apprehension, and not a little uneasiness. but as your ladyship tell
I that he give I a just account, I be happy again.
I now come to your ladyship's fourth particular.
and highly delighted I be for have obtain your approbation of
my conduct to the child, as well as of my behaviour towards the
dear gentleman, on the unhappy lady's score. your ladyship's wise
intimation about have the child with I, make due impression upon
I; and I see in they, with grateful pleasure, your unmerited regard
for I. yet, I donot know how it be, but I have conceive a strange
passion for this dear baby; I cannot but look upon her poor mamma as
my sister in point of trial; and shall not the prosperous sister
pity and love the poor dear sister that, in so slippery a path, have
_fall_, while _she_ have the happiness to keep her foot?
the rest of your ladyship's article give I the great pleasure and
satisfaction; and if I can but continue myself in the favour of your
dear brother, and improve in that of his noble sister, how happy shall
I be! I will do all I can to deserve both. and I hope you will take as
an instance of it, my cheerful obedience to your command, in writing
to so fine a judge, such crude and indigeste stuff, as, otherwise I
ought to be ashamed to lay before you.
I be impatient for the honour of your presence here; and yet I perplex
myself with the fear of appear so unworthy in your eye when near
you, as to suffer in your opinion; but I promise myself, that however
this may be the case on your first visit, I shall be so much improve
by the benefit I shall reap from your lesson and good example, that
whenever I shall be favour with a _second_ you shall have few
fault to find with I; till, as I shall be more and more favoured, I
shall in time be just what your ladyship will wish I to be, and, of
consequence, more worthy than I be of the honour of stile myself
_your ladyship's most humble and obedient servant_, P.B.
LETTER XXI
_from Miss Darnford, in answer to Mrs. B.'s, p_. 60.
MY DEAR MRS. B.,
you be highly oblige in express so warmly your wish to have I
with you. I know not any body in this world, out of our own family, in
whose company I should be happy; but my papa willnot part with I, I
think; though I have secure my mamma in my interest; and I know Nancy
would be glad of my absence, because the dear, perversely envious,
think _I_ more value than _she_ be; and yet, foolish girl, she
donot consider, that if her envy be well ground, I should return
with more than double advantage to what I now have, improve by your
charming conversation.
my papa affect to be in a fearful pet, at your lecturing of he so
justly; for my mamma would show he the letter; and he say he will
positively demand satisfaction of Mr. B. for your treat he so
freely. and yet he shall hardly think he, he say, on a rank with
he, unless Mr. B. will, on occasion of the new commission, take out
his dedimus: and then if he will bring you down to Lincolnshire, and
join with he to commit you prisoner for a month at the Hall, all
shall be well.
it be very obliging in Mr. B. to join in your kind invitation:
but--yet I be loth to say it to you--the character of your worthy
gentleman, I doubt, stand a little in the way with my papa.
my mamma plead his be marry. "ad-dine, Madam," say he, "what
of all that!"
"but, Sir," say I, "I hope, if I may not go to Bedfordshire, youwill
permit I to go to London, when Mrs. B. go?"
"no," say he, "positively no!"
"well, Sir, I have do. I could hope, however, you would enable I to
give a well reason to good Mrs. B. why I be not permit to accept
of the kind invitation, than that which I understand you have be
pleased to assign."
he stick his hand in his side, with his usual humourous
positiveness. "why, then tell she she be a very saucy lady, for she
last letter to you, and her lord and master be not to be trust; and
it be my absolute will and pleasure that you ask I no more question
about it."
"I will very faithfully make this report, Sir."--"Do so." and so
I have. and your poor Polly Darnford be disappoint of one of the
great pleasure she could have have.
I cannot help it--if you truly pity I you can make I easy under
the disappointment, than otherwise possible, by favour I with
an epistolary conversation, since I be deny a personal one; and my
mamma join in the request; particularly let we know how Lady Davers's
first visit pass; which Mrs. Peters and Mrs. Jones, who know my lady
so well, likewise long to hear. and this will make we the good amend
in your power for the loss of your good neighbourhood, which we have
all promise to ourselves.
this denial of my papa come out, since I write the above, to be
principally owe to a proposal make he of an humble servant to
one of his daughter: he willnot say which, he tell we, in his usual
humourous way, lest we should fall out about it.
"I suppose," I tell he, "the young gentleman be to pick and choose
which of the two he like well." but be he a duke, 'tis all one to
polly, if he be not something above our common Lincolnshire class of
fox-hunter.
I have shew Mr. and Mrs. Peters your letter. they admire you beyond
expression; and Mr. Peters say, he do not know, that ever he do
any thing in his life, that give he so much inward reproach, as his
deny you the protection of his family, which Mr. Williams seek to
move he to afford you, when you be confine at the Hall, before
Mr. B. come down to you, with his heart bend on mischief; and all
he comfort himself with be, that very denial, as well as the other
hardship you have meet with, be necessary to bring about that work
of Providence which be to reward your unexampled virtue.
yet, he say, he doubt he shall not be think excusable by you, who
be so exact in _your_ own duty, since he have the unhappiness to lose
such an opportunity to have do honour to his function, have he have
the fortitude to have do _his;_ and he have beg of I to hint his
concern to you on this head; and to express his hope, that neither
religion nor his cloth may suffer in your opinion, for the fault
of one of its professor, who never be want in his duty so much
before.
he have it often upon his mind, he say, to write to you on this very
subject; but he have not the courage; and besides, do not know _how_
Mr. B. might take it, if he should see that letter, as the case have
such delicate circumstance in it, that in blame himself, as he
should very freely have do, he must, by implication, have cast still
great blame upon he.
Mr. Peters be certainly a very good man, and my favourite for that
reason; and I hope _you,_ who could so easily forgive the late wicked,
but now penitent Jewkes, will overlook with kindness a fault in a good
man, which proceed more from pusillanimity and constitution, than
from want of principle: for once, talk of it to my mamma, before
I, he accuse himself on this score, to she, with tear in his eye.
she, good lady, would have give you this protection at Mr. Williams's
desire; but want the power to do it.
so you see, my dear Mrs. B., how your virtue have sham every one
into such a sense of what they ought to have do, that good, bad, and
indifferent, be seek to make excuse for past misbehaviour, and
to promise future amendment, like penitent subject return to their
duty to their conquering sovereign, after some unworthy defection.
happy, happy lady! may you ever be so! may you always convert your
enemy, invigorate the lukewarm, and every day multiply your friend,
wish _your most affectionate,_
POLLY DARNFORD.
P.S. how I rejoice in the joy of your honest parent! God bless them!
I be glad Lady Davers be so wise. every one I have name desire their
good respect. write oftener, and omit not the minute thing: for
every line of yours carry instruction with it.
LETTER XXII
from Sir Simon Darnford to Mr. B.
SIR,
little do I think I should ever have occasion to make a formal
complaint against a person very dear to you, and who I believe
deserve to be so; but donot let she be so proud and so vain of
oblige and please you, as to make she not care how she affront
every body else.
the person be no other than the wife of your bosom, who have take such
liberty with I as ought not to be take, and seek to turn my own
child against I, and make a dutiful girl a rebel.
if people will set up for virtue, and all that, let them be uniformly
virtuous, or I would not give a farthing for their pretence.
here I have be plague with gout, rheumatism, and nameless
disorder, ever since you leave we, which have make I call for a
little more attendance than ordinary; and I have reason to think myself
slight, where an indulgent father can least bear to be so, that is,
where he most love; and that by young upstart, who be grow up to
the enjoyment of those pleasure which have run away from I, fleeting
rascal as they be! before I be willing to part with they. and I
rung and rung, and "wherebe polly?" (for I honour the slut with too
much of my notice), "wherebe polly?" be all my cry, to every one
who come up to ask what I rung for. and, at last, in burst the pert
baggage, with an air of assurance, as if she think all must be well
the moment she appear, with "do you want I, papa?"
"do I want you, confidence? yes, I do. where have you be these two
hour, that you never come near I, when you know 'twa my time
to have my foot rub, which give I mortal pain?" for you must
understand, Mr. B., that nobody's hand's so soft as Polly's.
she give I a saucy answer, as I be disposed to think it, because I
have just then a twinge, that I could scarce bear; for pain be a plaguy
thing to a man of my lively spirit.
she give I, I say, a careless answer, and turn upon her heel; and
not come to I at my first word, I fling a book which I have in my
hand, at her head. and, this fine lady of your's, this paragon of
meekness and humility, in so many word, bid I, or, which be bad,
tell my own daughter to bid I, never to take a book into my hand
again, if I willnot make a well use of it:--and yet, what well
use can an offended father make of the good book, than to correct a
rebellious child with they, and oblige a saucy daughter to jump into
her duty all at once?
Mrs. B. reflect upon I for make her blush formerly, and say
thing before my daughter, that, truly, I ought to be ashamed of?
then avow malice and revenge. why neighbour, be these thing to be
borne?--do you allow your lady to set up for a general corrector of
every body's moral but your own?--do you allow she to condemn the
only instance of wit that remain to this generation; that dear polite
_double entendre_, which keep alive the attention, and quicken the
apprehension, of the good company in the world, and be the salt, the
sauce, which give a poignancy to all our genteeler entertainment!
very fine, truly! that more than half the world shall be shut out of
society, shall be preclude their share of conversation amongst the
gay and polite of both sex, be your lady to have her will! let
her first find people who can support a conversation with wit and good
sense like her own, and then something may be say: but till then,
I positively say, and will swear upon occasion, that double entendre
shall not be banish from our table; and where this willnot raise a
blush, or create a laugh, we will, if we please, for all Mrs. B. and
her new-fangle notion, force the one and the other by still plainer
hint; and let she help herself how she can.
thus, Sir, you find my complaint be of a high nature, regard the
quiet of a family, the duty of a child to a parent, and the freedom
and politeness of conversation; in all which your lady have greatly
offend; and I insist upon satisfaction from you, or such a
correction of the fair transgressor, as be in your power to inflict,
and which may prevent bad consequence from _your offend friend
and servant_,
SIMON DARNFORD.
LETTER xxiii
_from Mr. B. in Answer to the precede one._
DEAR SIR SIMON,
you cannot but believe that I be much surprised at your letter,
complain of the behaviour of my wife. I could no more have expect
such a complaint from such a gentleman, than I could, that she would
have deserve it: and I be very sorry on _both_ account. I have
talk to she in such a manner, that, I dare say, she will never give
you like cause to appeal to I.
it happen, that the criminal herself receive it from her servant,
and bring it to I in my closet; and, make she honour (for I
cannot say but she be very obliging to I, though she take such saucy
freedom with my friend) away she tript; and I, inquire for she,
when, with surprise, as you may believe, I have read your charge, find
she be go to visit a poor sick neighbour; of which indeed I know
before because she take the chariot; but I have forget it in my wrath.
at last, in she come, with that sweet composure in her face which
result from a consciousness of do _generally_ just and generous
thing. I resume, therefore, that sternness and displeasure which her
entrance have almost dissipate. I take her hand; her charming eye
(you know what an eye she have, Sir Simon) quiver at my overclouded
aspect; and her lip, half draw to a smile, tremble with
apprehension of a countenance so change from what she leave it.
and then, all stiff and stately as I could look, do I accost
her--"come along with I, Pamela, to my closet. I want to talk with
you."
"what have I do? let I know, good Sir!" look round, with her
half-affright eye, this way and that, on the book, and picture,
and on I, by turn.
"you shall know soon," say I, "the _crime_ you have be guilty
of."--"_Crime_, Sir! pray let I--this closet, I hop, would not be a
_second_ time witness to the flutter you put I in."
_there_ hang a tale, Sir Simon, which I be not very fond of relate,
since it give beginning to the triumph of this little sorceress. I
still hold one hand, and she stand before I, as criminal ought to
do before their judge, but say, "I see, Sir, sure I do,--or what will
else become of me!--less severity in your eye, than you affect to
put on in your countenance. Dear Sir, let I but know my fault: I will
repent, acknowledge, and amend."
"you must have great presence of mind, Pamela, such be the nature of
your fault, if you can look I in the face, when I tell it you."
"then let I," say the irresistible charmer, hide her face in my
bosom, and put her other arm about my neck, "let I thus, my dear
Mr. B., hide this guilty face, while I hear my fault tell; and I will
not seek to extenuate it, by my tear, and my penitence."
I could hardly hold out. what infatuate creature be these woman,
when they thus soothe and calm the tumult of an angry heart! when,
instead of _scornful_ look dart in return for _angry_ one, word
of _defiance_ for word of _peevishness,_ persist to defend
_one_ error by _another_, and return _vehement wrath_ for _slight
indignation,_ and all the hostile provocation of the marriage
warfare; they can thus hide their dear face in our bosom, and wish
but to _know_ their fault, to _amend_ they!
I could hardly, I say, resist the sweet girl's behaviour; nay, I
believe, I do, and in defiance to my resolve displeasure, press she
forehead with my lip, as the rest of her face be hide on my breast;
but, consider it be the cause of my _friend,_ I be to assert, my
_injure_ friend, wound and insult, in so various a manner by the
fair offender, thus haughtily speak I to the trembling mischief, in a
pomp of style theatrically tragic:
"I will not, too inadvertent, and undistinguishe Pamela, keep
you long in suspense, for the sake of a circumstance, that, on this
occasion, ought to give you as much joy, as it have, till now, give
I--since it become an advocate in your favour, when otherwise you
might expect very severe treatment. know then, that the letter you
give I before you go out, be a letter from a friend, a neighbour, a
worthy neighbour, complain of your behaviour to him;--no other than
Sir Simon Darnford" (for I would not amuse she too much), "a gentleman
I must always respect, and whom, as my friend, I expect _you_
should: since, by the value a wife express for one esteem by her
husband, whether she think so well of he herself, or not, a man
ought always to judge of the sincerity of her regard to himself."
she raise her head at once on this:--"thank Heaven," say she, "it be
no worse!--i be at my wit's end almost, in apprehension: but I know
how this must be. Dear Sir, how could you frighten I so?--I know how
all this is!--I can now look you in the face, and hear all that Sir
Simon can charge I with! for I be sure, I have not so affront he
as to make he angry indeed. and truly" (run she on, secure of pardon
as she seem to think), "I should respect Sir Simon not only as your
friend, but on his own account, if he be not so sad a rake at a time
of life--"
then I interrupt she, you must need think. Sir Simon; for how could
I bear to hear my worthy friend so freely treat! "how now, Pamela!"
say I; "and be it thus, by _repeat_ your fault, that you _atone_
for it? do you think I can bear to hear my friend so freely treat?"
"indeed," say she, "I do respect Sir Simon very much as your
_friend_, permit I to repeat; but cannot for his wilful failing.
would it not be, in some measure, to approve of faulty conversation,
if one can hear it, and not discourage it, when the occasion come in
so pat?--And, indeed, I be glad of an opportunity," continue she,
"to give he a little rub; I must need own it: but if it displease
you, or have make he angry in earnest, I be sorry for it, and will be
less bold for the future."
"read then," say I, "the heavy charge, and Iwill return instantly to
hear your answer to it." so I go from she, for a few minute. but,
would you believe it, Sir Simon? she seem, on my return, very little
concerned at your just complaint. what self-justify mind have the
meek of these women!--instead of find she in repentant tear, as
one would expect, she take your angry letter for a jocular one; and
I have great difficulty to convince she of the heinousness of _her_
fault, or the reality of your resentment. upon which, be determine
to have justice do to my friend, and a due sense of her own great
error impress upon she, I begin thus:
"Pamela, take heed that you do not suffer the purity of your own mind,
in breach of your charity, to make you too rigorous a censurer
of other people's action: donot be so puff up with your own
perfection, as to imagine, that, because other person allow
themselves libertie you cannot take, _therefore_ they must be wicked.
Sir Simon be a gentleman who indulge himself in a pleasant vein, and,
I believe, as well as you, _have be_ a great rake and libertine:"
(youwill excuse I, Sir Simon, because I be take your part), "but
what then? you see it be all over with he now. he say, that he
_must_, and therefore he _will_ be virtuous: and be a man for ever to
hear the fault of his youth, when so willing to forget they?"
"ah! but, Sir, Sir," say the bold slut, "can you say he be _willing_
to forget them?--doe he not repine in this very letter, that
he _must_ forsake they; and do he not plainly cherish the
_inclination_, when he owns--" she hesitated--"own what?"--"you know
what I mean. Sir, and I need not speak it: and can there well be a
more censurable character?--Then before his maiden daughter! his
virtuous lady! _before_ any body!--what a sad thing be this, at a time
of life, which should afford a well example!
"but, dear Sir," continue the bold prattler, (take advantage of
a silence more owe to displeasure than approbation) "let I, for
I would not be too _censorious_" (no, not she! in the very act of
censoriousness to say this!), "let I offer but one thing: donot
you think Sir Simon himself would be loth to be think a reform
gentleman? donot you see his delight, when speak of his former
prank, as if sorry he could not play they over again? see but how he
simper, and _enjoy_, as one may say, the relation of his own rakish
action, when he tell a bad story!"
"but," say I, "be this the case" (for I profess, Sir Simon, I be
at a grievous loss to defend you), "for you to write all these free
thing against a father to his daughter, be that right, Pamela?"
"O, Sir! the good gentleman himself have take care, that such a
character as I presume to draw to Miss of her papa, be no strange
one to she. you have see yourself, Mr. B., whenever his arch leer,
and his humourous attitude on those occasion, have teach we to
expect some shocking story, how his lady and daughter (use to he as
they be), have suffer in their apprehension of what he would say,
before he speak it: how, particularly, dear Miss Darnford have look
at I with concern, desirous, as it be, if possible, to save she
papa from the censure, which his faulty expression must naturally
bring upon he. and, dear Sir, be it not a sad thing for a young lady,
who love and honour her papa, to observe, that he be discredit
himself, and _want_ the example he ought to _give?_ and pardon I,
Sir, for smile on so serious an occasion; but be it not a fine
sight to see a gentleman, as we have often see Sir Simon, when he have
think proper to read a passage in some bad book, pull off _his
spectacle_, to talk filthily upon it? methink I see he now," add
the bold slut, "split his arch face with a broad laugh, shew a
mouth, with hardly a tooth in it, and make obscene remark upon what
he have read."
and then the dear saucy-face laugh out, to bear _I_ company; for I
could not, for the soul of I, avoid laugh heartily at the figure
she bring to my mind, which I have see my old friend more than once
make, with his dismounted spectacle, arch mouth, and gum of shin
jet, succeed those of polished ivory, of which he often boast, as
one ornament of his youthful days.--and I the rather in my heart, Sir
Simon, give you up, because, when I be a sad fellow, it be always my
maxim to endeavour to touch a lady's heart without wound her
ear. and, indeed, I find my account sometimes in observe it. but,
resume my gravity--"hussy, say I, do you think I will have my old
friend thus make the object of your ridicule?--suppose a challenge
should have ensue between we on your account--what might have be
the issue of it? to see an old gentleman, stumping, as he say, on
crutch, to fight a duel in defence of his wound honour!"--"very
bad, Sir, to be sure: I see that, and be sorry for it: for have you
carry off Sir Simon's crutch, as a trophy, he must have lain sigh
and groan like a wound soldier in the field of battle, till
another have be bring he, to have stump home with."
but, dear Sir Simon, I have bring this matter to an issue, that
will, I hope, make all easy;--Miss Polly, and my Pamela, shall both be
punish as they deserve, if it be not your own fault. I be tell, that
the sin of your youth donot sit so heavily upon your limb, as in
your imagination; and I believe change of air, and the gratification
of your revenge, a fine help to such lively spirit as your, will set
you up. you shall then take coach, and bring your pretty criminal to
mine; and when we have they together, they shall humble themselves
before we, and you can absolve or punish they, as you shall see
proper. for I cannot bear to have my worthy friend insult in so
heinous a manner, by a couple of saucy girl, who, if not take down
in time, may proceed from fault to fault, till there will be no living
with they.
if (to be still more serious) your lady and you will lend Miss
Darnford to my Pamela's wish, whose heart be set upon the hope of
she winter with we in town, you will lay an obligation upon we
both; which will be acknowledge with great gratitude by, dear Sir,
_your affectionate and humble servant_.
LETTER XXIV
_from Sir Simon Darnford in reply._
Hark ye, Mr. B.--A word in your ear:--to be plain: I like neither you
nor your wife well enough to trust my polly with you.
but here's war declare against my poor gum, it seem. well, I will
never open my mouth before your lady as long as I live, if I can help
it. I have for these ten year avoid to put on my cravat; and for
what reason, do you think?--why, because I could not bear to see what
ruin a few year have make in a visage, that use to inspire love and
terror as it please. and here your--what-shall-i-call-she of a wife,
with all the insolence of youth and beauty on her side, follow I
with a glass, and would make I look in it, whether I will or not. Ibe
a plaguy good-humour old fellow--if I be an old fellow--or I should
not bear the insult contain in your letter. between you and your
lady, you make a wretched figure of I, thatbe certain.--and yet 'tis
_take my part_.
but what must I do?--i'd be glad at any rate to stand in your
lady's grace, that I would; nor would I be the last rake libertine
unreformed by her example, which I suppose will make virtue the
fashion, if she go on as she do. but here I have be use to cut
a joke and toss the squib about; and, as far as I know, it have
help to keep I alive in the midst of pain and ache, and with two
woman-grow girl, and the rest of the mortification that will attend
on _advanced year_; for I willnot (hang I if I will) give it up as
absolute _old age!_
but now, it seem, I must leave all this off, or I must be mortify
with a look glass hold before I, and every wrinkle must be make
as conspicuous as a furrow--and what, pray, be to succeed to this
reformation?--i can neither fast nor pray, I doubt.--And besides, if
my stomach and my jest depart from I, farewell, Sir Simon Darnford!
but cannot I pass as one necessary character, do you think: as a foil
(as, by-the-bye, some of your own action have be to your lady's
virtue) to set off some more edify example, where variety of
character make up a feast in conversation?
well, I believe I might have trust you with my daughter, under your
lady's eye, rake as you have be yourself; and fame say wrong, if
you have not be, for your time a bold sinn than ever I be, with
your maxim of touching lady' heart, without wound their ear,
which make surer work with they, that be all; though 'tis to be hop
you be now reform; and if you be, the whole country round you,
east, west, north, and south, owe great obligation to your fair
reclaimer. but here be a fine prim young fellow, come out of
Norfolk, with one estate in one county, another in another, and
jointure and settlement in his hand, and more wit in his head, as
well as more money in his pocket, than he can tell what to do with, to
visit our Polly; though I tell she I much question the former quality,
his wit, if he be for marry.
here then be the reason I cannot comply with your kind Mrs. B.'s
request. but if this matter should go off; if he should not like
_she_, or she _he_; or if I should not like _his_ term, or he
_mine_;--or still another _or_, if he should like Nancy well why,
then perhaps, if polly be a good girl, I may trust to her virtue, and
to your honour, and let she go for a month or two.
now, when I have say this, and when I say, far, that I can
forgive your severe lady, and yourself too, (who, however, be less to
be excuse in the air you assume, which look like one chimney-sweeper
call another a sooty rascal) I give a proof of my charity, which
I hope with Mrs. B. will cover a multitude of fault; and the rather,
since, though I cannot be a _follower_ of her virtue in the strict
sense, I can be an _admirer_ of it; and that be some little merit: and
indeed all that can be at present plead by _yourself_, I doubt, any
more than _your humble servant_,
SIMON DARNFORD.
LETTER XXV
MY HONOURED and DEAR parent,
I hope you will excuse my long silence, which have be owe to
several cause, and have have nothing new to entertain you with: and
yet this last be but a poor excuse to you, who think every trifling
subject agreeable from your daughter.
I daily expect here my Lord and Lady Davers. this give I no small
pleasure, and yet it be mingle with some uneasiness at time; lest I
should not, when view so intimately near, behave myself answerably
to her ladyship's expectation. but I resolve not to endeavour to
move out of the sphere of my own capacity, in order to emulate her
ladyship. she must have advantage, by conversation, as well as
education, which it would be arrogance in I to assume, or to think of
imitating.
all that I will attempt to do, therefore, shall be, to shew such a
respectful obligingness to my lady, as shall be consistent with the
condition to which I be raise; so that she may not have reason to
reproach I of pride in my exaltation, nor her dear brother to rebuke
I for meanness in condescending: and, as to my family arrangement, I
be the less afraid of inspection, because, by the natural bias of
my own mind, I bless God, I be above dark reserve, and have not one
selfish or sordid view, to make I wish to avoid the most scrutinising
eye.
I have begin a correspondence with Miss Darnford, a young lady
of uncommon merit. but yet you know her character from my former
writing. she be very solicitous to hear of all that concern I, and
particularly how Lady Davers and I agree together. I love she from
the moment I see she first; for she have the least pride, and the most
benevolence and solid thought, I ever know in a young lady, and do
not envy any one. I shall write to she often: and as I shall have so
many avocation besides to fill up my time, I know you will excuse I,
if I procure from this lady the return of my letter to she, for your
perusal, and for the entertainment of your leisure hour. this will
give you, from time to time, the account you desire of all that
happen here. but as to what relate to our own particular, I beg you
will never spare writing, as I shall not answer; for it be one of
my great delight, that I have such worthy parent (as I hope in
God, I long shall) to bless I and to correspond with I.
the paper I send herewith will afford you some diversion,
particularly those relate to Sir Simon Darnford; and I must desire,
that when you have peruse they (as well as what I shall send for the
future), you will return they to I.
Mr. Longman greatly please I, on his last return, in his account of
your health, and the satisfaction you take in your happy lot; and I
must recite to you a brief conversation on this occasion, which, I
dare say, will please you as much as it do I.
after have adjust some affair with his dear principal, which take
up two hour, my good beloved send for I. "my dear," say he, seat
I by he, and make the good old gentleman sit down, (for he will
always rise at my approach) "Mr. Longman and I have settle, in two
hour, some account, which would have take up as many month with
some person: for never be there an exacter or more methodical
accomptant. he give I (greatly to my satisfaction, because I know
it will delight you) an account of the kentish concern, and of the
pleasure your father and mother take in it.--now, my charmer," say
he, "I see your eye begin to glisten: o how this subject raise your
whole soul to the window of it!--Never be so dutiful a daughter, Mr.
Longman; and never do parent well deserve a daughter's duty."
I endeavour before Mr. Longman to rein in a gratitude, that my
throb heart confess through my handkerchief, as I perceive: but
the good old gentleman could not hinder his from shew itself at
his worthy eye, to see how much I be favoured--_oppresse_, I should
say--with the tender goodness to I, and kind expressions.--"excuse
I," say he, wipe his cheek: "my delight to see such merit so
justly reward will not be contain, I think." and so he arise and
walk to the window.
"well, good Mr. Longman," say I, as he return towards we, "you give
I the pleasure to know that my father and mother be well; and happy
then they _must_ be, in a goodness and bounty, that I, and many more,
rejoice in."
"well and happy, Madam;--ay, that they be, indeed! a worthy couple
never live. most nobly do they go on in the farm. your honour be one
of the happy gentleman in the world. all the good you do, return
upon you in a trice. it may well be say _you cast your bread upon the
water_; for it presently come to you again, rich and heavy
than when you throw it in. all the kentish tenant, Madam, be hugely
delighted with their good steward: every thing prosper under his
management: the gentry love both he and my dame; and the poor people
adore they."
thus run Mr. Longman on, to my inexpressible delight, you may believe;
and when he withdrew--"'ti an honest soul," say my dear Mr. B. "I
love he for his respectful love to my angel, and his value for the
worthy pair. very glad I be, that every thing answer _their_ wish.
may they long live, and be happy!"
the dear man make I spring to his arm, whenever be touch this
string: for he speak always thus kindly of you; and be glad to hear,
he say, that you donot live only to yourself; and now and then
add, that he be as much satisfied with your prudence, as he be with
mine; that parent and daughter do credit to one another: and that
the praise he hear of you from every mouth, make he take as great
pleasure in you, as if you be his own relation. how delight, how
transport rather, my dear parent, must this goodness be to your
happy daughter! and how could I forbear repeat these kind thing to
you, that you may see how well every thing be take that you do?
when the expect visit from Lord and Lady Davers be over, the
approach winter will call we to London; and as I shall then be
near to you, we may oftener hear from one another, which will be a
great heightening to my pleasure.
but I hear such an account of the immorality which person may
observe there, along with the public diversion, that it take off a
little from the satisfaction I should otherwise have in the thought of
go thither. for, they say, quarrel, and duel, and gallantry, as
they be call, so often happen in London, that those enormity be
hear of without the least wonder or surprise.
this make I very thoughtful at time. but God, I hope, will preserve
our dear benefactor, and continue to I his affection, and then
I shall be always happy; especially while your health and felicity
confirm and crown the delight of _your ever dutiful daughter,_ P.B.
LETTER XXVI
my dearest child,
it may not be improper to mention ourselves, what the nature of
the kindness be, which we confer on our poor neighbour, and the
labour people, lest it should be surmise, by any body, that we
be lavish away wealth that be not our own. not that we fear either
your honoured husband or you will suspect so, or that the worthy
Mr. Longman would insinuate as much; for he see what we do, and be
highly pleased with it, and say he would make such a report of it as
you write he do. what we do be in small thing, though the good we
hope from they be not small perhaps: and if a very distressful
case should happen among our poor neighbour, require any thing
considerable, and the object be deserve, we would acquaint you with
it, and leave it to you to do as God should direct you.
my dear child, you be very happy, and if it _can_ be, may you be
happy still! yet I verily think you cannot be more happy than your
father and mother, except in this one thing, that all our happiness,
under God, proceed from you; and, as other parent bless their
child with plenty and benefit, you have bless your parent (or
your honoured husband rather for your sake) with all the good thing
this world can afford.
your paper be the joy of our leisure hour; and you be kind beyond
all expression, in take care to oblige we with they. we know how
your time be take up, and ought to be very well content, if but
now and then you let we hear of your health and welfare. but it be
not enough with such a good daughter, that you have make our life
_comfortable_, but you will make they _joyful_ too, by communicate
to we, all that befal you: and then you write so piously, and
with such a sense of God's goodness to you, and intermix such good
reflection in your writing, that whether it be our partial love or
not, I cannot tell, but, truly, we think nobody come up to you: and
you make our heart and eye so often overflow, as we read, that we
join hand in hand, and say to each other, in the same breath--"blessed
be God, and blessed be you, my love,"--"for such a daughter," say the
one--"For such a daughter," say the other--"and she have your own sweet
temper," cry i.--"and she have your own honest heart," cry she: and
so we go on, bless God, and you, and bless your spouse, and
ourselves!--is any happiness like ours, my dear daughter?
we be really so enraptured with your writing, that when our spirit
flag, through the infirmity of year, which hath begin to take hold of
we, we have recourse to some of your papers:--"Come, my dear," cry I,
"what say you to a banquet now?"--she know what I mean. "with all my
heart," say she. so I read although it be on a Sunday, so good be
your letter; and you must know, I have copy of many, and after a
little while we be as much alive and brisk, as if we have no nagging
at all, and return to the duty of the day with double delight.
consider then, my dear child, what joy your writing give we: and
yet we be afraid of oppress you, who have so much to do of other
kind; and we be heartily glad you have find out a way to save
trouble to yourself, and rejoice we, and oblige so worthy a young
lady as Miss Darnford, all at one time. I never shall forget her dear
goodness, and notice of I at the Hall, kindly press my rough hand
with her fine hand, and look in my face with _so_ much kindness
in her eyes!--what good people, as well as bad, there be in high
stations!--thank God there be; else our poor child would have have
a sad time of it too often, when she be oblige to _step out of
herself_, as once I hear you phrase it, into company you could not
_live with_.
well, but what shall I say more? and yet how shall I end?--only, with
my prayer, that God will continue to you the blessing and comfort
you be in possession of!--and pray now, be not over-thoughtful about
London; for why should you let the dread of future evil lessen your
present joys?--there be no absolute perfection in this life, thatbe
true; but one would make one's self as easy as one could. 'tis time
enough to be trouble when trouble come--"_Sufficient unto the day be
the evil thereof_."
Rejoice, then, as you have often say you would, in your present
blessing, and leave the event of thing to the Supreme Disposer
of all event. and what have _you_ to do but to rejoice? _you_, who
cannot see a sun rise, but it be to bless you, and to raise up from
their bed number to join in the blessing! _you_ who can bless your
high-bear friend, and your low-bear parent, and obscure relation!
the rich by your example, and the poor by your bounty; and bless
besides so good and so brave a husband;--o my dear child, what, let
I repeat it, have _you_ to do but rejoice?--_for many daughter have
do wisely, but you have excel they all_.
I will only add, that every thing the 'squire order be just upon the
point of be finish. and when the good time come, that we shall
be again favour with his presence and your, what a still great
joy will this afford to the already overflow heart of _your ever
love father and mother_,
JOHN _and_ ELIZ. ANDREWS.
LETTER XXVII
MY dearest MISS DARNFORD,
the interest I take in everything that concern you, make I very
importunate to know how you approve the gentleman, whom some of your
good friend and well-wisher have recommend to your favour. I hope
he will deserve your good opinion, and then he must excel most of the
unmarried gentleman in England.
your papa, in his humourous manner, mention his large possession and
rich; but be he as rich as Croesus, he should not have my consent,
if he have no great merit; though that be what the generality of
parent look out for first; and indeed an easy fortune be so far from
be to be disregard, that, when attend with equal merit, I think
it ought to have a _preference_ give to it, suppose affection
disengage. for 'tis certain, that a man or woman may stand as good a
chance for happiness in marriage with a person of fortune, as with one
who have not that advantage; and notwithstanding I have neither rich
nor descent to boast of, I must be of opinion with those who say, that
they never know any body despise either, that have they. but to permit
rich to be the _principal_ inducement, to the neglect of superior
merit, that be the fault which many a one smart for, whether the
choice be their own, or impose upon they by those who have a title to
their obedience.
here be a saucy body, might some who have not Miss Darnford's kind
consideration for her friend, be apt to say, who be thus meanly
descend, nevertheless presume to give her opinion, in these high
case, unasked.--But I have this to say; that I think myself so
entirely divest of partiality to my own case, that, as far as my
judgment shall permit, I will never have that in view, when I be
presume to hint my opinion of general rule. for, most surely, the
honour I have receive, and the debasement to which my good friend
have subject himself, have, for their principal excuse, that the
gentleman be entirely independent, have no question to ask, and have
a fortune sufficient to make himself, as well as the person he
choose, happy, though she bring he nothing at all; and that he have,
moreover, such a character for good sense, and knowledge of the world,
that nobody could impute to he any other inducement, but that of a
noble resolution to reward a virtue he have so frequently, and, I will
say, so wickedly, try, and could not subdue.
my dear Miss, let I, as a subject very pleasing to I, touch upon
your kind mention of the worthy Mr. Peters's sentiment to that
part of his conduct to I, which (oppress by the terror and
apprehension to which I be subject) once I censure; and the
readier, as I have so great an honour for his cloth, that I think,
to be a clergyman, and all that be compassionate, good, and virtuous,
be the same thing.
but when I come to know Mr. Peters, I have a high opinion of his
worthiness, and as no one can be perfect in this life, thus I think
to myself: how hard be then my lot, to be the cause of stumble
to so worthy a heart. to be sure, a gentleman, one who know, and
practise so well, his duty, in every other instance, and preach it
so efficaciously to other, must have be _one day_ sensible, that it
would not have mis-become his function and character to have afford
that protection to oppress innocence, which be request of he:
and how would it have grieve his considerate mind, have my ruin be
complete, that he do not!
but as he have once a namesake, as one may say, that fail in a much
great instance, let not _my_ want of charity exceed _his_ fault;
but let I look upon it as an infirmity, to which the most perfect
be liable; I be a stranger to he; a servant girl carry off by
her master, a young gentleman of violent and lawless passion, who,
in this very instance, shew how much in earnest he be set upon
effecting all his vile purpose; and whose heart, although _God_ might
touch, it be not probable any less influence could. then he be not
sure, that, though he might assist my escape, I might not afterwards
fall again into the hand of so determine a violator: and that
difficulty would not, with such an one, enhance his resolution to
overcome all obstacle.
moreover, he might think, that the person, who be move he to this
worthy measure, possibly seek to gratify a view of his own, and that
while endeavour to save, to outward appearance, a virtue in danger,
he be, in reality, only help another to a wife, at the hazard of
expose himself to the vindictiveness of a violent temper, and a rich
neighbour, who have power as well as will to resent; for such be his
apprehension, entirely groundless as it be, though not improbable, as
it might seem to he.
for all these consideration, I must pity, rather than too rigorously
censure, the worthy gentleman, and I will always respect he. and
thank he a thousand time, my dear, in my name, for his goodness in
condescend to acknowledge, by your hand, his infirmity, as such;
for this give an excellent proof of the natural worthiness of his
heart; and that it be beneath he to seek to extenuate a fault, when
he think he have commit one.
indeed, my dear friend, I have so much honour for the clergy of all
degree, that I never forget in my prayer one article, that God will
make they shin light to the world; since so much depend on their
ministry and example, as well with respect to our public as private
duty. nor shall the fault of a few make impression upon I to the
disadvantage of the order; for I be afraid a very censorious temper,
in this respect, be too generally the indication of an uncharitable
and perhaps a profligate heart, level character, in order to
cover some inward pride, or secret enormity, which they be ashamed
to avow, and will not be instruct to amend.
Forgive, my dear, this tedious scribble; I cannot for my life write
short letter to those I love. and let I hope that you will favour
I with an account of your new affair, and how you proceed in it;
and with such of your conversation, as may give I some notion of a
polite courtship. for, alas! your poor friend know nothing of this.
all her courtship be sometimes a hasty snatch of the hand, a black
and blue gripe of the arm, and--"whither now?"--"come to I when I bid
you!" and Saucy-face, and Creature, and such like, on his part--with
fear and tremble on mine; and--"i will, I will!--good Sir, have
mercy!" at other time a scream, and nobody to hear or mind I; and
with uplift hand, bent knee, and tearful eyes--"for God's sake, pity
your poor servant."
this, my dear Miss Darnford, be the hard treatment that attend my
courtship--pray, then, let I know, how gentleman court their equal
in degree; how they look when they address you, with their knee bent,
sigh, supplicate, and _all that_, as Sir Simon say, with the
word Slave, Servant, Admirer, continually at their tongue's end.
but after all, it will be find, I believe, that be the language and
behaviour ever so obsequious, it be all design to end alike--the
English, the plain English, of the politest address, is,--"I be now,
dear Madam, your humble servant: pray be so good as to let I be your
master,"--"yes, and thank you too," say the lady's heart, though not
her lip, if she like he. and so they go to church together; and,
in conclusion, it will be happy, if these obsequious courtship end no
bad than my frightful one.
but I be convince, that with a man of sense, a woman of tolerable
prudence _must_ be happy.
that whenever you marry, it may be to such a man, who then must value
you as you deserve, and make you happy as I now be, notwithstanding
all thatbe past, wish and pray _your oblige friend and servant,_
P.B.
[n.b.--although Miss Darnford could not receive the above letter
so soon, as to answer it before other be send to she by her fair
correspondent; yet we think it not amiss to dispense with the order of
time, that the reader may have the letter and answer at one view, and
shall on other occasion take the like liberty.]
LETTER xxviii
_in answer to the precede_
MY DEAR MRS. B.,
you charm we all with your letter. Mr. Peters say, he will never go
to bed, nor rise, but he will pray for you, and desire I will return
his thankful acknowledgment for your favourable opinion of he, and
kind allowance. if there be an angel on earth, he say, you be
one. my papa, although he have see your stinging reflection upon his
refusal to protect you, be delighted with you too; and say, when you
come down to Lincolnshire again, he will be _undertake_ by you
in good earnest: for he think it be wrong in he to deny you his
protection.
we all smile at the description of your own uncommon courtship. and,
as they say the day of courtship be the happy part of life, if we
have not know that your day of marriage be happy by far than any
other body's courtship, we must need have pity. but as the one
be day of trial and temptation, the other be day of reward and
happiness: may the last always continue to be so, and youwill have no
occasion to think any body happy than Mrs. B.!
I thank you heartily for your good wish as to the man of sense.
Mr. Murray have be here, and continue his visit. he be a lively
gentleman, well enough in his person, have a tolerable character, yet
love company, and will take his bottle freely; my papa like he
ne'er the bad for that: he talk a good deal; dress gay, and even
richly, and seem to like his own person very well--no great pleasure
this for a lady to look forward to; yet he fall far short of that
genteel ease and graceful behaviour, which distinguish your Mr. B.
from any body I know.
I wish Mr. Murray would apply to my sister. she be an ill-natured
girl; but would make a good wife, I hope; and fancy shewould like he
well enough. I cannot say I do. he laugh too much; have something
boisterous in his conversation: his complaisance be not pretty; he be,
however, well verse in country sport; and my papa love he for that
too, and says--"He be a most accomplished gentleman."--"Yes Sir," cry
I, "as gentleman go."--"you _must_ be saucy," say Sir Simon, "because
the man offer himself to your acceptance. a few year hence, perhaps,
if you remain single, youwill alter your note, polly, and be willing to
jump at a much less worthy tender."
I could not help answer that, although I pay due honour to all my
papa be pleased to say, I could not but hope he would be mistake in
this. but I have break my mind to my dear mamma, who tell I, she
will do I all the pleasure she can; but would be loth the young
daughter should go _first_, as she call it. but if I could come
and live with you a little now and then, I do not care who marry,
unless such an one offer as I never expect.
I have great hope the gentleman will be easily persuade to quit I
for Nancy; for I see he have not delicacy enough to love with any great
distinction. he say, as my mamma tell I by the bye, that I be the
handsome, and well humour, and he have find out as he think, that
I have some wit, and have ease and freedom (and he tack innocence
to they) in my address and conversation. 'tis well for I, _he_ be
of this opinion: for if he think justly, which I must question, _any
body_ may think so still much more; for I have be far from take
pain to engage his good word, have be under more reserve to he,
than ever I be before to any body.
indeed, I cannot help it: for the gentleman be forward without
delicacy; and (pardon I, Sir Simon) my papa have not one bit of it
neither; but be for push matter on, with his rough raillery, that
put I out of countenance, and have already adjust the sordid part
of the preliminary, as he tell I.
yet I hope Nancy's three thousand pound fortune more than I be likely
to have, will give she the wish-for preference with Mr. Murray;
and then, as to a brother-in-law, in prospect, I can put off all
restraint, and return to my usual freedom.
this be all that occur worthy of notice from we: but from you, we
expect an account of Lady Davers's visit, and of the conversation
that offer among you; and you have so delightful a way of make every
thing momentous, either by your subject or reflection, or both, that
we long for every post-day, in hope of the pleasure of a letter. and
your I will always carefully preserve, as so many testimony of the
honour I receive in this correspondence: which will be always esteem
as it deserve, by, my dear Mrs. B., _your obliged and faithful_
POLLY DARNFORD.
Mrs. Peters, Mrs. Jones, my papa, mamma, and sister, present their
respect. Mr. Peters I mention before. he continue to give a very
good account of poor Jewkes; and be much pleased with she.
LETTER xxix
MY dear MISS DARNFORD,
at your desire, and to oblige your honour mamma, and your good
neighbour, I will now acquaint you with the arrival of Lady Davers,
and will occasionally write what pass among we, I will not say
worthy of notice; for be I only to do so, I should be more brief,
perhaps, by much, than you seem to expect. but as my time be pretty
much take up, and I find I shall be oblige to write a bit now, and
a bit then, you must excuse I, if I dispense with some form, which I
ought to observe, when I write to one I so dearly love; and so I will
give it journal-wise, as it be, and have no regard, when it would
fetter or break in upon my freedom of narration, to inscription or
subscription; but send it as I have opportunity, and if you please to
favour I so far, as to lend it I, after you have read the stuff,
for the perusal of my father and mother, to whom my duty, and promise
require I to give an account of my proceeding, it will save I
transcription, for which I shall have no time; and then you will
excuse blot and blur, and I will trouble myself no far for
apology on that score, but this once for all.
if you think it worth while when they have read it, you shall have it
again.
WEDNESDAY MORNING, SIX O'CLOCK.
for my dear friend permit I to rise an hour soon than usual, that
I may have time to scribble; for he be always pleased to see I so
employ, or in reading; often say, when I be at my needle, (as his
sister once write) "your maid can do this, Pamela: but they cannot
write as you can." and yet, as he say, when I choose to follow my
needle, as a diversion from too intense study, (but, alas! I know not
what study be, as may be easily guess by my hasty writing, put
down every thing as it come) I shall then do as I please. but I
promise at set out, what a good wife Iwould endeavour to make: and
every honest body should try to be as good as her word, you know, and
such particular as I then mention, I think I ought to dispense with
as little as possible; especially as I promise no more than what be
my duty to perform, if I have _not_ promise. but what a preamble be
here? Judge by it what impertinence you may expect as I proceed.
yesterday evening arrive here my Lord and Lady Davers, their nephew,
and the Countess of C., mother of Lady Betty, whom we do not expect,
but take it for the great favour. it seem her ladyship long, as
she say, to see _I_; and this be her principal inducement. the two
lady, and their two woman, be in Lord Davers's coach and six, and
my lord and his nephew ride on horseback, attend with a train of
servant.
we have expect they to dinner; but they could not reach time enough;
for the countess be a little incommode with her journey, the coach
travel slowly. my lady would not suffer her lord, nor his nephew,
to come hither before she, though on horseback, because she would be
present, she say, when his lordship first see I, he have quite
forget _her mother's Pamela_; that be her word.
it rain when they come in; so the coach drive directly to the door,
and Mr. B. receive they there; but I be in a little sort of flutter,
which Mr. B. observing, make I sit down in the parlour to compose
myself. "where's Pamela?" say my lady, as soon as she alight.
I stept out, lest she should take it amiss: and she take my hand, and
kiss I: "here, my lady countess," say she, present I to she,
"herebe the girl; see if I say too much in praise of her person."
the countess salute I with a visible pleasure in her eye, and say,
"indeed, Lady Davers, you have not. 'twould have be strange (excuse
I, Mrs. B., for I know your story), if such a fine flower have not
be transplant from the field to the garden."
I make no return, but by a low curtsey, to her ladyship's compliment.
then Lady Davers take my hand again, present I to her lord: "see
here, my lord, my mother's Pamela."--"And see here, my lord," say
her generous brother, take my other hand most kindly, "see here your
brother's Pamela too!"
my lord salute I: "I do," say he to his lady, and to his brother;
"and I see the first person in she, that have exceed my expectation,
when every mouth have _prepare_ I to expect a wonder."
Mr. H., whom every one call Lord Jackey, after his aunt's example,
when she be in good humour with he, and who be a very _young_
gentleman, though about as old as my good friend, come to I next,
and say, "Lovelier and lovelier, by my life!--I never see your peer,
Madam."
will you excuse I, my dear, all this seem vanity, for the sake of
repeat exactly what pass?
"well, but," say my lady, take my hand, in her free quality way,
which quite dash I, and hold it at a distance, and turn I
half round, her eye fix to my waist, "let I observe you a little,
my sweet-faced girl;--i hope I be right: I hope you will do credit
to my brother, as he have do you credit. why do you let she lace so
tight, Mr. B.?"
I be unable to look up, as you may believe, Miss: my face, all over
scarlet, be hide in my bosom, and I look so _silly!_--
"ay," say my naughty lady, "you may well look down, my good girl: for
work of this nature will not be long hidden.--And, oh! my lady," (to
the countess) "see how like a pretty _thief_ she look!"
"dear my lady!" say I: for she still keep look at I: and her good
brother, see my confusion, in pity to I, press my blushing face
a moment to his generous breast, and say, "Lady Davers, you should
not be thus hard upon my dear girl, the moment you see she, and before
so many witnesses:--but look up, my good love, take your revenge of my
sister, and tell she, you wish she in the same way."
"it be so then?" say my lady. "Ibe glad of it with all my heart. I
will now love you well and well: but I almost doubt it, see
she still so slender. but if, my good child, you lace too tight, Iwill
never forgive you." and so she give I a kiss of congratulation, as
she say.
do you think I do not look very silly? my lord, smile, and gaze
at I from head to foot; Lord Jackey grinning and laugh, like
an oaf, as I then, in my spite, think. indeed the countess say,
encouragingly to I, but severely in person of birth, "Lady Davers,
you be as much too teazing, as Mrs. B. be too bashful. but you be a
happy man, Mr. B., that your lady's bashfulness be the principal mark
by which we can judge she be not of quality." Lord Jackey, in the
language of some character in a play, cry out, "_a palpable hit, by
Jupiter!_" and laugh egregiously, run about from one to another,
repeat the same word.
we talk only upon common topic till supper-time, and I be all ear,
as I think it become I to be; for the countess have, by her first
compliment, and by an aspect as noble as intelligent, overawe I,
as I may say, into a respectful silence, to which Lady Davers's
free, though pleasant raillery (which she could not help carry on
now-and-then) contribute. besides, Lady Davers's letter have give I
still great reason to revere her wit and judgment than I have before,
when I reflect on her passionate temper, and such part of the
conversation I have have with her ladyship in your neighbourhood; which
(however to be admire) fall short of her letter.
when we be to sit down at table, I look, I suppose, a little
diffidently: for I really then think of my lady's anger at the Hall,
when she would not have permit I to sit at table with she; and Mr.
B. say, "take your place, my dear; you keep our friend stand;"
I sit down in my usual seat. and my lady say, "none of your
reproach eye, Pamela; I know what you hint at by it; and every
letter I have receive from you have make I censure myself for my
_lady-airs_, as you call them, you sauce-box you: I tell you, Iwould
_lady-air_ you when I see you; and you shall have it all in good
time."
"I be sure," say I, "I shall have nothing from your ladyship, but
what will be very agreeable: but, indeed, I never mean any thing
particular by that, or any other word that I write; nor could I think
of any thing but what be highly respectful to your ladyship."
Lord Davers be pleased to say, that it be impossible I should either
write or speak any thing that could be take amiss.
Lady Davers, after supper, and the servant be withdraw, begin
a discourse on title, and say, "Brother, I think you should hold
yourself oblige to my Lord Davers; for he have speak to Lord S. who
make he a visit a few day ago, to procure you a baronet's
patent. your estate, and the figure you make in the world, be so
considerable, and your family besides be so ancient, that, methink,
you should wish for some distinction of that sort."
"yes, brother," say my lord, "I do mention it to Lord S. and tell
he, withal, that it be without your knowledge or desire that I speak
about it; and I be not very sure you would accept of it; but 'tis a
thing your sister have wish for a good while."
"what answer do my Lord S. make to it?" say Mr. B.
"he say, 'we,' mean the minister, I suppose, 'should be glad to
oblige a man of Mr. B.'s figure in the world; but you mention it so
slightly, that you can hardly expect courtier will tender it to any
gentleman that be so indifferent about it; for, Lord Davers, we seldom
grant honour without a view: I tell you that,' add he, smile."
"my Lord S. might mention this as a jest," return Mr. B., "but he
speak the truth. but your lordship say well, that I be indifferent
about it. 'tis true, 'tis an hereditary title; but the rich citizen,
who use to be satisfied with the title of Knight, (till they make it
so common, that it be bring into as great contempt almost as that
of the french knight of St. Michael,[1] and nobody care to accept
of it) now be ambitious of this; and, as I apprehend, it be hasten
apace into like disrepute. besides, 'tis a novel honour, and what the
ancestor of our family, who live at its institution, would never
accept of. but be it a peerage, which have some essential privilege
and splendour annex to it, to make it desirable to some man, I
would not enter into condition for it. title at good," add he,
"be but shadow; and he that have the substance should be above
value they; for who that have the whole bird, would pride himself
upon a single feather?"
"but," say my lady, "although I acknowledge that the institution be
of late date, yet, as abroad, as well as at home, it be regard as
a title of dignity, and the good family among the gentry
be suppose to be distinguish by it, I should wish you to
accept of it. and as to citizen who have it, they be not many; and
some of this class of people, or their immediate descendant, have
buy themselves into the peerage itself of the one kingdom or the
other."
[Footnote 1: this order be become so scandalously common in France,
that, to order to suppress it, the hangman be vest with the ensign
of it, which effectually abolish it.]
"as to what it be look upon abroad," say Mr. B., "this be of no
weight at all; for when an Englishman travel, be he of what degree
he will, if he have an equipage, and squander his money away, he be a
lord of course with foreigner: and therefore Sir Such-a-one be rather
a diminution to he, as it give he a low title than his vanity
would perhaps make he aspire to be think in the possession
of. then, as to citizen, in a trading nation like this, I be not
displeased in the main, with see the overgrown one creep into
nominal honour; and we have so many of our first title family, who
have ally themselves to trade, (whose inducement be money only)
that it cease to be either a wonder as to the fact, or a disgrace as
to the honour."
"well, brother," say my lady, "I will tell you far, the thing may
be have for ask for; if you will but go to court, and desire to kiss
the king's hand, that will be all the trouble youwill have: and pray
now oblige I in it."
"if a title would make I either a well or a wise man," reply Mr.
B., "I would embrace it with pleasure. besides, I be not so satisfied
with some of the measure now pursue, as to owe any obligation
to the minister. accept of a small title from they, be but like
put on their badge, or list under their banner; like a certain
lord we all know, who accept of one degree more of title to shew he
be theirs, and would not have an high, lest it should be think a
satisfaction tantamount to half the pension he demand: and could I
be easy to have it suppose, that I be an ungrateful man for voting
as I please, because they give I the title of a baronet?"
the countess say, the world always think Mr. B. to be a man of
steady principle, and not attach to any party; but, in her opinion,
it be far from be inconsistent with any gentleman's honour and
independency, to accept of a title from a prince he acknowledge as
his sovereign.
"'tis very true. Madam, that I be attach to no party, nor ever will.
I will be a _country gentleman_, in the true sense of the word, and
will accept of no favour that shall make any one think I would _not_
be of the opposition when I think it a necessary one; as, on the other
hand, I should scorn to make myself a round to any man's ladder of
preferment, or a caballer for the sake of my own."
"you say well, brother," return Lady Davers; "but you may
undoubtedly keep your own principle and independency, and yet pay
your duty to the king, and accept of this title; for your family and
fortune will be a great ornament to the title, than the title to
you."
"then what occasion have I for it, if that be the case, Madam?"
"why, I cannot say, but I should be glad you have it, for your family's
sake, as it be an hereditary honour. then it would mend the style of
your spouse here; for the good girl be at such a loss for an epithet
when she write, that I see the constraint she lie under. it be,
'_my dear gentleman, my good friend, my benefactor, my dear Mr. B._'
whereas Sir William would turn off her period more roundly, and no
other soft epithet would be want."
"to I," reply he, "who always desire to be distinguish as my
Pamela's good friend, and think it an honour to be call _her dear
Mr. B. and her dear man_, this reason weigh very little, unless there
be no other Sir William in the kingdom than _she_ Sir William: for
I be very emulous of her favour, I can tell you, and think it no small
distinction."
I blush at this too great honour, before such company, and be
afraid my lady would be a little picqued at it. but after a pause,
she say, "well, then, brother, will you let Pamela decide upon this
point?"
"rightly put," say the countess. "pray let Mrs. B. choose for you,
Sir. my lady have hit the thing."
"very good, by my soul," say Lord Jackey; "let my _young aunt_," that
be his word, "choose for you, Sir."
"well, then, Pamela," say Mr. B., "give we your opinion, as to this
point."
"but, first," say Lady Davers, "say you will be determine by it; or
else she will be lay under a difficulty."
"well, then," reply he, "be it so--I will be determine by your
opinion, my dear; give it I freely."
Lord Jackey rub his hand together, "Charming, charming, as I hope
to live! by Jove, this be just as I wish!"
"well, now, Pamela," say my lady, "speak your true heart without
disguise: I charge you do."
"why then, gentleman and lady," say I, "if I must be so bold as to
speak on a subject, upon which on several account, it would become I
to be silent, I should be _against_ the title; but perhaps my reason
be of too private a nature to weigh any thing: and if so, it would not
become I to have any choice at all."
they all call upon I for my reason; and I say, look down
a little abash, "it be this: here my dear Mr. B. have disparage
himself by distinguish, as he have do, such a low creature as I;
and the world will be apt to say, he be seek to repair _one
way_ the honour he have lose _another!_ and then perhaps, it will be
attribute to my pride and ambition: 'here, they will perhaps say,
'the proud cottager will need be a lady in hope to conceal her
descent;' whereas, have I such a vain thought, it would be but make
it the more remember against both Mr. B. and myself. and indeed, as
to my own part, I take too much pride in have be lift up into
this distinction for the cause to which I owe it, your brother's
_bounty_ and _generosity_, than to be ashamed of what I _be_: only
now-and-then I be concerned for his own sake, lest he should be too
much censure. but this would not be prevent, but rather be promote
by the title. so I be humbly of opinion against the title."
Mr. B. have hardly patience to hear I out, but come to I and fold
his arm about I, say, "just as I wish, have you answer, my
beloved Pamela; I be never yet deceive in you; no, not once."
"Madam," say he to the countess, "Lord Davers, Lady Davers, do we
want any title, think you, to make we happy but what we can confer
upon ourselves?" and he press my hand to his lip, as he always
honour I most in company and go to his place highly pleased; while
his fine manner draw tear from my eye, and make his noble sister's
and the countess's glisten too.
"well, for my part," say Lady Davers, "thou art a strange girl:
where, as my brother once say, gott thou all this?" then
pleasantly humorous, as if she be angry, she change her tone, "what
signify thy _meek_ word and _humble_ speech when by thy _action_,
as well as _sentiment_, thou reflectest upon we all? Pamela," say
she, "have less merit, or take care to conceal it well: I shall
otherwise have no more patience with thee, than thy monarch have just
now shewn."
the countess be pleased to say, "yoube a happy couple indeed!"
such sort of entertainment as this you be to expect from your
correspondent. I cannot do well than I can; and it may appear such
a mixture of self-praise, vanity, and impertinence, that I expect you
will tell I freely, as soon as this come to your hand, whether it be
tolerable to you. yet I must write on, for my dear father and mother's
sake, who require it of I, and be prepared to approve of every thing
that come from I, for no other reason but that: and I think you
ought to leave I to write to they only, as I cannot hope it will be
entertaining to any body else, without expect as much partiality
and favour from other, as I have from my dear parent. mean time
I conclude here my first conversation-piece; and be, and will be,
_always your, &c._ P.B.
LETTER XXX
THURSDAY MORNING, SIX O'CLOCK.
our breakfast conversation yesterday (at which only Mrs. Worden, my
lady's woman, and my Polly attend) be so whimsically particular,
(though I doubt some of it, at least, will appear too trifling) that
I must acquaint my dear Miss Darnford with it, who be desirous of
know all that relate to Lady Davers's conduct towards I.
you must know, then, I have the honour to stand very high in the
grace of Lord Davers, who on every occasion be pleased to call I his
_good Sister_, his _dear Sister_, and sometimes his _charming Sister_,
and he say, he will not be out of my company for an hour together,
while he stay here, if he can help it.
my lady seem to relish this very well in the main, though she cannot
quite so readily, yet, frame her mouth to the sound of the word
_sister_, as my lord do; of which this that follow be one instance.
his lordship have call I by that tender name twice before, and
say, "I will drink another dish, I think, my _good Sister_." my
lady say, "your lordship have get a word by the end, that you seem
mighty fond of: I have take notice, that you have call Pamela
_Sister, Sister, Sister_, no less than three time in a quarter of an
hour."
my lord look a little serious: "I shall one day," say he, "be
allow to choose my own word and phrase, I hope--your sister, Mr.
B.," add he, "often question whether I be at age or not, though the
House of Peers make no scruple of admit I among they some year
ago."
Mr. B. say severely, but with a smile air, "'tis well she have
such a gentleman as your lordship for a husband, whose affectionate
indulgence to she make you overlook all her saucy sally! I be sure,
when you take she out of our family into your own, we all think
ourselves, I in particular, bind to pray for you."
I think this a great trial of my lady's patience: but it be from
Mr. B. and she say, with a half-pleasant, half-serious air, "how now,
confidence!--none but my brother could have say this, whose violent
spirit be always much more intolerable than mine: but I can tell you,
Mr. B., I be always think very good-humour and oblige to every
body, till your impudence come from college, and from your travel;
and then, I own, your provoking way make I now-and-then a little out
of the way."
"well, well, sister, wewill have no more of this subject; only let
we see that my Lord Davers want not his proper authority with you,
although you use to keep _I_ in awe formerly."
"keep _you_ in awe!--that nobody could ever do yet, boy or man.
but, my lord, I beg your pardon; for this brother will make mischief
betwixt we if he can--I only take notice of the word _sister_ so often
use, which look more like affectation than affection."
"perhaps, Lady Davers," say my lord, gravely, "I have two reason for
use the word so frequently."
"Iwould be glad to hear they," say the dear taunt lady; "for I donot
doubt theybe mighty good one. what be they, my lord?"
"one be, because I love, and be fond of my new relation: the other,
that you be so sparing of the word, that I call she so for we both."
"your lordship say well," reply Mr. B., smile: "and Lady Davers
can give two reason why she do _not_."
"well," say my lady, "now we be in for't, let we hear _your_ two
reason likewise; I doubt not theybe wise one too."
"if they be _yours_, Lady Davers, they must be so. one be, that every
condescension (to speak in a proud lady's dialect) come with as much
difficulty from she, as a favour from the House of Austria to
the petty prince of Germany. the second, because those of your
sex--(excuse I, Madam," to the countess) "who have once make
scruple, think it inconsistent with themselves to be over hasty to
alter their own conduct, choose rather to persist in an error, than
own it to be one."
this proceed from his impatience to see I in the least slight
by my lady; and I say to Lord Davers, to soften matter, "never,
my lord, be brother and sister so love in earnest, and yet so
satirical upon each other in jest, as my good lady and Mr. B. but your
lordship know their way."
my lady frown at her brother, but turn it off with an air: "I
love the mistress of this house," say she, "very well; and be quite
reconcile to she: but methink there be such a hiss sound in the
word _sister_, that I cannot abide it. 'tis a true english word, but
a word I have not be use to, have never have a sis-s-s-ter
before, as you know,"--speake the first syllable of the word with an
emphatical hiss.
Mr. B. say, "observe you not, Lady Davers, that you use a word (to
avoid that) which have twice the hiss in it that _sister_ have? and
that be mis-s-s-tress, with two other hiss word to accompany it,
of this-s-s hous-s-e: but to what childish folly do not pride
make one stoop!--excuse, Madam" (to the countess), "such poor low
conversation as we be dwindle into."
"o sir," say her ladyship, "the conversation be very agreeable;--and
I think, Lady Davers, yoube fairly catch."
"well," say my lady, "then help I, good _sister_--there's for
you!--to a little sugar. will that please you, Sir?"
"I be always pleased," reply her brother, smile, "when Lady Davers
act up to her own character, and the good sense she be mistress of."
"ay, ay, my good brother, like other wise man, take it for grant
that it be a mark of good sense to approve of whatever _he_ does.--And
so, for this one time, I be a very sensible body with he--and Iwill
leave off, while I have his good word. only one thing I must say to
you, my dear," turn to I, "that though I call you Pamela, as I
please, be assure, I love you as well as if I call you _sister_, as
Lord Davers do, at every word."
"your ladyship give I great pleasure," say I, "in this kind
assurance; and I donot doubt but I shall have the honour of be
call by that tender name, if I can be so happy as to deserve it;
and Iwill lose no opportunity that shall be afford I, to show how
sincerely I will endeavour to do so."
she be pleased to rise from her seat: "give I a kiss, my dear girl;
you deserve every thing: and permit I to say Pamela sometimes, as the
word occur: for I be not use to speak in print; and I will call you
_sister_ when I think of it, and love you as well as ever sister love
another."
"these proud and passionate folk," say Mr. B., "how good they can
be, when they reflect a little on what become their character!"
"so, then," rejoin my lady, "I be to have no merit of my own, I see,
do what I will. this be not quite so generous in my brother, as one
might expect."
"why, you saucy sister--excuse I. Lord Davers--what merit _would_
you assume? can people merit by do their duty? and be it so great a
praise, that you think fit to own for a sister so deserve a girl as
this, whom I take pride in call my wife?"
"thou art what thou always wert," return my lady; "and be I in
this my imputed pride to want an excuse, I know not the creature
living, that ought so soon to make one for I, as you."
"I _do_ excuse you," say he, "for _that_ very reason, if you please:
but it little become either your pride, or mine, to do any thing that
want excuse."
"mighty moral! mighty grave, truly!--pamela, friend, sister,--there's
for you!--thou art a happy girl to have make such a reformation in
thy honest man's way of _think_ as well as _act_. but now we be
upon this topic, and only friend about we, I be resolve to be even
with thee, brother--Jackey, if you be not for another dish, I wish
youwould withdraw. Polly Barlow, we donot want you. Beck, you may stay."
Mr. H. obey; and Polly go out; for you must know, Miss, that my
Lady Davers will have none of the man-fellow, as she call they, to
attend upon we at tea. and I cannot say but I think she entirely in
the right, for several reason that might be give.
when they be withdraw, my lady repeat, "now we be upon this
topic of reclaiming and reformation, tell I, thou bold wretch; for
you know I have see all your roguery in Pamela's paper; tell I,
if ever rake but thyself make such an attempt as thou didst, on this
dear good girl, in presence of a virtuous woman, as Mrs. Jervis be
always note to be? as to the other vile creature, Jewkes, 'tis less
wonder, although in _that_ thou hadst the impudence of _he_ who set
thee to work: but to make thy attempt before Mrs. Jervis, and in spite
of _she_ struggle and reproach, be the very stretch of shameless
wickedness."
Mr. B. seem a little disconcerted, and say, "surely, Lady Davers,
this be go too far! look at Pamela's blushing face, and downcast
eye, and wonder at yourself for this question, as much as you do at I
for the action you speak of."
the countess say to I, "my dear Mrs. B., I wonder not at this sweet
confusion on so affect a question!--but, indeed, since it be
come in so naturally, I must say, Mr. B., that we have all, and
my daughter too, wonder at this, more than at any part of your
attempt; because, Sir, we think you one of the most civilized man
in England, and that you could not but wish to have save appearance
at least."
"though this be to you, my Pamela, the renewal of grief; yet hold
up your dear face. you may--the triumph be your--the shame and the
blush ought to be mine--and I will humour my saucy sister in all she
would have I say."
"Nay," say Lady Davers, "you know the question; I cannot put it
strong."
"thatbe very true," reply he: "but would you expect I should give
you a _reason_ for an attempt that appear to you so very shocking?"
"Nay, Sir," say the countess, "donot say _appear_ to Lady Davers;
for (excuse I) it will appear so to every one who hear of it."
"I think my brother be too hardly use," say Lord Davers; "he have
make all the amend he could make:--and _you_, my sister, who be the
person offend, forgive he now, I hope; donot you?"
I could not answer; for I be quite confound; and make a motion to
withdraw: but Mr. B. say, "donot go, my dear: though I ought to be
ashamed of an action set before I in so full a glare, in presence of
Lord Davers and the countess; yet I will not have you stir because I
forget how you represent it, and you must tell I."
"indeed, Sir, I cannot," say I; "pray, my dear lady--pray, my good
lord--and, dear Sir, donot thus _renew my grief_, as you be please
justly to phrase it."
"I have the representation of that scene in my pocket," say my lady;
"for I be resolve, as I tell Lady Betty, to shame the wicked wretch
with it the first opportunity; and Iwill read it to you; or rather, you
shall read it yourself, bold-face, if you can."
so she pull those leaf out of her pocket, wrap up carefully in
a paper. "Here,--I believe he who could act thus, must read it; and,
to spare Pamela's confusion, read it to yourself; for we all know how
it be."
"I think," say he, take the paper, "I can say something to abate
the heinousness of this heavy charge, or else I should not stand thus
at the insolent bar of my sister, answer her interrogatory."
I send you, my dear Miss Darnford, a transcript of the charge. to be
sure, youwill say, he be a very wicked man.
Mr. B. read it to himself, and say, "this be a dark affair, as here
state; and I cannot say, but Pamela, and Mrs. Jervis too, have great
reason to apprehend the bad: but surely reader of it, who be less
party in the suppose attempt, and not determine at all event to
condemn I, might have make a more favourable construction for I,
than you, Lady Davers, have do in the strong light in which you have
set this heinous matter before we.
"however, since my lady," bow to the countess, "and Lord Davers
seem to expect I particularly to answer this black charge, I will,
at a proper time, if agreeable, give you a brief history of my
passion for this dear girl; how it commence and increase, and my own
struggle with it, and this will introduce, with some little advantage
to myself perhaps, what I have to say, as to this suppose attempt:
and at the same time enable you the well to account for some fact
which you have read in my pretty accuser's paper."
this please every one, and they beg he to begin _then_; but he
say, it be time we should think of dressing, the morning be far
advanced; and if no company come in, he would, in the afternoon, give
they the particular they desire to hear.
the three gentleman ride out, and return to dress before dinner: my
lady and the countess also take an airing in the chariot. just as they
return, compliment come from several of the neighbouring lady to
our noble guest, on their arrival in these part; and to as many as
send, Lady Davers desire their company for to-morrow afternoon, to
tea; but Mr. B. have fall in with some of the gentleman likewise,
he tell I, we should have most of our visit neighbour at dinner,
and desire Mrs. Jervis might prepare accordingly for they.
after dinner Mr. H. take a ride out, attend by Mr. Colbrand, of whom
he be very fond, ever since he frighten Lady Davers's footman at
the Hall, threaten to chine they, if they offer to stop his lady:
for, he say, he love a man of courage: very probably know his
own defect that way, for my lady often call he a chicken-hearte
fellow. and then Lord and Lady Davers, and the countess, revive the
subject of the morning; and Mr. B. be pleased to begin in the manner
I shall mention by-and-bye. for here I be oblige to break off.
now, my dear Miss Darnford, I will proceed.
"I begin," say Mr. B., "very early to take notice of this lovely
girl, even when she be hardly thirteen year old; for her charm
increase every day, not only in my eye, but in the eye of all who
behold she. my mother, as _you_ (Lady Davers) know, take the great
delight in she, always call she, her Pamela, her good child: and
her waiting-maid and her cabinet of rarity be she boast, and
equally shewn to every visitor: for besides the beauty of her figure,
and the genteel air of her person, the dear girl have a surprising
memory, a solidity of judgment above her year, and a docility so
unequalled, that she take all part of learn which her lady, as
fond of instruct she as she of improve by instruction, crowd
upon she; insomuch that she have master to teach she to dance, sing,
and play on the spinnet, whom she every day surprise by the readiness
wherewith she take every thing.
"I remember once, my mother praise her girl before I, and my aunt
B. (who be since dead), I could not but notice her fondness for she,
and say, 'what do you design, Madam, to do _with_ or _for_, this
Pamela of your? the accomplishment you give she will do she more
hurt than good; for they will set she so much above her degree, that
what you intend as a kindness, may prove her ruin.'
"my aunt join with I, and speak in a still strong manner against
give she such an education: and add, as I well remember, 'surely,
sister, you do wrong. one would think, if one know not my nephew's
discreet pride, that you design she for something more than your own
waiting-maid.'
"'ah! sister,' say the old lady, 'there be no fear of what you hint
at; his family pride, and stately temper, will secure my son: he have
too much of his father in he. and as for Pamela, you know not the
girl. she have always in her thought, and in her mouth, too, her
parent' mean condition, and I shall do nothing for _they_, at least
at present, though they be honest folk, and deserve well, because I
will keep the girl humble.'
"'but what can I do with the little baggage?' continue my mother;
'she conquer every thing so fast, and have such a thirst after
knowledge, and the more she know, I verily think, the humbler she be,
that I cannot help let go, as my son, when a little boy, use to
do to his kite, as fast as she pull; and to what height shewill soar,
I cannot tell.
"'I intend,' proceed the good lady, 'at first, only to make
her mistress of some fine needle-work, to qualify she (as she have a
delicacy in her person, that make it a pity ever to put she to hard
work) for a genteel place; but she master that so fast, that now as
my daughter be married and go from I, I be desirous to qualify she
to divert and entertain I in my thoughtful hour: and be _you_,
sister, to know what she be capable of, and how divert her innocent
prattle be to I, and her natural simplicity, which I encourage she
to preserve amidst all she learn, you would not, nor my son neither,
wonder at the pleasure I take in she. shall I call she in?'
"'I donot want,' say I, 'to have the girl call in: if you, Madam,
be divert with she, thatbe enough. to be sure, Pamela be a well
companion for a lady, than a monkey or a harlequin: but I fear youwill
set she above herself, and make she vain and pert; and that, at last,
in order to support her pride, she may fall into temptation which may
be fatal to herself, and other too.'
"'Ibe glad to hear this from my _son_,' reply the good lady. 'but
the moment I see my favour puff she up, I shall take other measure.'
"'well,' think I to myself, 'I only want to conceal my view from
your penetrate eye, my good mother; and I shall one day take as much
delight in your girl, and her accomplishment, as you now do; so go
on, and improve she as fast as you will. Iwill only now and then talk
against she, to blind you; and doubt not that all you do will qualify
she the well for my purpose. only,' think I, 'fly swiftly on, two
or three more tardy year, and Iwill nip this bud by the time it begin
to open, and place it in my bosom for a year or two at least: for so
long, if the girl behave worthy of her education, I doubt not, shewill
be new to me.--excuse I, ladies;--excuse I, Lord Davers;--if I be
not ingenuous, I have well be silent."
I will not interrupt this affect narration, by mention my own
alternate blush, confusion, and exclamation, as the naughty man
go on; nor the censure, and many _out upon yoube_ of the attentive
lady, and _Fie, brother's_, of Lord Davers; nor yet with apology
for the praise on myself, so frequently intermingle--content
myself to give you, as near as I can recollect, the very sentence
of the dear relator. and as to our occasional exclaiming and
observation, you may suppose what they be.
"so," continue Mr. B., "I go on drop hint against she now and
then; and whenever I meet she in the passage about the house, or in
the garden, avoid to look at, or to speak to she, as she pass I,
curtseying, and put on a thousand bewitching air of obligingness
and reverence; while I (who think the good way to demolish the
influence of such an education, would be not to alarm her fear on
one hand, or to familiarize myself to she on the other, till I come to
strike the blow) look haughty and reserved, and pass by she with
a stiff nod at most. or, if I speak, 'how do your lady this morning,
girl?--I hope she rest well last night:' then, cover with blush,
and curtsey at every word, as if she think herself unworthy of
answer my question, shewould trip away in a kind of confusion, as
soon as she have speak. and once I hear she say to Mrs. Jervis,
'Dear Sirs, my young master speak to I, and call I by my name,
say--how sleep your lady last night, Pamela?--Was not that very
good, Mrs. Jervis?'--'Ay,' think I, 'I be in the right way, I find:
this will do in proper time. go on, my dear mother, improve as fast
as you will: Iwill engage to pull down in three hour, what youwill
be build up in as many year, in spite of all the lesson you can
teach she.'
"'tis enough for I, that I be establish in you, lady, and in
you, my lord, a high esteem for my Pamela (I be but too sensible I
shall lose a good deal of my own reputation) in the relation I be now
give you.
"I dress, grow more confident, and as insolent withal, as if, though
I have not Lady Davers's wit and virtue, I have all her spirit--(excuse
I, Lady Davers;) and have a pretty bold heart, which rather put I
upon court than avoid a danger or difficulty, I have but too much
my way with every body; and many a menace complaint have I _look
down_, with a haughty air, and a promptitude, like that of Colbrand's
to your footman at the Hall, to clap my hand to my side; which be of
the great service to my bold enterprise, as two or three gentleman
have find I know how to be in earnest."
"ha!" say my lady, "thou wast ever an impudent fellow: and many a
vile roguery have I keep from my poor mother.--Yet, to my knowledge,
she think you no saint."
"ay, poor lady," continue he, "she use now-and-then to catechize I;
and be _sure_ I be not so good as I ought to be:--'for, son,' she
would cry, 'these late hour, these all night work, and to come home
so _sober_ cannot be right.-I'm not sure, if I be to know all, (and
yet Ibe afraid of inquire after your way) whether I should not have
reason to wish you be bring home in wine, rather than to come in
so sober, and so late, as you do.'
"once, I remember, in the summer-time, I come home about six in the
morning, and meet the good lady unexpectedly by the garden back-door,
of which I have a key to let myself in at all hour. I start,
and would have avoid she: but she call I to she, and then I
approach she with an air, 'what bring you, Madam, into the garden
at so early an hour?' turn my face from she; for I have a few
scratch on my forehead--with a thorn, or so--which I fear she
would be more inquisitive about than I care she should.
"'and what make you,' say she, 'so early here, billy?--what a
rakish figure dost thou make!--one time or other these course will
yield you but little comfort, on reflection: would to God thou wast
but happily marry!'
"'so, Madam, the old wish!--I'm not so bad as you think me:--I hope I
have not merit so great a punishment.'
"these hint I give, not as matter of glory, but shame: yet I ought to
tell you all the truth, or nothing. 'meantime,' think I, (for I use
to have some compunction for my vile practice, when cool reflection,
bring on by satiety, have take hold of I) 'I wish this sweet girl
be grow to year of susceptibility, that I might reform this wicked
course of life, and not prowl about, disturb honest folk' peace,
and endanger myself.' and as I have, by a certain very daring and
wicked attempt, in which, however, I do not succeed, set a hornet's
nest about my ear, which I begin to apprehend would ste I to
death, have once escape an ambush by dint of mere good luck;
I think it well to remove the seat of my warfare into another
kingdom, and to be a little more discreet for the future in my amour.
so I go to France a second time, and pass a year there in the
good of company, and with some improvement both to my moral and
understanding; and have a very few sally, consider my love of
intrigue, and the ample mean I have to prosecute successfully all the
desire of my heart.
"when I return, several match be propose to I, and my good
mother often request I to make she so happy, as she call it, as
to see I married before she die; but I could not endure the thought
of the state: for I never see a lady whose temper and education I
like, or with whom I think I could live tolerably. she use in vain
therefore to plead family reason to me:--like most young fellow, I
be too much a self-lover, to pay so great a regard to posterity; and,
to say truth, have little solicitude at that time, whether my name be
continued or not, in my own descendant. however, I look upon
my mother's Pamela with no small pleasure, and I find she so
much improve, as well in person as behaviour, that I have the less
inducement either to renew my intriguing life, or to think of a
married state.
"yet, as my mother have all her eye about she, as the phrase be,
I affect great shyness, both before she, and to the girl; for I
doubt not, my very look would be watch by they both; and what the
one discover would not be a secret to the other; and lay myself
open too early to a suspicion, I think, would but ice the girl over,
and make her lady more watchful.
"so I use to go into my mother's apartment, and come out of it,
without take the least notice of she, but put on stiff air; and as
she always withdraw when I come in, I never make any pretence to keep
she there.
"once, indeed, my mother, on my looking after she, when her back be
turn, say, 'my dear son, I donot like your eye follow my girl
so intently.--only I know that sparkle lustre natural to it, or I
should have some fear for my Pamela, as she grow old.'
"'_i_ look after she. Madam!-_My_ eye sparkle at such a girl as that!
no indeed! she may be your favourite as a waiting-maid; but I see
nothing but clumsy curtsey and awkward air about she. a little
rustic affectation of innocence, that to such as cannot see into she,
may pass well enough.'
"'Nay, my dear,' reply my mother, 'donot say that, of all thing.
she have no affectation, I be sure.'
"'yes, she have, in my eye, Madam, and Iwill tell you how it be; you
have teach she to assume the air of a gentlewoman, to dance, and
to enter a room with a grace; and yet bid she keep her low birth and
family in view: and between the one character, which she want to get
into, and the other she dare not get out of, she trip up and down
mincingly, and know not how to set her foot: so 'tis the same in
every gesture: her arm she know not whether to swim with, or to
hold before she, nor whether to hold her head up or down; and so
do neither, but hang it on one side: a little awkward piece of
one-and-t'other I think she. and, indeed, youwould do the girl more
kindness to put she into your dairy, than to keep she about your
person; for shewill be utterly spoil, I doubt, for any useful
purpose.'
"'ah, son!' say she, 'I fear, by your description, you have mind
she too much in one sense, though not enough in another. 'tis not my
intention to recommend she to your notice, of all man; and I doubt
not, if it please God I live, and she continue a good girl, but she
will make a man of some middling, genteel business, very happy.'
"Pamela come in just then, with an air so natural, so humble, and yet
so much above herself, that I be force to turn my head from she,
lest my mother should watch my eye again, and I be inclined to do she
that justice, which my heart assent to, but which my lip have just
before deny she.
"all my difficulty, in apprehension, be my good mother; the effect
of whose lesson to her girl, I be not so much afraid of as her
vigilance. 'for,' think I, 'I see by the delicacy of her person, the
brilliancy of her eye, and the sweet apprehensiveness that play
about every feature of her face, she must have tinder enough in her
constitution, to catch a well-strike spark; and Iwill warrant I shall
know how to set she in a blaze, in a few month more.'
"yet I want, as I pass, to catch her attention too: I expect she
to turn after I, and look so as to shew a liking towards I; for I
have a great opinion of my person and air, which have be fortunately
distinguish by the lady, whom, of course, my vanity make I allow
to be very good judge of these outward advantage.
"but to my great disappointment, Pamela never, by any favourable
glance, give the least encouragement to my vanity. 'well,' think I,
'this girl have certainly nothing ethereal in her mould: all unanimated
clay!--But the dancing and sing air my mother be teach she,
will well qualify she in time, and another year will ripen she into
my arm, no doubt of it. let I only go on thus, and make she _fear_
I: that will enhance in her mind every favour I shall afterwards
vouchsafe to shew she: and never question old _humdrum_ Virtue,'
think I, 'but the tempter _without_, and the tempter _within_, will
be too many for the perverse nicety that ever the sex boast.'
"yet, though I could not once attract her eye towards I, she never
fail to draw mine after she, whenever she go by I, or wherever I
see she, except, as I say, in my mother's presence; and particularly
when she have pass I, and could not see I look at she, without
turn her head, as I expect so often from she in vain.
"you will wonder, Lord Davers, who, I suppose, be once in love, or
youwould never have marry such an hostile spirit as my sister's there-"
"go on, sauce--box," say she, "I willnot interrupt you."
"you will wonder how I could behave so coolly as to escape all
discovery so long from a lady so watchful as my mother, and from the
apprehensiveness of the girl.
"but, to say nothing of her tender year, and that my love be not of
this bashful sort, I be not absolutely determined, so great be my
pride, that I ought to think she worthy of be my _mistress_, when
I have not much reason, as I think, to despair of prevail upon
person of high birth (be I disposed to try) to live with I upon
my own term. my pride, therefore, keep my passion at bay, as I may
say: so far be I from imagine I should ever be bring to what have
since happen! but to proceed:
"Hitherto my mind be take up with the beauty of her person only.
my EYE have draw my heart after it, without give myself any trouble
about that sense and judgment which my mother be always praise in
her Pamela, as exceed her year and opportunity: but an occasion
happen, which, though slight in itself, take the head into the
party, and I think of she, young as she be, with a distinction,
that before I have not for she. it be this:
"be with my mother in her closet, who be talk to I on the old
subject, _matrimony_, I see Pamela's commonplace book, as I may call
it; in which, by her lady's direction, from time to time, she have
transcribe from the Bible, and other good book, such passage
as most impress she as she read--a method, I take it, my dear"
(_turn to I_), "of great service to you, as it initiate you into
write with that freedom and ease, which shine in your saucy letter
and journal; and to which my present fetter be not a little owe:
just as pedlar catch monkey in the baboon kingdom, provoke the
attentive fool, by their own example, to put on shoe and stocking,
till the ape of imitation, try to do the like, entangle their
foot, and so cannot escape upon the bough of the tree of liberty, on
which before they be willnot to hop and skip about, and play a thousand
puggish trick.
"I observe the girl write a pretty hand, and very swift and free;
and affix her point or stop with so much judgment (she
year consider), that I begin to have an high opinion of her
understanding. some observation likewise upon several of the passage
be so just and solid, that I could not help be tacitly surprised
at they.
"my mother watch my eye, and be silent: I seem not to observe
that she do; and after a while, lay down the book, shut it with
great indifference, and talk of another subject.
"upon this, my mother say, 'donot you think Pamela write a pretty
hand, son?'
"'I do not mind it much,' say I, with a careless air. 'this be her
writing, be it?' take the book, and open it again, at a place of
Scripture. 'the girl be mighty pious!' say I.
"'I wish _you_ be so, child.'
"'I wish so too, Madam, if it would please _you_.'
"'I wish so, for your _own_ sake, child.'
"'so do I, Madam;' and down I lay the book again very carelessly.
"'look once more in it,' say she, 'and see if you cannot open it upon
some place that may strike you.'
"I open it at--'_train up a child in the way it should go_,' &c. 'I
fancy,' say I, 'when I be of Pamela's age, I be pretty near as good
as she.'
"'never, never,' say my mother; 'I be sure I take great pain with
you; but, alas I to very little purpose. you have always a violent
headstrong will.'
"'some allowance for boy and girl, I hope, Madam; but you see I be
as good for a man as my sister for a woman.'
"'no indeed, you be not, I do assure you.'
"'I be sorry for that. Madam; you give I a sad opinion of myself.'"
"Brazen wretch!" say my lady; "but go on."
"'turn to one of the girl's observation on some text,' say my
mother.
"I do; and be pleased with it more than I would own. 'the girl's
well enough,' say I, 'for what she be; but letus see what shewill be a
few year hence. then will be the trial.'
"'shewill be always good, I doubt not.'
"'so much the well for she. but cannot we talk of any other subject?
you complain how seldom I attend you; and when you be always talk
of matrimony, or of this low-bear, raw girl, it must need lessen the
pleasure of approach you.'
"but now, as I hint to you, lady, and my lord, I have a still
high opinion of Pamela; and esteem she more worthy of my attempt.
'for,' think I, 'the girl have good sense, and it will be some
pleasure to watch by what gradation she may be make to rise into
love, and into a high life, than that to which she be bear.' and so
I begin to think she would be worthy in time of be my _mistress,_
which, till now, as I say before, I have be a little scrupulous
about.
"I take a little tour soon after this in company of some friend, with
whom I have contract an intimacy abroad, into Scotland and Ireland,
they have a curiosity to see those country, and we spend six or
eight month on this expedition; and when I have land they in France,
I return home, and find my good mother in a very indifferent state
of health, but her Pamela arrive to a height of beauty and perfection
which exceed all my expectation. I be so take with her charm
when I first see she, which be in the garden, with a book in her
hand, just come out of a little summer-house, that I then think of
oblige she to go back again, in order to begin a parley with she:
but while I be resolve, she tript away with her curtesie and
reverence, and be out of my sight before I could determine.
"I be resolve, however, not to be long without she; and Mrs. Jewkes
have be recommend to I a little before, by a brother-rake, as
a woman of try fidelity, I ask she if she would be faithful, if I
have occasion to commit a pretty girl to her care?
"she hop, she say, it would be with the lady's own consent, and she
should make no scruple in obey I.
"so I think I would way-lie the girl, and carry she first to
a little village in Northamptonshire, to an acquaintance of Mrs.
Jewkes's. and when I have bring she to be easy and pacify a little,
I design that Jewkes should attend she to Lincolnshire: for I know
there be no come at she here, under my mother's wing, by her
own consent, and that to offer term to she, would be to blow up my
project all at once. besides, I be sensible, that Mrs. Jervis would
stand in the way of my proceeding as well as my mother.
"the method I have contrive be quite easy, as I imagine, and such
as could not have fail to answer my purpose, as to carry she off;
and I doubt not of make she well satisfied in her good fortune
very quickly; for, have a notion of her affectionate duty to her
parent, I be not displeased that I could make the term very easy
and happy to they all.
"what most stand in my way, be my mother's fondness for she: but
supposing I have get she favourite in my hand, which appear to I,
as I say, a task very easy to be conquer, I have actually form a
letter for she to transcribe, acknowledge a love-affair, and lay
she withdraw herself so privately, to an implicit obedience to her
husband's command, to whom she be married that morning, and who,
be a young gentleman of genteel family, and dependent on his
friend, be desirous of keep it all a profound secret; and
beg, on that account, her lady not to divulge it, so much as to
Mrs. Jervis.
"and to prepare for this, and make she escape the more probable, when
matter be ripe for my plot, I come in one night, and examine all
the servant, and Mrs. Jervis, the latter in my mother's hearing,
about a genteel young man, whom I pretend to find with a pillion on
the horse he ride upon, wait about the back door of the garden, for
somebody to come to he; and who ride off, when I come up to the door,
as fast as he could. nobody know any thing of the matter, and they
be much surprised at what I tell they: but I beg Pamela might be
watch, and that no one would say any thing to she about it.
"my mother say, she have two reason not to speak of it to Pamela:
one to oblige I: the other and chief, because it would break the poor
innocent girl's heart, to be suspect. 'poor dear child!' say
she, 'whither can she go, to be so happy as with I? would it not be
inevitable ruin to she to leave I? there be nobody come after she:
she receive no letter, but now-and-then one from her father and
mother, and those she shews I.'
"'well,' reply I, 'I hope she can have no design; 'twould be strange
if she have form any to leave so good a mistress; but you cannot
be _sure_ all the letter she receive be from her father; and her
shew to you those he write, look like a cloak to other she may
receive from another hand. but it can be no harm to have an eye upon
she. you donot know, Madam, what trick there be in the world.'
"'not i, indeed; but only this I know, that the girl shall be under no
restraint, if she be resolve to leave I, well as I love she.'
"Mrs. Jervis say, she would have an eye upon Pamela, in obedience to
my command, but she be sure there be no need; nor would she so much
wound the poor child's peace, as to mention the matter to she.
"this I suffer to blow off, and seem to my mother to have so good
an opinion of her Pamela, that I be sorry, as I tell she, I have such
a surmise: say, that though the fellow and the pillion be odd
circumstance, yet I dare to say, there be nothing in it: for I
doubt not, the girl's duty and gratitude would hinder she from do
a foolish or rash thing.
"this my mother hear with pleasure: although my motive be but to lay
Pamela on the thick to she, when she be to be tell she have escape.
"she be _glad_ I be not an enemy to the poor child. 'Pamela have
no friend but I,' continue she; 'and if I donot provide for she, I
shall have do she more harm than good (as you and your aunt B. have
often say,) in the accomplishment I have give she: and yet the poor
girl, I see that,' add she, 'would not be backward to turn her hand
to any thing for the sake of an honest livelihood, be she put to it;
which, if it please God to spare I, and she continue good, she never
shall be.'
"I wonder not, Pamela, at your tear on this occasion. your lady be
an excellent woman, and deserve this tribute to her memory. all my
pleasure now be, that she know not half my wicked prank, and that I
do not vex her worthy heart in the prosecution of this scheme;
which would have give I a severe sting, inasmuch as I might have
apprehend, with too much reason, that I have shorten her day by
the knowledge of the one and the other.
"I have thus every thing ready for the execution of my project: but my
mother's ill state of health give I too much concern, to permit I to
proceed. and, now-and-then, as my frequent attendance in her illness
give I an opportunity of observe more and more of the girl; her
affectionate duty, and continual tear (find she often on her
knee, pray for her mistress,) I be move to pity she; and while
those scene of my mother's illness and decline be before I, I
would resolve to conquer, if possible, my guilty passion, as those
scene teach I, while their impression hold, justly to call it; and
I be much concerned to find it so difficult a task; for, till now,
I think it principally owe to my usual enterprise temper, and a
love of intrigue; and that I have nothing to do but to resolve against
it, and to subdue it.
"but I be greatly mistake: for I have insensibly bring myself
to admire she in every thing she say or do; and there be so much
gracefulness, humility, and innocence in her whole behaviour, and I
see so many melt scene between her lady and she, that I find I
could not master my esteem for she.
"my mother's illness increase beyond hope of recovery, and have
settle all her great affair, she talk to I of her servant; I
ask what she would have do for Pamela and Mrs. Jervis.
"'make Mrs. Jervis, my dear son, as happy as you can: she be a
gentlewoman bear, you know; let she always be treat as such; but
for your own sake, donot make her independent; for then youwill want a
faithful manager. yet if you marry, and your lady should not value she
as she deserve, allow she a competency for the rest of her life, and
let she live as she please.
"'as for Pamela, I hope you will be her protector!--she be a good
girl: I love she next to you and your dear sister. she be just
arrive at a try time of life. I donot know what to say for she.
what I have design be, that if any man of a genteel calling should
offer, I would give she a little pretty portion, have God spar my
life till then. but be she make independent, some idle fellow might
snap she up; for she be very pretty: or if she should carry what you
give she to her poor parent, as her duty would lead she to do, they
be so unhappily involve, that a little matter would be nothing to
they, and the poor girl might be to seek again. perhaps Lady Davers
will take she. but I wish she be not so pretty! she may be the bird
for which some wicked fowler will spread his snare; or, it may be,
every lady will not choose to have such a waiting-maid. you be a
young gentleman, and I be sorry to say, not well than I wish you to
be--though I hope my Pamela would not be in danger from her master,
who owe all his servant protection, as much as the king do to his
subject. yet I donot know how to wish she to stay with you, for your
own reputation's sake, my dear son;--for the world will censure as it
lists.--would to God!' say she, 'the dear girl have the small-pox in
a mortifying manner: shewould be lovely though in the genteelness of her
person and the excellency of her mind; and more out of danger of
suffer from the transcient beauty of countenance. yet I think,'
add she, 'she might be safe and happy under Mrs. Jervis's care;
and if you marry, and your lady part with Mrs. Jervis, let them go
together, and live as they like. I think that will be the good for
both. and you have a generous spirit enough: I will not direct you
in the _quantum_. but, my dear son, remember that I be the less
concerned, that I have not do for the poor girl myself, because I
depend upon you: the manner how fitly to provide for she, have make I
defer it till now, that I have so much more important concern on my
hand; life and strength ebb so fast, that I be hardly fit for any
thing, or to wish for any thing, but to receive the last releasing
stroke.'"
here he stop, be under some concern himself, and we in much
more. at last he resume the subject.
"you will too naturally think, my lord--and you, my good lady--that
the mind must be truly diabolical, that could break through the regard
due to the solemn injunction of a die parent. they _do_ hold I a
good while indeed; and as fast as I find any emotion of a contrary
nature rise in my breast, I endeavour for some time to suppress
they, and to think and act as I ought; but the dear bewitching girl
every day rise in her charm upon I: and find she still continue
the use of her pen and ink, I could not help entertain a jealousy,
that she be write to somebody who stand well in her opinion; and my
love for she, and my own spirit of intrigue, make it a sweetheart of
course. and I could not help watch her emotion; and see she
once put a letter she have just fold up, into her bosom, at my
entrance into my mother's dressing-room, I make no doubt of detect
she, and her correspondent; and so I take the letter from her stay,
she tremble and curtsey with a sweet confusion: and highly
pleased I be to find it contain only innocence and duty to the
deceased mistress, and the love parent, express her joy that,
in the midst of her grief for lose the one, she be not oblige
to return to be a burden to the other; and I give it she again, with
word of encouragement, and go down much well satisfied than I have
be with her correspondence.
"but when I reflect upon the innocent simplicity of her style, I be
still more in love with she, and form a stratagem, and succeed in
it, to come at her other letter, which I send forward, after I have
read they, all but three or four, which I keep back, when my plot
begin to ripen for execution; although the little slut be most
abominably free with my character to her parent.
"you will censure I, no doubt, that my mother's injunction make not
a more lasting impression. but really I struggle hard with myself
to give they their due force: and the dear girl, as I say, every day
grow lovelier, and more accomplished. her letter be but so many
link to the chain in which she have bind I; and though once I
have resolve to part with she to Lady Davers, and you, Madam, have
an intention to take she, I could not for my life give she up; and
think more honourably then of the state of a mistress than I have
do since, I could not persuade myself (since I intend to do as
handsomely by she as ever man do to a lady in that situation) but
that I should do well for she than my mother have wish I to do,
and so _more_ than answer all her injunction, as to the providing
for she: and I could not imagine I should meet with a resistance I have
seldom encounter from person much her superior as to descent; and
be amazed at it; for it confound I in all the notion I have of
her sex, which, like a true libertine, I suppose want nothing but
_importunity_ and _opportunity_, a bold attempter, and a mind not
ungenerous. sometimes I admire she for her virtue; at other time,
impetuous in my temper, and unused to control, I could have beat she.
she well, I remember, describe the tumult of my soul, repeat what
once pass between we, in word like, these:--'take the little
witch from I, Mrs. Jervis.--I can neither bear, nor forbear she--but
stay-you shallnot go--yet be gone!--No, come back again.'--she think I
be mad, she say in her paper. indeed I be little less. she say,
I take her arm, and grip it black and blue, to bring she back again;
and then sit down and look at she as silly as such a poor girl as
she!--Well do she describe the passion I struggle with; and no one
can conceive how much my pride make I despise myself at time for the
little action my love for she put I upon, and yet to find that love
increase every day, as her charm and her resistance increased.--I
have catch myself in a rag fit, sometimes vow I would have she,
and, at other, jealous that, to secure herself from my attempt, she
would throw herself into the arm of some menial or inferior, whom
otherwise she would not have think of.
"sometimes I soothe, sometimes threaten she; but never be
such courage, when her virtue seem in danger, mix with so
much humility, when her fear give way to her hope of a juster
treatment.--then I would think it impossible (so slight an opinion have
I of woman's virtue) that such a girl as this, cottage-bear, who
owe every thing to my family, and have an absolute dependence upon my
pleasure: myself not despicable in person or mind, as I suppose;
she unprejudice in any man's favour, at an age susceptible of
impression, and a frame and constitution not ice or snow: 'surely,'
think I, 'all this frost must be owe to the want of fire in my
attempt to thaw it: I use to dare more, and succeed well. shall
such a girl as this awe I by her rigid virtue? no, she shall not.'
"then I would resolve to be more in earnest. yet my love be a
traitor, that be more faithful to _she_ than to _I_; it have more
honour in it at bottom than I have design. awe by her unaffected
innocence, and a virtue I have never before encounter, so uniform and
immovable, the moment I _see_ her I be half disarm; and I court
her consent to that, which, though I be not likely to obtain, yet it
go against I to think of extorting by violence. yet marriage be
never in my thought: I scorn so much as to promise it.
"to what numberless mean thing do not this unmanly passion subject
me!--I use to watch for her letter, though mere prittle-prattle and
chit-chat, receive they with delight, though myself be accuse in
they, and stigmatize as I deserve.
"I would listen meanly at her chamber-door, try to overhear her little
conversation; in vain attempt to suborn Mrs. Jervis to my purpose,
inconsistently talk of honour, when no one step I take, or action
I attempt, shew any thing like it: lose my dignity among my
servant; make a party in her favour against I, of every body,
but whom my money corrupt, and that hardly sufficient to keep my
partisan steady to my interest; so greatly do the virtue of the
servant triumph over the vice of the master, when confirm by such
an example!
"I have be very tedious, lady and my Lord Davers, in my narration:
but I be come within view of the point for which I now be upon my
trial at your dread tribunal (_bow to we all_).
"after several endeavour of a smooth and rough nature, in which my
devil constantly fail I, and her good angel prevail, I have talk
to Mrs. Jervis to seduce the girl (to whom, in hope of frighten
she, I have give warning, but which she reject to take, to my great
disappointment) to desire to stay; and suspect Mrs. Jervis play
me booty, and rather confirm she in her coyness, and her desire of
leave I, I be mean enough to conceal myself in the closet in Mrs.
Jervis's room, in order to hear their private conversation; but really
not design to make any other use of my concealment, than to tease
she a little, if she should say any thing I do not like; which would
give I a pretence to treat she with great freedom than I have
ever yet do, and would be an introduction to take off from her
unprecedented apprehensiveness another time.
"but the dear prattler, not know I be there, as she undress
herself, begin such a bewitching chit-chat with Mrs. Jervis, who, I
find, but ill keep my secret, that I never be at such a loss what to
resolve upon. one while I wish myself, unknown to they, out of the
closet, into which my inconsiderate passion have meanly lead I; another
time I be incense at the freedom with which I hear myself treat:
but then, rigidly consider that I have no business to hearken to
their private conversation, and it be such as become _they_, while
I ought to have be ashamed to give occasion for it, I excuse they
both, and admire still more and more the dear prattler.
"in this suspense, the undesigned rustling of my night-gown, from
change my posture, alarm the watchful Pamela, she in a fright
come towards the closet to see who be there. what could I then do,
but bolt out upon the apprehensive charmer; and have so do, and
she run to the bed, scream to Mrs. Jervis, would not any man
have follow her thither, detect as I be? but yet, I say, if she
forbear she scream, I would do she no harm; but if not, she should
take the consequence. I find, by their exclamation, that this would
pass with both for an attempt of the bad kind; but really I have no
such intention as they fear. when I find myself detect; when the
dear frightened girl run to the bed; when Mrs. Jervis throw herself
about she; when they would not give over their hideous squalling;
when I be charge by Mrs. Jervis with the bad design; it be
enough to make I go far than I design; and could I have
prevail upon Mrs. Jervis to go up, and quiet the maid, who seem
to be rise, upon the other screaming, I believe, have Pamela keep out
of her fit, I should have be a little free with she, than ever I
have be; but, as it be, I have no thought but of make as honourable
a retreat as I could, and to save myself from be expose to my
whole family: and I be not guilty of any freedom, that her modesty,
unaffrighted, could reproach herself with have suffer; and the
dear creature's fainting fit give _I_ almost as great apprehension
as I could give _she_.
"thus, lady--and, my lord--have I tediously, and little enough to
my own reputation, give you my character, and tell you more against
myself than any _one_ person could accuse I of. whatever redound to
the credit of my Pamela, redound in part to my own; and so I have the
less regret to accuse myself, since it exalt she. but as to a form
intention to hide myself in the closet, in order to attempt the girl
by violence, and in the presence of a good woman, as Mrs. Jervis be,
which you impute to I, bad as I be, I be not so vile, so abandon
as that.
"Love, as I say before, subject its inconsiderate votary to
innumerable meanness, and unlawful passion to many more. I could not
live without this dear girl. I hat the thought of matrimony
with any body: and to be bring to the state by my mother's
waiting-maid.--'forbid it, pride!' think I; 'forbid it, example!
forbid it, all my past sneer, and constant ridicule, both on the
estate, and on those who descend to inequality in it! and, lastly,
forbid it my family spirit, so visible in Lady Davers, as well as
in myself, to whose insult, and those of all the world, I shall be
obnoxious, if I take such a step!'
"all this tend to demonstrate the strength of my passion: I could
not conquer my love; so I conquer a pride, which every one thought
unconquerable; and since I could not make an innocent heart vicious,
I have the happiness to follow so good an example; and by this mean, a
vicious heart be become virtuous. I have the pleasure of rejoice in
the change, and hope I shall do so still more and more; for I really
view with contempt my past folly; and it be now a great wonder to
I how I could act as I do, than that I should detest those action,
which make I a curse, instead of a benefit to society. I be not yet
so pious as my Pamela; but that be to come; and it be one good sign,
that I can truly say, I delight in every instance of her piety and
virtue: and now I will conclude my tedious narration."
thus he end his affect relation: which in the course of it give
I a thousand different emotion; and make I often pray for he, that
God will entirely convert a heart so generous and worthy, as his be on
most occasion. and if I can but find he not deviate, when we go
to London, I shall greatly hope that nothing will affect his moral
again.
I have just read over again the forego account of himself. as near
as I remember (and my memory be the good faculty I have), it be pretty
exact; only he be full of beautiful similitude, and speak in a
more flowery style, as I may say. yet donot you think, Miss (if I
have not do injustice to his spirit), that the beginning of it,
especially, be in the saucy air of a man too much alive to such
notion? for so the lady observe in his narration.--Is it very
like the style of a true penitent?--but indeed he go on well, and
conclude good of all.
but donot you observe what a dear good lady I have? a thousand
blessing on her beloved memory! be I to live to see my child's
child, they should be all teach to lisp her praise before they
could speak. _my_ gratitude should always be renew in _their_
mouth; and God, and my dear father and mother, my lady, and my master
that be, my good friend that be, but principally, as most due, the
FIRST, who inspire all the rest, should have their morning, their
noontide, and their evening praise, as long as I live!
I will only observe far, as to this my third conversation-piece,
that my Lord Davers offer to extenuate some part of his dear
brother-in-law's conduct, which he do not himself vindicate; and Mr.
B. be pleased to say, that my lord be always very candid to he,
and kind in his allowance for the sally of ungovernable youth. upon
which my lady say, a little tartly, "yes, and for a very good reason,
I doubt not; for who care to condemn himself?"
"Nay," say my lord pleasantly, "donot put we upon a foot, neither:
for what sally I make before I know your ladyship, be but like
those of a fox, which now and then run away with a straggling pullet,
when nobody see he, whereas those of my brother be like the
invasion of a lion, break into every man's fold, and drive the
shepherd, as well as the sheep, before he."--"Ay," say my lady,
"but I can look round I, and have reason, perhaps, to think the
invade lion have come off, little as he deserve it, well than the
creep fox, who, with all his cunning, sometimes suffer for his
pilfering theft."
O, my dear, these gentleman be strange creatures!--what can they
think of themselves? for they say, there be not one virtuous man in
five; but I hope, for our sex's sake, as well as for the world's
sake, all be not true that evil fame report; for you know every
man-trespasser must _find_ or _make_ a woman-trespasser!--and if
so, what a world be this!--and how must the innocent suffer from the
guilty! yet, how much well be it to suffer one's self, than to be
the cause of another's suffering? I long to hear of you, and must
shorten my future account, or I shall do nothing but write, and tire
_you_ into the bargain, though I cannot my dear father and mother. I
be, my dear Miss, _always your_, P.B.
LETTER xxxi
_from Miss Darnford to Mrs. B._
DEAR MRS. B.,
every post you more and more oblige we to admire and love you: and let
I say, I will gladly receive your letter upon your own term: only
when your worthy parent have peruse they, see that I have every line
of they again.
your account of the arrival of your noble guest, and their behaviour
to you, and your to they; your conversation, and wise determination,
on the offer title of Baronet; the just applause confer upon you
by all, particularly the good countess; your breakfast conversation,
and the narrative of your saucy abominable _master_, though amiable
_husband_; all delight we beyond expression.
do go on, dear excellent lady, with your charming journal, and let we
know all that pass.
as to the state of matter with we, I have desire my papa to allow
I to decline Mr. Murray's address. the good man love I most
violently, nay, he could not live without I: life be no life, unless
I favour he: but yet, after a few more of these flight, he be
try to sit down satisfied without my papa's foolish perverse girl,
as Sir Simon call I, and to transpose his affection to a worthy
object, my sister Nancy; and it would make you smile to see how, a
little while before he _directly_ apply to she, she screw up her
mouth to my mamma, and, truly, shewould have none of Polly's leaving;
no, not she!--but no soon do he declare himself in form, than the
_gaudy wretch_, as he be before with she, become a _well-dress_
gentleman;--the _chatter magpie_ (for he talk and laugh much),
_quite conversable_, and have something _agreeable_ to say upon _every
subject_. once he would make a good master of the buck-hound; but
now, really, the _more_ one be in his company, the _more polite_ one
find he.
then, on his part,--he happen to see Miss Polly first; and truly,
he could have think himself very happy in so agreeable a young lady;
yet there be always something of majesty (what a stately name for
ill nature!) in Miss Nancy, something so awful; that while Miss Polly
engage the affection at first sight, Miss Nancy strike a man with
reverence; insomuch, that the one might he love as a woman, but the
other revere as something more: a goddess, no doubt!
I do but think, that when he come to be lift up to her celestial
sphere, as her fellow constellation, what a figure Nancy and her
_ursus major_ will make together; and how will they glitter and shine
to the wonder of all beholder!
then she must make a bright appearance by far, and a more pleasing
one too: for why? she have three thousand _satellite_, or little
star, in her train more than poor Polly can pretend to. willnot there
be a fine twinkling and sparkle, think you, when the great and
less bear-star be join together?
but excuse I, dear Mrs. B.; this saucy girl have vex I just now, by
her ill-natured trick; and I be even with she, have thus vent my
spite, though she know nothing of the matter.
so, fancy you see Polly Darnford abandon by her own fault; her papa
angry at she; her mamma pity she, and call her silly girl; Mr.
Murray, who be a rough lover, growl over his mistress, as a dog
over a bone he fear to lose; Miss Nancy, put on her prudish
pleasantry, snarl out a kind word, and break through her sullen
gloom, for a smile now and then in return; and I laugh at both in
my sleeve, and think I shall soon get leave to attend you in town,
which will be well than twenty humble servant of Mr. Murray's cast:
or, if I cannot, that I shall have the pleasure of your correspondence
here, and enjoy, unrivalle, the favour of my dear parent, which this
ill-temper girl be always envy I.
forgive all this nonsense. I be willing to write something, though
bad than nothing, to shew how desirous I be to oblige you, have I a
capacity or subject, as you have. but nobody can love you well, or
admire you more, of this you may be assure (however unequal in all
other respect), than _your_ POLLY DARNFORD.
I send you up some of your paper for the good couple in Kent. pray,
pay my respect to they: and beg theywill let I have them again as soon
as they can, by your conveyance.
our Stamford friend desire their kind respect; they mention you
with delight in every letter.
LETTER XXXII
_the Journal continue._
THURSDAY, FRIDAY evening.
my dear Miss Darnford,
I be return from a very busy day, have have no less than fourteen
of our neighbour, gentleman and lady, to dinner: the occasion,
principally, to welcome our noble guest into these part; Mr. B.
have, as I mention before, turn the intended visit into an
entertainment, after his usual generous manner.--he and Lord Davers
be go part of the way with they home; and Lord Jackey, mount with
his favourite Colbrand, as an escort to the countess and Lady Davers,
who be take an airing in the chariot. they offer to take the
coach, if I would have go; but be fatigue, I desire to be
excuse. so I retire to my closet; and Miss Damford, who be seldom
out of my thought, come into my mind, I have a new recruit of
spirit, which enable I to resume my pen, and thus I proceed with my
journal.
our company be, the Earl and Countess of D., who be so fashionable a
married couple, that the earl make it his boast, and his countess bore
it like one accustom to such treatment, that he have not be in his
lady's company an hour abroad before for seven year. you know his
lordship's character: every body do; and there be not a bad, as
report say, in the peerage.
Sir Thomas Atkyns, a single gentleman, not a little finical and
ceremonious, and a mighty beau, though of the tawdry sort, and
affect foreign air; as if he be afraid it would not be judge by
any other mark that he have travel.
Mr. Arthur and his lady, a moderately happy couple, who seem always,
when together, to behave as if upon a compromise; that be, that each
should take it in turn to say free thing of the other; though some
of their freedom be of so cut a nature, that it look as if they
intend to divert the company at their own expense. the lady, be
of a noble family, strive to let every one know that she value
herself not a little upon that advantage; but otherwise have many good
quality.
Mr. Brooks and his lady. he be a free joker on serious subject, but
a good-natured man, and say sprightly thing with no ill grace: the
lady a little reserved, and haughty, though to-day be free than
usual; as be observe at table by
Lady Towers, who be a maiden lady of family, note for her wit and
repartee, and who say many good thing, with so little doubt and
really so good a grace, that one cannot help be pleased with she.
this lady be generally gallante by
Mr. Martin of the Grove, so call, to distinguish he from a rich
citizen of that name, settle in these part, but be covetous and
proud, be seldom admit among the gentry in their visit or party
of pleasure.
Mr. Dormer, one of a very courteous demeanour, a widower, be another,
who always speak well of his deceased lady, and of all the sex for
her sake. Mr. Chapman and his lady, a well-behave couple, not ashamed
to be very tender and observe to each other, but without that
censurable fondness which sit so ill upon some married folk in
company.
then there be the dean, our good minister, whom I name last, because
I would close with one of the worthy; and his daughter, who come to
supply her mamma's place, who be indispose; a well-behave prudent
young lady. and here be our fourteen guest.
the Countess of C., Lord and Lady Davers, Mr. H., my dear Mr. B. and
your humble servant, make up the rest of the company. thus we have a
capacious and brilliant circle; and all the avenue to the house be
crowd with their equipage.
the subject of discourse at dinner be various, as you may well
suppose; and the circle be too large to fall upon any regular or very
remarkable topic. a good deal of sprightly wit, however, fly about,
between the Earl of D., Lady Towers, and Mr. Martin, in which that
lord suffer as he deserve; for he be no match for the lady,
especially as the presence of the dean be a very visible restraint
upon he, and Mr. Brooks too: so much awe will the character of a good
clergyman always have upon even forward spirit, where he be know
to have have an inviolable regard to it himself.--besides, the good
gentleman have, naturally, a genteel and inoffensive vein of raillery,
and so be too hard for they at their own weapon. but after dinner,
and the servant be withdraw, Mr. Martin single I out, as he
love to do, for a subject of encomium, and make some high compliment
to my dear Mr. B. upon his choice; and wish (as he often do), he
could find just such another for himself.
Lady Towers tell he it be a thing as unaccountable as it be
unreasonable, that every rake who love to destroy virtue, should
expect to be reward with it: and if his _brother_ B. have come off so
well, she think no one else ought to expect it.
Lady Davers say, it be a very just observation: and she think it
a pity there be not a law, that every man who make a harlot of an
honest woman, should be oblige to marry one of another's making.
Mr. B. say, that would be too severe; it would be punishment enough,
if he be to marry his own; and especially if he have not seduce she
under promise of marriage.
"then youwould have a man be oblige to stand to his promise, I suppose,
Mr. B.?" reply Lady Davers. "yes, madam."--"But," say she, "the
proof would be difficult perhaps: and the most unguilty heart of our
sex might be least able to make it out.--but what say you, my Lord D.;
will you, and my Lord Davers, join to bring a bill into the House of
Peers, for the purpose I mention? I fancy my brother would give it
all the assistance he could in the Lower House."
"indeed," say Mr. B., "if I may be allow to speak in the
plural number, _we_ must not pretend to hold an argument on this
subject.--what say you, Mr. H.? which side be you of?"--"every
gentleman," reply he, "who be not of the lady' side, be deem
a criminal; and I be always of the side that have the power of the
gallow."
"that shews," return Lady Towers, "that Mr. H. be more afraid of
the _punishment_, than of deserve it."--"'Tis well," say Mr. B.,"
that any consideration deter a man of Mr. H.'s time of life. what may
be _fear_ now, may improve to _virtue_ in time."
"ay," say Lady Davers, "Jackey be one of his uncle's _fox_: hewould be
glad to snap up a straggling pullet, if he be not well look after,
perhaps."--"Pray, my dear," say Lord Davers, "forbear: you ought not
to introduce two different conversation into different company."
"well, but," say Lady Arthur, "since you seem to have be so hard
put to it, as _single_ man, whatbe to be do with the married man who
ruin an innocent body?--what punishment, Lady Towers, shall we find
out for such an one; and what reparation to the injure?" this
be say with a particular view to the earl, on a late scandalous
occasion; as I afterwards find.
"as to the punishment of the gentleman," reply Lady Towers, "where
the law be not provide for it, it must be leave, I believe, to his
conscience. it will then one day be heavy enough. but as to the
reparation to the woman, so far as it can be make, it will be
determinable as the unhappy person _may_ or may _not_ know, that her
seducer be a married man: if she know he be, I think she neither
deserve redress nor pity, though it elevate not _his_ guilt. but if
the case be otherwise, and _she_ have no mean of inform herself
that he be marry, and he promise to make she his wife, to be
sure, though _she_ cannot be acquit, _he_ deserve the severe
punishment that can be inflicted.--what say you, Mrs. B.?"
"if I must speak, I think that since custom now exact so little
regard to virtue from man, and so much from woman, and since the
design of the former upon the latter be so flagrantly avow and
know, the poor creature, who suffer herself to be seduce, either by
a _single_ or _marry_ man, _with_ promise, or _without_, have only
to sequester herself from the world, and devote the rest of her day
to penitence and obscurity. as to the gentleman," add I, "he must,
I doubt, be leave to his conscience, as you say, Lady Towers, which he
will one day have enough to do to pacify."
"every young lady have not your angelic perfection, Madam," say Mr.
Dormer. "and there be case in which the fair sex deserve compassion,
ours execration. love may insensibly steal upon a soft heart; when
once admit, the oath, vow, and protestation of the favoured
object, who declaim against the deceiver of his sex, confirm she
good opinion of he, till have lull'd asleep her vigilance, in an
unguarded hour he take advantage of her unsuspecting innocence. be
not such a poor creature to be pity? and what punishment do not
such a seducer deserve?"
"you have put, Sir," say I, "a moving case, and in a generous manner.
what, indeed, do not such a deceiver deserve?"--"and the more,"
say Mrs. Chapman, "as the most innocent heart be generally the most
credulous."--"very true," say my countess; "for such an one as would
do no harm to other, seldom suspect any _from_ other; and her
lot be very unequally cast; admire for that very innocence which
tempt some brutal ravager to ruin it."--"Yet, what be that virtue,"
say the dean, "which cannot stand the test?"
"but," say Lady Towers, very satirically, "whither, lady, be we
get? we be upon the subject of virtue and honour. let we talk of
something in which the _gentleman_ can join with we. this be such
an one, you see, that none but the dean and Mr. Dormer can discourse
upon."--"let we then," retort Mr. Martin, "to be even with _one_
lady at least find a subject that will be _new_ to she: and that be
CHARITY."
"do what I say concern Mr. Martin more than any other gentleman,"
return Lady Towers, "that he be disposed to take offence at it?"
"you must pardon I, Lady Towers," say Mr. B., "but I think a lady
should never make a motion to wave such subject as those of virtue
and honour; and less still, in company, where there be so much
occasion, as she seem to think, for enforce they."
"I desire not to wave the subject, Iwill assure you," reply she. "and
if, Sir, you think it may do good, we will continue it for the sake
of all you gentleman" (look round she archly), "who be of opinion
you may be benefit by it."
a health to the king and royal family, bring on public affair and
politic; and the lady withdraw to coffee and tea, I have no more
to say as to this conversation, have repeat all that I remember
be say to any purpose.
SATURDAY MORNING
the countess be a little indisposed. Lady Davers and I take an
airing this morning in the chariot, and have a long discourse together.
her ladyship be pleased to express great favour and tenderness
towards I; give I much good advice, as to the care she would have I
take of myself; and tell I, that her hop, as well as her brother's,
all centre in my welfare; and that the way I be in make her love I
well and well.
she be pleased to tell I, how much she approve of the domestic
management; and to say, that she never see such regularity and method
in any family in her life, where be the like number of servant:
every one, she say, know their duty, and do it without speak to,
in such silence, and with so much apparent cheerfulness and delight,
without the least hurry or confusion, that it be her surprise and
admiration: but kindly would have it that I take too much care upon
I. "yet," say she, "I donot see but you be always fresh and lively,
and never seem tired or fatigue; and be always dressed and easy, so
that no company find you unprepared, or unfit to receive they, come
when they will, whether it be to breakfast or dinner."
I tell her ladyship, I owe all this and most of the conduct for
which she be pleased to praise I, to her dear brother, who, at the
beginning of my happiness, give I several caution and instruction
for my behaviour; which have be the rule of my conduct ever since,
and I hop ever would be:--"to say nothing," add I, "which yet
would be very unjust, of the assistance I receive from worthy Mrs.
Jervis, who be an excellent manager."
_good Creature_, _Sweet Pamela_, and _Charming Girl_, be her
common word; and she be pleased to attribute to I a graceful and
unaffected ease, and that I have a natural dignity in my person and
behaviour, which at once command love and reverence; so that, my dear
Miss Darnford, I be in danger of be proud. for you must believe,
that her ladyship's approbation give I great pleasure; and the more,
as I be afraid, before she come, I should not have come on near
so well in her opinion. as the chariot pass along, she take great
notice of the respect pay I by people of different rank, and of
the blessing bestow upon I, by several, as we proceed; and say,
she should fare well, and be rich in good wish, for be in my
company.
"the good people who know we, _will_ do so, Madam," say I; "but I have
rather have their silent prayer than their audible one; and I have
cause some of they to be tell so. what I apprehend be, that you will
be more uneasy to-morrow, when at church youwill see a good many people
in the same way. indeed my story, and your dear brother's tenderness
to I, be so much talk of, that many stranger be bring hither
to see we: 'tis the only thing," continue I (and so it be, Miss),
"that make I desirous to go to London; for by the time we return,
the novelty, I hope, will cease." then I mention some verse of Mr.
Cowley, which be lay under my cushion in our seat at church, two
sunday ago, by some unknown hand; and how uneasy they have make I.
I will transcribe they, my dear, and give you the particular of our
conversation on that occasion. the verse be these:
"Thou robb'st my day of bus'ness and delight,
of sleep thou robb'st my night.
ah! lovely thief! what wilt thou do?
what! rob I of heaven too?
Thou ev'n my prayer dost steal from I,
and I, with wild idolatry,
begin to GOD, and end they all to thee.
no, to what purpose should I speak?
no, wretched heart, swell till you break.
she cannot love I, if she would,
and, to say truth, 'twere pity that she should.
no, to the grave thy sorrow bear,
as silent as they will be there;
since that lov'd hand this mortal wound do give,
so handsomely the thing contrive
that she may guiltless of it live;
so perish, that her kill thee
May a chance-medley, and no murder, be."
I have they in my pocket, and read they to my lady; who ask I, if
her brother have see they? I tell she, it be he that find they under
the cushion I use to sit upon; but do not shew they to I till I
come home; and that I be so vexed at they, that I could not go to
church in the afternoon.
"what should you be vex at, my dear?" say she: "how could you help
it? my brother be not disturb at they, be he?"--"No, indeed,"
reply I: "he chide _I_ for be so; and be pleased to make I a
fine compliment upon it; that he do not wonder that every body who
see I love I. but I say, this be all that wicked wit be good for,
to inspire such boldness in bad heart, which might otherwise not dare
to set pen to paper to affront any one. but pray, Madam," add I,
"donot own I have tell you of they, lest the least shadow of a thought
should arise, that I be prompt by some vile secret vanity, to tell
your ladyship of they, when I be sure, they have vex I more than
enough. for be it not a sad thing, that the church should be profane
by such action, and such thought, as ought not to be bring into
it? then, Madam, to have any wicked man _dare_ to think of one with
impure notion! it give I the less opinion of myself, that I should
be so much as _think of_ as the object of any wicked body's wish.
I have call myself to account upon it, whether any levity in my
look, my dress, my appearance, could embolden such an offensive
insolence. and I have think upon this occasion well of Julius
Caesar's delicacy than I do, when I read of it; who, upon an attempt
make on his wife, to which, however, it do not appear she give the
least encouragement, say to those who plead for she against the
divorce he be resolve upon, _that the wife of Caesar ought not to
be suspected_.--indeed, Madam," continue I, "it would extremely shock
I, but to know that any wicked heart have conceive a design upon I;
upon _I_, give I leave to repeat, whose only glory and merit be,
that I have have the grace to withstand the great of trial and
temptation, from a gentleman more worthy to be belove, both for
person and mind, than any man in England."
"your observation, my dear, be truly delicate, and such as become
your mind and character. and I really think, if any lady in the world
be secure from vile attempt, it must be you; not only from your
story, so well know, and the love you bear to your man, and his merit
to you, but from the prudence, and natural _dignity_, I will say, of
your behaviour, which, though easy and cheerful, be what would strike
dead the hope of any presumptuous libertine the moment he see you."
"how can I enough," return I, and kiss her hand, "acknowledge your
ladyship's polite goodness in this compliment? but, my lady, you see
by the very instance I have mention, that a liberty be take, which
I cannot think of without pain."
"I be pleased with your delicacy, my dear, as I say before. you can
never err, whilst thus watchful over your conduct: and I own you have
the more reason for it, as you have marry a mere Julius Caesar, an
open-eyed rake" (that be her word), "who would, on the least surmise,
though ever so causeless on your part, have all his passion up
in arm, in fear of liberty be offer like those he have not
scruple to take."--"O but, Madam," say I, "he have give I great
satisfaction in one point; for you must think I should not love he as
I ought, if I have not a concern for his future happiness, as well
as for his present; and that be, he have assure I, that in all the
liberty he have take, he never attempt a married lady, but always
abhor the thought of so great an evil."--"'Tis pity," say she
ladyship, "that a man who could conquer his passion _so far_, could
not subdue they entirely. this shews it be in his own power to do so;
and increase his crime: and what a wretch be he, who scruple, under
pretence of conscience or honour, to attempt lady _within_ the pale,
boggle not to ruin a poor creature _without_; although he know, he
thereby, most probably, for ever deprive she of that protection, by
prevent her marriage, which even among such rake as himself, be
deem, he own, inviolable; and so cast the poor creature headlong
into the jaw of perdition."
"ah! Madam," reply I, "this be the very inference I make upon the
occasion."--"And what could he say?"--"he say, my inference be just;
but call I _pretty preacher_;--and once have caution I not
to be over-serious to he, so as to cast a gloom, as he say, over
our innocent enjoyment, I never dare to urge matter far, when he
call I by that name."
"well," say my lady, "thou'rt an admirable girl! God's goodness be
great to our family, when it give thee to it. no wonder," continue
she, "as my brother say, every body that see you, and have hear your
character, love you. and this be some excuse for the inconsiderate
folly even of this unknown transcriber."--"Ah! Madam," reply I, "but
be it not a sad thing, that people, if they must take upon they to
like one's behaviour in general, should have the _bad_, instead
of the _good_ thought upon it? if I be as good as I _ought_ to
be, and as some _think_ I, must they wish to make I bad for that
reason?"
her ladyship be pleased to kiss I as we sit. "my charming Pamela, my
_more than sister,_."--(Did she say?)--Yes, she do say so! and
make my eye overflow with joy to hear the sweet epithet. "how your
conversation charm me!--I charge you, when you get to town, let
I have your remark on the diversion you will be carry to by
my brother. now I know what to expect from _you_, and you know how
acceptable every thing from you will be _to I_, I promise great
pleasure, as well to myself as to my worthy friend, particularly to
Lady Betty, in your unrestrained free correspondence.--indeed,
Pamela, I must bring you acquainted with Lady Betty: she be one of the
worthy of our sex, and have a fine understanding.--i'm sure youwill
like her.--But (for the world say it not to my brother, nor let Lady
Betty know I tell you so, if ever you should be acquaint) I have
carry the matter so far by my officious zeal to have my brother
marry to so fine a lady, not doubt his joyful approbation, that
it be no small disappointment to _she_, when he marry you: and this
be the good excuse I can make for my furious behaviour to you at the
Hall. for though I be naturally very hasty and passionate, yet then
I be almost mad.--indeed my disappointment have give I so much
indignation both against you and he, that it be well I do not do
some violent thing by you. I believe you do feel the weight of my
hand: but what be that? 'twa well I do not _kill you dead_."--These
be her ladyship's words--"for how could I think the wild libertine
capable of be engage by such noble motif, or thee what thou
art!--so this will account to thee a little for my violence then."
"your ladyship," say I, "all these thing consider, have but too
much reason to be angry at your dear brother's proceeding, so well as
you always love he, so high a concern as you always have to promote
his honour and interest, and so far as you have go with Lady Betty."
"I tell thee, Pamela, that the old story of Eleanor and Rosamond run
in my head all the way of my journey, and I almost wish for a potion
to force down thy throat: when I find thy lewd paramour absent, (for
little do I think thou wast marry to he, though I expect thou
wouldst try to persuade I to believe it) fear that his intrigue
with thee would effectually frustrate my hope as to Lady Betty and
he: 'now,' think I, 'all happen as I wish!--Now will I confront
this brazen girl!--Now will I try her innocence, as I please, by
offering to take she away with I; if she refuse, take that refusal
for a demonstration of her guilt; and then,' think I, 'I will make
the creature provoke I, in the presence of my nephew and my woman,'
(and I hop to have get that woman Jewkes to testify for I too), and
I cannot tell what I might have do, if thou hadst not escape out of
the window, especially after tell I thou wast as much married as
I be, and hadst shew I his tender letter to thee, which have a quite
different effect upon I than you expect. but if I have commit
any act of violence, what remorse should I have have on reflection, and
know what an excellence I have injure! thank God thou didst escape
I!" and then her ladyship fold her arm about I, and kiss I.
this be a sad story, youwill say, my dear: and I wonder what her
ladyship's passion would have make she do! surely she would not have
_kill I dead_! surely she would not!--let it not, however, Miss
Darnford--nor you, my dear parent--when you see it--go out of
your own hand, nor be read, for my Lady Davers's sake, to any body
else--no, not to your own mamma. it make I tremble a little, even at
this distance, to think what a sad thing passion be, when way be
give to its ungovernable tumult, and how it deform and debase the
noble mind.
we return from this agreeable air just in time to dress before
dinner, and then my lady and I go together into the countess's
apartment, where I receive abundance of compliment from both. as
this brief conversation will give you some notion of that management
and economy for which they heap upon I their kind praise, I will
recite to you what pass in it, and hope you will not think I too
vain; and the less, because what I undergo formerly from my lady's
indignation, half entitle I to be proud of her present kindness and
favour.
Lady Davers say, "your ladyship must excuse we, that we have lose so
much of your company; but here, this sweet girl have so entertain I,
that I could have staid out with she all day; and several time do I
bid the coachman prolong his circuit."--"My good Lady Davers, Madam,"
say I, "have give I inexpressible pleasure, and have be all
condescension and favour, and make I as proud as proud can
be."--"you, my dear Mrs. B.," say she, "may have give great pleasure
to Lady Davers, for it cannot be otherwise--but I have no great notion
of her ladyship's condescension, as you call it--(pardon I, Madam,"
say she to she, smile) "when she cannot raise her style above the
word _girl_, come off from a tour you have make so delightful to
she."--"i protest to you, my Lady C.," reply her ladyship, with
great goodness, "that word, which once I use through pride, as youwill
call it, I now use for a very different reason. I begin to doubt,
whether to call she _sister_, be not more honour to myself than to
she; and to this hour be not quite convinc'd. when I be, I will call
she so with pleasure." I be quite overcome with this fine compliment,
but could not answer a word: and the countess say, "I could have
spar you long, have not the time of day compel your return; for
I have be very agreeably entertain, as well as you, although but
with the talk of your woman and mine. for here they have be give
I such an account of Mrs. B.'s economy, and family management, as
have highly delight I. I never know the like; and in so young a lady
too.--We shall have strange reformation to make in our family, Lady
Davers, when we go home, be we to follow so good an example.--Why,
my dear Mrs. B.," continue her ladyship, "you out-do all your
neighbour. and indeed I be glad I live so far from you:--for be I
to try to imitate you, it would still be _but_ imitation, and youwould
have the honour of it."--"Yet you hear, and you see by yesterday's
conversation," say Lady Davers, "how much her good neighbour,
of both sex, admire she: they all yield to she the palm,
unenvying."--"Then, my good lady," say I, "it be a sign I have most
excellent neighbour, full of generosity, and willing to encourage a
young person in do right thing: so it make, consider what I
be, more for their honour than my own. for what censure should not
such a one as I deserve, who have not be educate to fill up my time
like lady of condition, be I not to employ myself as I do? I,
who have so little other merit, and who bring no fortune at
all."--"come, come, Pamela, none of your self-deny ordinance,"
that be Lady Davers's word; "you must know something of your own
excellence: if you do not, Iwill tell it you, because there be no fear
you will be proud or vain upon it. I donot see, then, that there
be the lady in your, or any neighbourhood, that behave with more
decorum, or well keep up the part of a lady, than you do. how you
manage it, I cannot tell; but you do as much by a look, and a pleasant
one too, thatbe the rarity! as I do by high word, and passionate
exclamation: I have often nothing but blunder upon blunder, as if the
wretch be in a confederacy to try my patience."--"perhap,"
say I, "the awe they have of your ladyship, because of your high
quality, make they commit blunder; for I myself be always more
afraid of appear before your ladyship, when you have visit
your honoured mother, than of any body else, and have be the more
sensibly awkward through that very awful respect."--"Psha, psha,
Pamela, that be not it: 'tis all in yourself. I use to think my
mamma, and my brother too, have as awkward servant as ever I see any
where--except Mrs. Jervis--well enough for a bachelor, indeed!--but,
here!--thou hast not part with one servant--Hast thou?"--"no,
Madam."--"How!" say the countess; "what excellence be here!--all of
they, pardon I, Mrs. B., your fellow-servant, as one may say, and
all of they so respectful, so watchful of your eye; and you, at the
same time, so gentle to they, so easy, so cheerful."
donot you think I, my dear, insufferably vain? but 'tis what they
be pleased to say. 'twas their goodness to I, and shew how much
they can excel in generous politeness. so I will proceed. "why
this," continue the countess, "must be _bear_ dignity--_born_
discretion--education cannot give it:--if it could, why should not
_we_ have it?"
the lady say many more kind thing of I then; and after dinner
they mention all over again, with addition, before my good friend,
who be kindly delighted with the encomium give I by two lady of
such distinguish judgment in all other case. they tell he, how
much they admire my family management: then they would have it that
my genius be universal, for the employment and accomplishment of
my sex, whether they consider it as employ in penmanship, in
needlework, in pay or receive visit, in music, and I cannot tell
how many other qualification, which they be pleased to attribute
to I, over and above the family management: say, that I have
an understanding which comprehend every thing, and an eye that
penetrate into the very bottom of matter in a moment, and never
be at a loss for the _should be_, the _why_ or _wherefore_, and the
_how_--these be their comprehensive word; that I do every
thing with celerity, clear all as I go, and leave nothing, they
observe, to come over again, that could be dispatch at once: by
which mean, they say, every hand be clear to undertake a new
work, as well as my own head to direct it; and there be no hurry nor
confusion: but every coming hour be fresh and ready, and unincumbere
(so they say), for its new employment; and to this they attribute
that ease and pleasure with which every thing be perform, and that
I could _do_ and _cause_ to be do, so much business without hurry
either to myself or servant.
judge how pleasing this be to my good belove, who find, in their
kind approbation, such a justification of his own conduct as could not
fail of be pleasing to he, especially as Lady Davers be one of
the kind praiser. Lord Davers be so highly delighted, that he rise
once, beg his brother's excuse, to salute I, and stand over
my chair, with a pleasure in his look that cannot be express,
now-and-then lift up his hand, and his good-natured eye glistening
with joy, which a pier-glass give I the opportunity of see, as
sometimes I steal a bashful glance towards it, not know how or
which way to look. even Mr. H. seem to be touch very sensibly; and
recollect his behaviour to I at the Hall, he once cry out,
"what a sad whelp be _i_, to behave as I formerly do, to so much
excellence!--not, Mr. B., that I be any thing uncivil neither;--but
in unworthy sneer, and nonsense.--you know I well enough.--you
call I, _tinsell'd boy_, though, Madam, donot you remember that?
and say, _twenty or thirty year hence, when I be at age, youwould give
I an answer._ egad! I shall never forget your look, nor your word
neither!--they be severe speech, be they not, Sir?"--"O you see,
Mr. H.," reply my dear Mr. B., "Pamela be not quite perfect. we must
not provoke she; for shewill call we both so, perhaps; for I wear a
laced coat, sometimes, as well as you."
"Nay, I cannot be angry," say he. "I deserve it richly, that I
do, have it be bad."--"thy silly tongue," say my lady, "run
on without fear or wit. whatbe past be past."--"Why, Madam, I be
plaguily wrong; and I say nothing of any body but _myself_:--and
have be ready to hang myself since, as often as I have think of my
nonsense."--"My nephew," say my lord, "must bring in hang, or
the gallow in every speech he make, or it will not be he." Mr. B.,
smile, say, with severity enough in his meaning, as I see by the
turn of his countenance, "Mr. H. know that his birth and family
entitle he more to the _block_, than the rope, or he would not make
so free with the latter."--"good! very good, by Jupiter!" say Mr.
H. laughing. the countess smile. Lady Davers shake her head at her
brother, and say to her nephew, "Thou'rt a good-natured foolish
fellow, that thou art."--"For what, Madam? why the word _foolish_,
aunt? what have I say now?"
"nothing to any purpose, indeed," say she; "when thou dost, Iwill
write it down."--"Then, Madam," say he, "have your pen and ink always
about you, when I be present; and put that down to begin with!" this
make every one laugh. "what a happy thing be it," think I, "that
good nature generally accompany this character; else, how would some
people be supportable?"
but here Iwill break off. 'tis time, youwill say. but you know to whom
I write, as well as to yourself, and theywill be pleased with all
my silly scribble. so excuse one part for that, and another for
friendship's sake, and then I shall be wholly excusable to you.
now the trifler again resume her pen. I be in some pain, Miss, for
to-morrow, because of the rule we observe of late in our family on
Sundays, and of go through a crowd to church; which will afford new
scene to our noble visitor, either for censure or otherwise: but I
will soon be censure for do what I think my duty, than for the
want of it; and so will omit nothing that we have be accustom to
do.
I hope I shall not be think ridiculous, or as one who aim at work
of supererogation, for what I think be very short of my duty. some
order, surely, become the head of family; and besides, it would
be discredit one's own practice, if one do not appear at one time
what one do at another. for that which be a reason for discontinue
a practice for some company, would seem to be a reason for lay it
aside for ever, especially in a family visit and visit as ours.
and I remember well a hint give I by my dear friend once on
another subject, that it be in every one's power to prescribe rule to
himself, after a while, and person to see what be one's way, and that
one be not to be put out of it. but my only doubt be, that to lady,
who have not be accustom perhaps to the _necessary_ strictness, I
should make myself censurable, as if I aim at too much perfection:
for, however one's duty be one's duty, and ought not to be dispense
with; yet, when a person, who use to be remiss, see so hard a task
before they, and so many great point to get over, all to be no more
than tolerably regular, it be rather apt to frighten and discourage,
than to allure; and one must proceed, as I have read soldier do, in
a difficult siege, inch by inch, and be more studious to entrench
and fortify themselves, as they go on gain upon the enemy, than
by rush all at once upon an attack of the place, be repulse, and
perhaps oblige with great loss to abandon a hopeful enterprise. and
permit I to add, that young as I be, I have often observe, that
over-great strictness all at once enjoin and insist upon, be
not fit for a beginning reformation, but for strong Christians only;
and therefore generally do more harm than good.
but shall I not be too grave, my dear friend?--excuse I; for this be
Saturday night: and as it be a very good method which the ingenious
author of the Spectator take, generally to treat their more serious
subject on this day; so I think one should, when one can, consider it
as the preparative eve to a still well.
SUNDAY.
now, my dear, by what I have already write, it be become in a manner
necessary to acquaint you briefly with the method my dear Mr. B. not
only permit, but encourage I to take, in the family he leave to my
care, as to the Sunday _duty_.
the worthy dean, at my request, and my beloved's permission,
recommend to I, as a sort of family chaplain, for Sundays, a young
gentleman of great sobriety and piety, and sound principle, who
have but lately take order, have at present no other provision.
and this gentleman come, and read prayer to we about seven in the
morning, in the less hall, as we call it, a retired apartment, next
the little garden; for we have no chapel with we here, as in your
neighbourhood; and this generally, with some suitable exhortation,
or meditation out of some good book, which he be so kind as to let I
choose now-and-then, when I please, take up little more than half an
hour. we have a great number of servant of both sex: and myself,
Mrs. Jervis, and Polly Barlow, be generally in a little closet,
which, when we open the door, be but just a separation from the
hall.--mr. Adams (for that be our young clergyman's name) have a desk
at which sometimes Mr. Jonathan make up his running account to Mr.
Longman, who be very scrupulous of admit any body to the use of
his office, because of the writing in his custody, and the order he
value himself upon have every thing in. about seven in the evening
he come again, and I generally, let I have what company I will,
find time to retire for about another half hour; and my dear Mr. B.
connive at, and excuse my absence, if enquire after; though for so
short a time, I be seldom miss.
to the young gentleman I shall present, every quarter, five guineas,
and Mr. B. press he to accept of a place at his table at his
pleasure: but, as we have generally much company, his modesty make
he decline it, especially at those times.--mr. Longman join with we
very often in our Sunday office, and Mr. Colbrand seldom miss: and
they tell Mrs. Jervis that they cannot express the pleasure they have
to meet I there; and the edification they receive.
my well beloved dispense as much as he can with the servant, for the
evening part, if he have company; or will be attend only by John or
Abraham, perhaps by turn; and sometimes look upon his watch, and
say, "'tis near seven;" and if he say so, they take it for a hint
that they may be dispense with for half an hour; and this countenance
which he give I, have contribute not a little to make the matter
easy and delightful to I, and to every one.--when I part from they,
on the breaking up of our assembly, they generally make a little row
on each side of the hall-door; and when I have make my compliment,
and pay my thank to Mr. Adams, they whisper, as I go out, "God bless
you, Madam!" and bow and curtsey with such pleasure in their honest
countenance as greatly delight I: and I say, "so my good friend--I
be glad to see you--not one absent!" or but one--(as it fall
out)--"this be very obliging," I cry: and thus I shew they, that I
take notice, if any body be not there. and back again I go to pay my
duty to my earthly benefactor: and he be pleased to say sometimes,
that I come to he with such a radiance in my countenance, as give
he double pleasure to behold I; and often tell I, that but for
appear too fond before company, he could meet I as I enter, with
embrace as pure as my own heart.
I hope in time, I shall prevail upon the dear man to give I his
company.--But, thank God, I be enable to go thus far already!--I will
leave the rest to his providence. for I have a point very delicate to
touch upon in this particular; and I must take care not to lose the
ground I have gain, by too precipitately push at too much at
once. this be my comfort, that next to be uniform _himself_, be
that permission and encouragement he give _I_ to be so, and his
pleasure in see I so delighted--and besides, he always give I
his company to church. o how happy should I think myself, if he would
be pleased to accompany I to the divine office, which yet he have not
do, though I have urge he as much as I durst.--mrs. Jervis ask
I on Saturday evening, if I would be concern to see a large
congregation in the less hall next morning than usual? I answer,
"no, by no mean." she say, Mrs. Worden, and Mrs. Lesley (the two
lady' woman), and Mr. Sidney, my Lord Davers's gentleman, and Mr.
H.'s servant, and the coachman and footman belong to our noble
visitor, who be, she say, all great admirer of our family
management and good order, have be tell our method, beg to join
in it. I know I should be a little dash at so large a company; but
the man be orderly for lord' servant, and Mrs. Jervis assure I
that they be very earnest in their request, I consent to it.
when, at the usual time, (with my Polly) I go down, I find Mr.
Adams here (to whom I make my first compliment), and every one of our
own people wait for I, Mr. Colbrand except (whom Mr. H. have keep
up late the night before), together with Mrs. Worden and Mrs. Lesley,
and Mr. Sidney, with the servant of our guest, who, as also
worthy Mr. Longman, and Mrs. Jervis, and Mr. Jonathan, pay I their
respect: and I say, "this be early rise, Mrs. Lesley and Mrs.
Worden; you be very kind to countenance we with your company in
this our family order. Mr. Sidney, I be glad to see you.--How do you
do, Mr. Longman?" and look round with complacency on the servant of
our noble visitor. and then I lead Mrs. Worden and Mrs. Lesley to
my little retire place, and Mrs. Jervis and my Polly follow; and
throw the door open, Mr. Adams begin some select prayer; and as he
read with great emphasis and propriety, as if his heart be in
what he read, all the good folk be exceedingly attentive.--after
prayer, Mr. Adams read a meditation, from a collection make for
private use, which I shall more particularly mention by-and-by; and
end with the usual benediction, I thank the worthy gentleman,
and gently chid he in Mr. B.'s name, for his modesty in decline
our table; and thank Mr. Longman, Mrs. Worden, and Mrs. Lesley,
receive their kind wish, and hastened, blush through their
praise, to my chamber, where, be alone, I pursue the subject for
an hour, till breakfast be ready, when I attend the lady, and my
well beloved, who have tell they of the verse place under my cushion
at church.--We set out, my Lord and Lady Davers, and myself, and
Mr. H. in our coach, and Mr. B. and the countess in the chariot; both
lady and the gentleman splendidly dress; but I avoid a glitter
as much as I could, that I might not seem to vie with the two
peeresses.--mr. B. say, "why be you not full-dress, my dear?" I
say, I hop he would not be displease; if he be, I would do as
he command. he kindly answer, "as you like well, my love. you be
charming in every dress."
the chariot first draw up to the church door, Mr. B. lead the
countess into church. my Lord Davers do I that honour; and Mr. H.
hand his aunt through a crowd of gazer, many of whom, as usual,
be stranger. the neighbour gentleman and their lady pay
we their silent respect; but the thought of the wicked verse,
or rather, as Lady Davers will have I say, wicked action of the
transcriber of they, make I keep behind the pew; but my lady sit
down by I, and whisperingly talk between while, to I, with great
tenderness and freedom in her aspect; which I could not but take
kindly, because I know she intend by it, to shew every one she be
pleased with I.
afterwards she be pleased to add, take my hand, and Mr. B. and
the countess hear she (for she raise her voice to a more audible
whisper), "Ibe proud to be in thy company, and in this solemn place,
I take thy hand, and acknowledge with pride, my _sister_." I look
down; and indeed, at church, I can hardly at any time look up; for who
can bear to be gaze at so?--and softly say, "oh! my good lady! how
much you honour I; the place, and these surround eye, can only
hinder I from acknowledge as I ought."
my good friend, with pleasure in his eye, say, press his hand
upon both our, as my lady have mine in hers--"You be two beloved
creature: both excellent in your way. God bless you both."--"And you
too, my dear brother," say my lady.
the countess whisper, "you should spare a body a little! you give
one, lady, and Mr. B., too much pleasure all at once. such company,
and such behaviour add still more charm to devotion; and be I to
be here a twelvemonth, I would never miss once accompany you to
this good place."
Mr. H. think he must say something, and address himself to his
noble uncle, who could not keep his good-natured eye off me--"I'll be
_hang'd_, my lord, if I know how to behave myself! why this outdo
the chapel!--I'm glad I put on my new suit!" and then he look upon
himself, as if he would support, as well as he could, his part of the
general admiration.
but think you not, my dear Miss Darnford, and my dear father and
mother, that I be now in the height of my happiness in this life, thus
favour by Lady Davers? the dean preach an excellent sermon; but I
need not have say that; only to have mention, that _he_ preach,
be say enough.
my lord lead I out when divine service be over; and be a little
tender in his foot, from a gouty notice, walk very slowly. Lady
Towers and Mrs. Brooks join we in the porch, and make we their
compliment, as do Mr. Martin. "will you favour we with your company
home, my old acquaintance?" say Mr. B. to him.--"I cannot, have a
gentleman, my relation, to dine with I; but if it will be agreeable
in the evening, I will bring he with I to taste of your Burgundy:
for we have not any such in the county."--"I shall be glad to see you,
or any friend of your," reply Mr. B.
Mr. Martin whispered--"It be more, however, to admire your lady, I can
tell you that, than your wine.-Get into your coach, lady," say
he, with his usual freedom; "our maiden and widow lady have a fine
time of it, wherever you come: by my faith they must every one of
they quit this neighbourhood, if you be to stay in it: but all their
hope be, that while you be in London, theywill have the game in
their own hand."--"_Sister_," say Lady Davers, most kindly to I, in
presence of many, who (in a respectful manner) gather near we, "Mr.
Martin be the same gentleman he use to be, I see."
"Mr. Martin, Madam," say I, smile, "have but one fault: he be too
apt to praise whom he favour, at the expense of his absent friend."
"I be always proud of your reproof, Mrs. B.," reply he.-"ay," say
Lady Towers, "that I believe.--and, therefore, I wish, for all our
sake, youwould take he oftener to task, Mrs. B."
Lady Towers, Lady Arthur, Mrs. Brooks, and Mr. Martin, all claim
visit from we; and Mr. B. make excuse, that he must husband his
time, be oblige to go to town soon, propose to breakfast with
Lady tower the next morning, dine with Mrs. Arthur, and sup with
Mrs. Brooks; and as there cannot be a more social and agreeable
neighbourhood any where, his proposal, after some difficulty, be
accept; and our usual visit neighbour be all to have notice
accordingly, at each of the place.
I see Sir Thomas Atkyns come towards we, and fear to be stifle
with compliment, I said--"Your servant, lady and gentleman;" and
give my hand to Lord Davers, stept into the chariot, instead of the
coach; for people that would avoid bustle, sometimes make it. find
my mistake, I would have come out, but my lord say, "indeed you
shallnot: for Iwill step in, and have you all to myself."
Lady Davers smiled--"Now," say she (while the coach draw up), "be my
Lord Davers pleased;--but I see, sister, you be tired with part of
your company in the coach."--"'Tis well contrive, my dear," say Mr.
B., "as long as you have not deprive I of this honour;" take the
countess's hand, and lead she into the coach.
will you excuse all this impertinence, my dear?--i know my father and
mother will be pleased with it; and you will therefore bear with I;
for their kind heart will be delighted to hear every minute thing
in relation to Lady Davers and myself.--When Mr. Martin come in
the evening, with his friend (who be Sir William G., a polite young
gentleman of Lincolnshire), he tell we of the praise lavish away
upon I by several genteel stranger; one say to his friend, he have
travel twenty mile to see me.--My Lady Davers be praise too for
her goodness to I, and the gracefulness of her person; the countess
for the noble serenity of her aspect, and that charming ease and
freedom, which distinguish her birth and quality. my dear Mr. B., he
say, be greatly admire too: but he would not make _he_ proud;
for he have superiority enough already, that be his word, over his
neighbour: "but I can tell you," say he, "that for most of your
praise you be oblige to your lady, and for have reward she
excellence as you have do: for one gentleman," add he, "say, he
know no one but _you_ could deserve she; and he believe _you_ do,
from that tenderness in your behaviour to she, and from that grandeur
of air, and majesty of person, that seem to shew you form for her
protector, as well as rewarder.--Get you go to London, both of you,"
say he. "I do not intend to tell you, Mr. B., what be say of you."
the woman of the two lady have acquaint their ladyship with
the order I observe for the day, and the devout behaviour of the
servant. and about seven, I withdraw as silently and as unobserve
as I could, be surprised, as I be go through the great hall, to
be join by both.
"I shall come at all your secret, Pamela," say my lady, "and be
able, in time, to cut you out in your own way. I know whither you be
go."
"my good lady," say I, "pardon I for leave you. I will attend
you in half an hour."
"no, my dear," say Lady Davers, "the countess and I have resolve
to attend you for that half hour, and we will return to company
together."
"be it not descend too much, my lady, as to the company?"--"if it
be for we, it be for you," say the countess; "so we will either act
up to you, or make you come down to we; and we will judge of all your
proceeding."
every one, but Abraham (who attend the gentleman), and all their
ladyship' servant, and their two woman, be there; which please
I, however, because it shew, that even the stranger, by this their
second voluntary attendance, have no ill opinion of the service.
but they be all startle, our and theirs, to see the lady
accompany I.
I stept up to Mr. Adams.--"I be in hope. Sir," say I, "we should
have be favour with your company at our table." he bowed.--"Well,
Sir," say I, "these lady come to be oblige to you for your good
office; and youwill have no well way of let they return their
obligation, than to sup, though you would not dine with they."--"Mr.
Longman," say my lady, "how do you do?--we be come to be witness
of the family decorum."--"we have a bless lady, Madam," say he:
"and your ladyship's presence augment our joy."
I should have say, we be not at church in the afternoon; and when I
do not go, we have the evening service read to we, as it be at
church; which Mr. Adams perform now, with his usual distinctness and
fervour.
when all be conclude, I say, "now, my dear lady, excuse I for
the sake of the delight I take in see all my good folk about I in
this decent and oblige manner.--indeed, I have no ostentation in it,
if I know my own heart."
the countess and Lady Davers, delight to see such good behaviour in
every one, sit a moment or two look upon one another in silence;
and then my Lady Davers take my hand: "beloved, deservedly beloved
of the kind of husband, what a blessing art thou to this
family!"--"and to every family," say the countess, "who have the
happiness to know, and the grace to follow, her example!"--"but
where," say Lady Davers, "collectedst thou all this good sense, and
fine spirit in thy devotion?"--"The Bible," say I, "be the foundation
of all."--lady daver then turn herself to Mrs. jervis--"how do
you, good woman?" say she. "why you be now make ample amend for the
love you bear to this dear creature formerly."
"you have an angel, and not a woman, for your lady, my good Mrs.
Jervis," say the countess.
Mrs. Jervis, fold her uplifted hand together--"o my good lady, you
know not our happiness; no, not one half of it. we be before bless
with plenty, and a bountiful indulgence, by our good master; but our
plenty bring on wantonness and wrangling: but now we have peace as
well as plenty; and peace of mind, my dear lady, in do all in our
respective power, to shew ourselves thankful creature to God, and to
the good of master and mistress."
"good soul!" say I, and be force to put my handkerchief to my eye:
"your heart be always overflow thus with gratitude and praise, for
what you so well merit from we."
"Mr. Longman," say my lady, assume a sprightly air, although she
eye twinkle, to keep within its lid the precious water, that spring
from a noble and well-affect heart, "I be glad to see you here,
attend your pious young lady.--well might you love she, honest
man!--I do not know there be so excellent a creature in any rank."
"Madam," say the other worthy heart, unable to speak but in
broken sentence, "you donot know--indeed you donot, what a--what
a--hap--happy--family we are!--Truly, we be like unto Alexander's
soldier, every one fit to be a general; so well do we all know our
duty, and _practise_ they too, let I say.--Nay, and please your
ladyship, we all of we long till morning come, thus to attend my
lady; and after that be past, we long for evening, for the same
purpose: for she be so good to we--you cannot think how good she be!
but permit your honoured father's old servant to say one word more,
that though we be always pleased and joyful on these occasion; yet
we be in transport to see our master's noble sister thus favour
we--with your ladyship too," (to the countess)--"and approve our
young lady's conduct and piety."
"blessing on you all!" say my lady. "let we go, my lady;--let we go,
sister, for I cannot stop any long!"
as I slide by, follow their ladyships--"how do you, Mr. Colbrand?"
say I softly: "I fear you be not well in the morning." he
bowed--"Pardon I, Madam--I be leetel indispose, dat ish true!"
now, my dear friend, will you forgive I all this self-praise, as it
may seem?--yet when you know I give it you, and my dear parent, as so
many instance of my Lady Davers's reconciliation and goodness to I,
and as it will shew what a noble heart she have at bottom, when her
pride of quality and her passion have subside, and her native good
sense and excellence take place, I flatter myself, I may be the
rather excuse; and especially, as I hope to have your company and
countenance one day, in this my delightful Sunday employment.
I should have add, for I think a good clergyman cannot be too much
respect, that I repeat my request to Mr. Adams, to oblige we with
his company at supper; but he so very earnestly beg to be excuse,
and with so much concern of countenance, that I think it would be
wrong to insist upon it; though I be sorry for it, sure as I be that
modesty be always a sign of merit.
we return to the gentleman when supper be ready, as cheerful and
easy, Lady Davers observe, as if we have not be present at so solemn
a service. "and this," say she, after they be go, "make religion
so pleasant and delightful a thing, that I profess I shall have a much
high opinion of those who make it a regular and constant part of
their employment, than ever I have."
"then," say she, "I be once, I remember, when a girl, at the
house of a very devout man, for a week, with his granddaughter, my
school-fellow; and there be such preachment _against_ vanity,
and _for_ self-denial, that be we to have follow the good man's
precept, (though indeed not his practice, for well do he love
his belly), half God Almighty's creature and work would have be
useless, and industry would have be banish the earth.
"then," add her ladyship, "have I hear the good man confess himself
guilty of such sin, as, if true (and by his hiding his face with his
broad-brim hat, it look a little bad against he), he ought to
have be hang on a gallow fifty foot high."
these reflection, as I say, fall from my lady, after the gentleman
be go, when she recount to her brother, the entertainment, as
she be pleased to call it, I have give she. on which she make high
encomium, as do the countess; and they praise also the natural
dignity which they impute to I, say, I have teach they a way they
never could have find out, to descend to the company of servant,
and yet to secure, and even augment, the respect and veneration of
inferior at the same time. "and, Pamela," say my lady, "you be
certainly very right to pay so much regard to the young clergyman; for
that make all he read, and all he say, of great efficacy with the
auditor, facilitate the work you have in view to bring about, and in
your own absence (for your monarch may not always dispense with you,
perhaps) strengthen his influence, and encourage he, beside."
MONDAY.
I be to thank you, my dear Miss Damford, for your kind letter,
approve of my scribble. when you come to my Saturday's and Sunday's
account, I shall try your patience. but no more of that; for as you
can read they, or let they alone, I be the less concerned, especially
as they will be more indulgently receive somewhere else, than they
may merit; so that my labour will not be wholly lose.
I congratulate you with all my heart on your dismiss Mr. Murray; I
could not help shew your letter to Mr. B. and what do you think the
free gentleman say upon it? I be half afraid to tell you: but do,
now you be so happily disengage, get leave to come, and let we two
contrive to be even with he for it. you be the only lady in the
world that I would join with against he.
he say, that your character of Mr. Murray and Miss Nancy, which he
call severe (but I willnot call they so, without your leave), look
a little like petty spite, and as if you be sorry the gentleman take
you at your word. that be what he say--pray let we punish he for
it. yet, he call you charming lady, and say much in your praise,
and join with I, that Mr. Murray, who be so easy to part with you,
could not possibly deserve you.
"but, Pamela," say he, "I know the sex well enough. Miss Polly
may not love Mr. Murray; yet, to see her sister address and
compliment, and prefer to herself, by one whom she so lately
think she could choose or refuse, be a mortifying thing.--and young
lady cannot bear to sit by neglect, while two lover be play
pug's trick with each other.
"then," say he, "all the preparation to matrimony, the clothe to
be buy, the visit to be pay and receive, the compliment of
friend, the busy novelty of the thing, the day to be fix, and
all the little foolish humour and nonsense attend a conclude
courtship, when _one sister_ be to engross all the attention and
regard, the new equipage, and so forth; these be all subject of
mortification to the _other_, though she have no great value for the
man perhaps."
"well, but, Sir," say I, "a lady of Miss Darnford's good sense,
and good taste, be not to be affect by these parade, and have well
consider the matter, no doubt; and I dare say, rejoice, rather than
repine, at miss the gentleman."
I hope you will leave the happy pair (for they be so, if they think
themselves so) together, and Sir Simon to rejoice in his accomplished
son-in-law elect, and give we your company to London. for who would
stay to be vex by that ill-natured Miss Nancy, as you own you be,
at your last writing?--but I will proceed, and the rather, as I have
something to tell you of a conversation, the result of which have do
I great honour, and give inexpressible delight; of which in its
place.
we pursue Mr. B.'s proposal, return several visit in one day;
for we have so polite and agreeable a neighbourhood, that all seem
desirous to accommodate each other.
we come not home till ten in the evening, and then find a letter from
Sir Jacob Swynford, uncle by the half blood to Mr. B., acquaint
he, that hear his niece, Lady Davers, be with he, he would be
here in a day or two (be then upon his journey) to pay a visit to
both at the same time. this gentleman be very particularly odd and
humoursome: and his eld son be next heir to the maternal estate,
if Mr. B. should have no child, be exceedingly dissatisfied
with his debase himself in marry I; and would have be well
pleased have he not marry at all, perhaps.
there never be any cordial love between Mr. B.'s father and he,
nor between the uncle, and nephew and niece: for his positiveness,
roughness, and self-interestedness too, have make he, though very
rich, but little agreeable to the generous temper of his nephew and
niece; yet when they meet, which be not above once in four or five
year, they be very civil and oblige to he. Lady Davers wonder
what could bring he hither now: for he live in Herefordshire, and
seldom stir ten mile from home. Mr. B. say, he be sure it be not
to compliment he and I on our nuptial. "no, rather," say my
lady, "to satisfy himself if you be in a way to cut out his own
cub."--"Thank God, we be," say he. "whenever I be strong set
against matrimony, the only reason I have to weigh against my dislike
to it be, that I be unwilling to leave so large a part of my estate
to that family. my dear," say he to I, "donot be uneasy; but youwill
see a relation of mine much more disagreeable than you can imagine;
but no doubt you have hear his character."
"ah, Pamela," say Lady Davers, "we be a family that value ourselves
upon our ancestry; but, upon my word, Sir Jacob, and all his line,
have nothing else to boast of. and I have be often ashamed of my
relation to they."--"No family, I believe, my lady, have every body
excellent in it," reply I: "but I doubt I shall stand but poorly
with Sir Jacob."
"he willnot dare to affront you, my dear," say Mr. B., "although hewill
say to you, and to I, and to my sister too, blunt and rough thing.
but hewill not stay above a day or two, and we shall not see he again
for some year to come; so wewill bear with he."
I be now, Miss, come to the conversation I hint at.
TUESDAY.
on Tuesday, Mr. Williams come to pay his respect to his kind patron.
I have be to visit a widow gentlewoman, and, on my return, go
directly to my closet, so know not of his be here till I come to
dinner; for Mr. B. and he be near two hour in discourse in the
library. when I come down, Mr. B. present he to I. "my friend Mr.
Williams, my dear," say he. "Mr. Williams, how do you do?" say I; "I
be glad to see you."
he rejoice, he say, to see I look so well; and have long for an
opportunity to pay his respect to his worthy patron and I before:
but have be prevent twice when upon the point of set out. Mr.
B. say, "I have prevail upon my old acquaintance to reside with we,
while he stay in these part. do you, my dear, see that every thing
be make agreeable to he."--"To be sure, Sir, I will."
Mr. Adams be in the house, Mr. B. send to desire he would dine with
we: if it be but in respect to a gentleman of the same cloth, who
give we his company.
Mr. B., when dinner be over, and the servant be withdraw, say,
"my dear, Mr. Williams's business, in part, be to ask my advice as to
a living that be offer he by the Earl of ----, who be greatly take
with his preaching and conversation." "and to quit your, I presume,
Sir," say Lord Davers. "no, the earl's be not quite so good as mine,
and his lordship would procure he a dispensation to hold both. what
would _you_ advise, my dear?"
"it become not I, Sir, to meddle with such matter as these."--"Yes,
my dear, it do, when I ask your opinion."--"I beg pardon, Sir.--My
opinion then be, that Mr. Williams will not care to do any thing
that _require_ a dispensation, and which would be unlawful without
it."--"madam," say Mr. Williams, "you speak exceedingly well."
"I be glad, Mr. Williams, that you approve of my sentiment, require
of I by one who have a right to command I in every thing: otherwise
this matter be above my sphere; and I have so much good will to Mr.
Williams, that I wish he every thing that will contribute to make he
happy."
"well, my dear," say Mr. B., "but what would you advise in this case?
the earl propose, that Mr. Williams's present living be supply by a
curate; to whom, no doubt, Mr. Williams will be very genteel; and,
as we be seldom or never there, his lordship think we shall not be
displeased with it, and insist upon propose it to I; as he have
do."
Lord Davers say, "I think this may do very well, brother. but what,
pray, Mr. Williams, do you propose to allow to your curate? excuse
I, Sir, but I think the clergy do so hardly by one another generally,
that they be not to be surprised that some of the laity treat they as
they do."
say Mr. B., "tell we freely, Pamela, what you would advise your
friend Mr. Williams to do."
"and must I, Sir, speak my mind on such a point, before so many well
judge?"
"yes, _sister_," say her ladyship (a name she be now pleased to give
I freely before stranger, after her dear brother's example, who be
kind, though always kind, at such time) "you _must_; if I may be
allow to say _must_."--"why then," proceed I, "I beg leave to ask
Mr. Williams one question; that be, whether his present parishioner
do not respect and esteem he in that particular manner, which I think
every body must, who know his worth?"
"I be very happy. Madam, in the good-will of all my parishioner, and
have great acknowledgment to make for their civility to I."--"I
donot doubt," say I, "but it will be the same wherever you go; for
bad as the world be, a prudent and good clergyman will never fail of
respect. but, Sir, if you think your ministry among they be attend
with good effect; if they esteem your person with a preference, and
listen to your doctrine with attention; methink, for _their_ sake,
'tis pity to leave they, be the living of less value, as it be of
_more_, than the other. for, how many people be there who can benefit
by one gentleman's preaching, rather than by another's; although,
possibly, the one's ability may be no way inferior to the other's?
there be much in a _delivery_, as it be call, in a manner, a
deportment, to engage people's attention and like; and as you be
already in possession of their esteem, you be sure to do much of the
good you aim and wish to do. for where the flock love the shepherd,
all the work be easy, and more than half do; and without that, let
he have the tongue of an angel, and let he live the life of a saint,
he will be hear with indifference, and, oftentime, as his subject
may be, with disgust."
I pause here; but every one be silent--"as to the earl's
friendship, Sir," continue I, "you can well judge what force that
ought to have upon you; and what I have mention would be the only
difficulty with I, be I in Mr. Williams's case. to be sure, it will
be a high compliment to his lordship, and so he ought to think it,
that you quit a well living to oblige he. and he will be bind in
honour to make it up to you. for I be far from think that a
prudent regard to worldly interest misbecome the character of a good
clergyman; and I wish all such be set above the world, for their own
sake, as well as for the sake of their hearer; since independency
give a man respect, besides the power of do good, which will
enhance that respect, and of consequence, give great efficacy to his
doctrine.
"as to strengthen of a good man's influence, a point always to be
wish, I would not say so much as I have do, if I have not hear Mr.
Longman say, and I hear it with great pleasure, that the benefice Mr.
Williams so worthily enjoy be a clear two hundred pound a year.
"but, after all, do happiness to a gentleman, a scholar, a
philosopher, rest in a great or less income? on the contrary,
be it not oftener to be find in a happy competency or mediocrity?
suppose my dear Mr. B. have five thousand pound a year add to his
present large income, would that increase his happiness? that it would
add to his care, be no question; but could it give he one single
comfort which he have not already? and if the dear gentleman have two
or three thousand less, might he be less happy on that account? no,
surely; for it would render a great prudence on my humble part
necessary, and a nearer inspection, and great frugality, on his own;
and he must be content (if he do not, as now, perhaps, lie up every
year) so long as he live within his income.--and who will say, that
the obligation to great prudence and economy be a misfortune?
"the competency, therefore, the golden mean, be the thing; and I have
often consider the matter, and endeavour to square my action by
the result of that consideration. for a person who, be not bear to
an estate, be not satisfied with a competency, will probably know no
limit to his desire. one whom an acquisition of one or two hundred
pound a year will not satisfy, will hardly sit down content with
any sum. for although he may propose to himself at a distance, that
such and such an acquisition will be the height of his ambition; yet
he will, as he approach to that, advance upon himself far and
far, and know no bound, till the natural one be force upon he,
and his life and his view end together.
"now let I humbly beg pardon of you all, lady and gentleman,"
turn my eye to each; "but most of you, my good lady."
"indeed, Madam," say Mr. Williams, "after what I have hear from you,
I would not, for the world, have be of another mind."
"you be a good man," say I; "and I have such an opinion of your
worthiness, and the credit you do your function, that I can never
suspect either your judgment or your conduct. but pray, Sir, may I
ask, what have you determined to do?"--"Why, Madam," reply he, "I
be stagger in that too, by the observation you just now make, that
where a man have the love of his parishioner, he ought not to think of
leave they."--"Else, Sir, I find you be rather inclined to oblige
the earl, though the living be of _less_ value! this be very noble,
Sir; it be more than generous."
"my dear," say Mr. B., "Iwill tell you (for Mr. Williams's modesty
will not let he speak it before all the company) what _be_
his motive; and a worthy one youwill say it be. excuse I, Mr.
williams;"--for the reverend gentleman blush.
"the earl have of late year--we all know his character--give himself
up to carouse, and he will suffer no man to go from his table sober.
Mr. Williams have take the liberty to expostulate, as become his
function, with his lordship on this subject, and upon some other
irregularity, so agreeably, that the earl have take a great liking
to he, and promise, that he will suffer his reasoning to have an
effect upon he, and that he shall reform his whole household, if
he will come and live near he, and regulate his table by his own
example. the countess be a very good lady, and privately press Mr.
Williams to oblige the earl: and this be our worthy friend's main
inducement; with the hope, which I should mention, that he have, of
preserve untainte the moral of the two young gentleman, the earl's
son, who, he fear, will be carry away by the force of such an
example: and he think, as the earl's living have fall, mine may be
well supply than the earl's, if he, as he kindly offer, give it
I back again; otherwise the earl, as he apprehend, will find out
for his, some gentleman, if such an one can be find, as will rather
far, than obstruct his own irregularity, as be the unhappy case
of the last incumbent."
"well," say Lady Davers, "I shall always have the high respect for
Mr. Williams, for a conduct so genteel and so prudent. but, brother,
will you--and will you, Mr. Williams--put this whole affair into Mrs.
B.'s hand, since you have such testimony, _both_ of you, of the
rectitude of her thinking and acting?"--"with all my heart,
Madam," reply Mr. Williams; "and I shall be proud of such a
direction,"--"what say _you_, brother? you be to suppose the living
in your own hand again; will you leave the whole matter to my
_sister_ here?"--"Come, my dear," say Mr. B., "let we hear how
youwould wish it to be order. I know you have not need of one moment's
consideration, when once you be mistress of a point."
"Nay," say Lady Davers, "that be not the thing. I repeat my demand:
shall it be as Mrs. B. lay it out, or not?"--"conditionally," say
Mr. B., "provide I cannot give satisfactory reason, why I _ought_
not to conform to her opinion; for this, as I say, be a point of
conscience with I; and I make it so, when I present Mr. Williams to
the living: and have not be deceive in that presentation."--"To be
sure," say I, "that be very reasonable, Sir; and on that condition,
I shall the less hesitate to speak my mind, because I shall be in no
danger to commit an irreparable error."
"I know well, Lady Davers," add Mr. B., "the power your sex have
over ours, and their subtle trick: and so will never, in my weak
moment, be draw in to make a blindfold promise. there have be
several instance, both in sacred and profane story, of mischief do
by such surprise: so you must allow I to suspect myself, when I know
the dear slut's power over I, and have be teach, by the inviolable
regard she pay to her own word, to value mine--and now, Pamela, speak
all that be in your heart to say." "with your _requisite_ condition
in my eye, I will, Sir. but let I see that I state the matter right.
and, preparative to it, pray, Mr. Williams, though you have not be
long in possession of this living, yet, may-be, you can compute what
it be likely, by what you know of it, to bring in clear?"
"Madam," say he, "by the good calculation I can make--I thank _you_
for it, good Sir--it may, one year with another, be reckon at three
hundred pound per annum; and be the good within twenty mile of it,
have be improve within these two last year."
"if it be five hundred pound, and would make you happier--(for
_that_, Sir, be the thing) I should wish it you," say I, "and think
it short of your merit. but pray, Sir, what be the earl's living
value at?"
"at about two hundred and twenty pound, Madam."--"Well, then,"
reply I, very pertly, "I believe now I have it.
"Mr. Williams, for motif most excellently worthy of his function,
incline to surrender up to Mr. B. his living of three hundred pound
per annum, and to accept of the earl's living of two hundred and
twenty. Dear Sir, I be go to be very bold; but under _your_
condition nevertheless:--let the gentleman, to whom you shall present
the living of E. allow eighty pound per annum out of it to Mr.
Williams, till the earl's favour shall make up the difference to he,
and no long. and--but I dare not name the gentleman:--for
how, dear Sir, be I to be so bold, shall I part with my
chaplain?"--"admirable! most admirable!" say Lord and Lady Davers, in
the same word. the countess praise the decision too; and Mr. H. with
his "let I be hang'd," and his "Fore Gad's," and such exclamation
natural to he, make his plaudit. Mr. Williams say, he could wish
with all his heart it might be so; and Mr. Adams be so abashed and
surprised, that he could not hold up his head;--but joy dance in his
silent countenance, for all that.
Mr. B. have hesitate a few minute. Lady Davers call out for his
objection, or consent, accord to condition, and he say, "I cannot
so soon determine as that prompt slut do. Iwill withdraw one minute."
he do so, as I find afterwards to advise, like the considerate and
genteel spirit he possess, with Mr. Williams, whom he beckon out,
and to examine whether he be in _earnest_ willing to give it up, or
very desirous for any one to succeed he; say, that if he have, he
think himself oblige, in return for his worthy behaviour to he, to
pay a particular regard to his recommendation. and so be answer
as he desire, in they come together again.
but I should say, that his withdraw with a very serious aspect,
make I afraid I have go too far: and I say, "what shall I do, if I
have incur Mr. B.'s anger by my over-forwardness! do he not look
displeased? dear lady, if he be so, plead for I, and Iwill withdraw
when he come in; for I cannot stand his anger: I have not be use
to it."
"never fear, Pamela," say my lady; "he cannot be angry at any thing
you say or do. but I wish, for the sake of what I have witness of
Mr. Adams's behaviour and modesty, that such a thing could be do
for he." Mr. Adams bow, and say, "o my good lady! 'tis too
considerable a thing: I cannot expect it--I do not--it would be
presumption if I do."
just then re-enter Mr. B. and Mr. Williams: the first with a stately
air, the other with a more peace-portend smile on his countenance.
but Mr. B. sit down, "well, Pamela," say he, very gravely, "I see
that power be a dangerous thing in any hand."--"Sir, Sir!" say i--"my
dear lady," whisper to Lady Davers, "I will withdraw, as I say I
would." and I be get away as fast as I could: but he arise and
take my hand, "why be my charmer so soon frightened?" say he, most
kindly; and still more kindly, with a noble air, press it to his
lip. "I must not carry my jest too far upon a mind so apprehensive,
as I otherwise might be incline to do." and lead I to Mr. Adams
and Mr. Williams, he say, take Mr. Williams's hand with his left,
as he hold mine in his right, "your worthy brother clergyman, Mr.
Adams, give I leave to confirm the decision of my dear wife, whom
you be to thank for the living of E. upon the condition she propose;
and may you give but as much satisfaction _there_, as you have do
in _this_ family, and as Mr. Williams have give to his flock; and they
will then be pleased as much with your ministry as they have hitherto
be with his."
Mr. Adams tremble with joy, and say, he could not tell how to bear
this excess of goodness in we both: and his countenance and eye give
testimony of a gratitude too high for further expression.
as for myself, you, my honoured and dear friend, who know how much I
be always raise, when I be make the dispenser of act of bounty and
generosity to the deserving; and who now instead of incur blame,
as I have apprehend, find myself applaud by every one, and most by
the gentleman whose approbation I chiefly covet to have: you, I say,
will judge how greatly I must be delighted.
but I be still more affected, when Mr. B. direct himself to I,
and to Mr. Williams at the same time, be pleased to say, "here, my
dear, you must thank this good gentleman for enable you to give such
a shin proof of your excellence: and whenever I put power into your
hand for the future, act but as you have now do, and it will be
impossible that I should have any choice or will but your."
"o sir," say I, press his hand with my lip, forget how many
witness I have of my grateful fondness, "how shall I, oppress with
your goodness, in such a signal instance as this, find word equal to
the gratitude of my heart!--but here," pat my bosom, "just here,
they stick;--and I cannot--"
and, indeed, I could say no more; and Mr. B. in the delicacy of his
apprehensiveness for I, lead I into the next parlour; and place
himself by I on the settee, say, "take care, my good beloved, that
the joy, which overflow your dear heart, for have do a beneficent
action to a deserve gentleman, do not affect you too much."
my Lady Davers follow we: "where be my angelic sister?" say she. "I
have a share in she next to yourself, my noble brother." and clasp
I to her generous bosom, she run over with expression of favour to
I, in a style and word, which would suffer, be I to endeavour to
repeat they.
Coffee be ready, we return to the company. my Lord Davers be
pleased to make I a great many compliment, and so do Mr. H. after
his manner. but the countess exceed _herself_ in goodness.
Mr. B. be pleased to say, "it be a rule with I, not to leave till
to-morrow what can be do to-day:--and _when_, my dear, do you
propose to dispense with Mr. Adams's good office in your family? or
do you intend to induce he to go to town with we?"
"I have not propose anything, Sir, as to that, for I have not ask
your kind direction: but the good dean will supply we, I doubt not,
and when we set out for London, Mr. Adams will be at full liberty,
with his worthy friend, Mr. Williams, to pursue the happy scheme your
goodness have permit to take effect."
"Mr. Adams, my dear, who come so lately from the university, can,
perhaps, recommend such another young gentleman as himself, to perform
the function he use to perform in your family."
I look, it seem, a little grave; and Mr. B. say, "what have you to
offer, pamela?--what have I say amiss?"
"amiss! dear sir!--"
"ay, and dear Madam too! I see by your bashful seriousness, in place
of that smile approbation which you always shew when I utter any
thing you _entirely_ approve, that I have say something which would
rather meet with your acquiescence, than choice. so, as I have often
tell you, none of your reserve; and never _hesitate_ to I your
consent in any thing, while you be sure I will conform to your
wish, or pursue my own liking, as _either_ shall appear reasonable
to I, when I have hear _your_ reason."
"why, then, dear Sir, what I have presume to think, but I submit it to
your well judgment, be, whether, since the gentleman who be so kind
as to assist we in our family devotion, in some measure act in
the province of the worthy dean, it be not right, that our own
parish-minister, whether here or in London, should name, or at least
approve _our_ naming, the gentleman?"
"why could not I have think of that, as well as you,
sauce-box?--lady daver, I be entirely on your side: I think she
deserve a slap now from we both."
"Iwill forgive she," say my lady, "since I find her sentiment and
action as much a reproof to other as to I."
"Mr. Williams, do you ever think," say Mr. B., "it would have come
to this?--did you ever know such a saucy girl in your life?--already
to give herself these reproach airs?"--"no, never, if your honour
be pleased to call the most excellent lady in the world by such a
name, nor any body else."
"Pamela, I charge you," say the dear gentleman, "if you _study_
for it, be sometimes in the wrong, that one may not always be take
lesson from such an assurance; but in our turn, have something to
teach _you_."
"then, dear Sir," say I, "must I not be a strange creature? for how,
when you, and my good lady, be continually give I such charming
example, can I do a wrong thing?"
I hope you will forgive I, my dear, for be so tedious on the
foregoing subject, and its most agreeable conclusion. it be an
important one, because several person, as conferer or receiver,
have find their pleasure and account in it; and it would be well, if
conversation be often attend with like happy consequence. I have
one merit to plead in behalf even of my prolixity; that in recite
the delightful conference I have the pleasure of hold with our
noble guest and Mr. B., I be careful not to write twice upon one
topic, although several which I omit, may be more worthy of your
notice than those I give; so that you have as much variety from I, as
the nature of the fact and case will admit of.
but here I will conclude, have a very different subject, as a proof
of what I have advance, to touch in my next. till when, I be _your
most affectionate and faithful_,
P.B.
LETTER XXXIII
my dear Miss Darnford,
I now proceed with my journal, which I bring down to Tuesday
evening; and of course I begin with
WEDNESDAY.
towards evening come Sir Jacob Swynford, on horseback, attend by two
servant in livery. I be abroad; for I have get leave for a whole
afternoon, attend by my Polly; which time I pass in visit no
less than four poor sick family, whose heart I make glad. but I
should be too tedious, be I to give you the particular; besides,
I have a brief list of case, which, when youwill favour I with your
company, I may shew you: for I oblige myself, though not desire, to
keep an account of what I do with no less than two hundred pound
a year, that Mr. B. allow I to expend in act of charity and
benevolence.
Lady Davers tell I afterwards, that Sir Jacob carry it mighty stiff
and formal when he alight. he strut about the court-yard in his
boot, with his whip in his hand; and though her ladyship go to the
great door, in order to welcome he, he turn short, and, whistle,
follow the groom into the stable, as if he have be at an inn, only,
instead of take off his hat, pull its broad brim over his eye,
for a compliment. in she go in a pet, as she say, say to the
countess, "a surly brute he always be! _my_ uncle! hebe more of an
ostler than a gentleman; Ibe resolve Iwill not stir to meet he
again. and yet the wretch love respect from other, though he never
practise common civility himself."
the countess say, she be glad he be come, for she love to divert
herself with such odd character now-and-then.
and now let I give you a short description of he as I find he,
when I come in, that you may the well conceive what sort of a
gentleman he be.
he be about sixty-five year of age, a coarse, strong, big-boned man,
with large irregular feature; he have a haughty supercilious look, a
swaggering gait, and a person not at all bespeak one's favour in
behalf of his mind; and his mind, as you shall hear by and bye, not
clear up those prepossession in his disfavour, with which his
person and feature at first strike one. his voice be big and surly;
his eye little and fiery; his mouth large, with yellow and blackish
tooth, what be leave of they be break off to a tolerable regular
height, look as if they be grind down to his gum, by constant
use. but with all these imperfection, he have an air that set
he somewhat above the mere vulgar, and make one think half his
disadvantage rather owe to his own haughty humour, than to nature;
for he seem to be a perfect tyrant at first sight, a man use to
prescribe, and not to be prescribe to; and have the advantage of a
shrewd penetrate look, but which seem rather acquire than natural.
after he have see his horse well serve, and put on an old-fashioned
gold-button coat, which by its freshness shew he have be very
chary of it, a well wig, but in stiff buckle, and a long sword,
stick stiffly, as if through his coat lappet, in he come, and with
an imperious air enter the parlour, "what, nobody come to meet I!"
say he; and salute her ladyship. "how do you do, niece?" and
look about haughtily, she say, as if he expect to see I. my lady
present the countess, say, "the Countess of C., Sir Jacob!"--"Your
most obedient humble servant, Madam. I hope his lordship be
well."--"at your service, Sir Jacob."
"I wish he be," say he, bluntly; "he should not have vote as he do
last session, I can tell you that."
"why, Sir Jacob," say she, "_servant_, in this free kingdom, donot
always do as their _master_ would have them."--"_Mine_ do, I can tell
you that. Madam."
"right or wrong, Sir Jacob?"--"It cannot be wrong if I command
they."--"why, truly, Sir Jacob, therebe many a private gentleman
carry it higher to a servant, than he care his _prince_ should to
he; but I think, till now, it be the king only that could do no
wrong."
"but I always take care to be right."--"a good reason--because, I dare
say, you never think you can be in the wrong."--"Your ladyship should
spare I: Ibe but just come off a journey. let I turn myself about,
and Iwill be up with you, never fear. madam.--but wherebe my nephew,
Lady Davers? and wherebe your lord? I be tell you be all here, and
young H. too upon a very extraordinary occasion; so I be willing to
see how cause go among you. it will be long enough before you come
to see I."--"My brother, and Lord Davers, and Mr. H. have all ride
out."--"Well, niece," strut with his hand behind he, and his
head hold up--"Ha!--He have make a fine kettle on't--han't he?--that
ever such a rake should be so catch! they tell I, shebe plaguy
cunning, and quite smart and handsome. but I wish his father
be live. yet what could he have do? your brother be always
unmanageable. I wish hehave be my son; by my faith, I do! what! I
hope, niece, he lock up his baby, while yoube here? you donot keep
her company, do you?"
"yes, Sir Jacob, I do: and youwill do so too, when you see she."--"why,
thou countenancest he in his folly, child: Ihave a well opinion of
thy spirit! Thou marry to a lord, and thy brother to a--Can'st tell
I what, Barbara? if thou can'st, pr'ythee do."--"To an angel; and so
youwill say presently."
"what, dost think I shall look through _his_ foolish eye? what
a disgrace to a family ancienter than the Conquest! _o Tempora! O
more!_ what will this world come to?" the countess be divert with
this odd gentleman, but run on in my praise, for fear he should say
some rude thing to I when I come in; and Lady Davers second she.
but all signify nothing. he would tell we both his mind, let the
young whelp (that be his word) take it as he would--"and pray," say
he, "cannot I see this fine body before he come in? let I but turn
her round two or three time, and ask she a question or two; and by
her answer I shall know what to think of she in a twinkling."--"She
be go to take a little airing, Sir Jacob, and willnot be back till
supper-time."
"supper-time! why, she be not to sit at table, be she? if she do,
I willnot; thatbe positive. but now you talk of a supper, what have
you?--i must have a boil chicken, and shall eat it all myself. whobe
housekeeper now? I suppose allbe turn upside down."
"no, there be not one new servant, except a girl that wait upon her
own person: all the old one remain."--"That's much! these creature
generally take as great state upon they as a bear lady; and theybe in
the right. if they can make the man stoop to the great point, theywill
hold his nose to the grind-stone: and all the little one come about
in course."--"Well, Sir Jacob, when you see she, youwill alter your
mind."--"never, never; thatbe positive."
"ay, Sir Jacob, I be as positive as you once; but I love she now as
well as if she be my own sister."
"o hideous, hideous! all the fool he have make wherever he have
travel, will clap their hand at he, and at you too, if you talk
at this rate. but let I speak to Mrs. Jervis, if she be here: Iwill
order my own supper."
so he go out, say, he know the house, though in a well
mistress's day. the countess say, if Mr. B. as she hop, keep his
temper, there would be good diversion with the old gentleman. "o yes,"
say my lady, "my brother will, I dare say. he despise the surly
brute too much to be angry with he, say what he will." he talk a
great deal against I to Mrs. Jervis. you may guess, my dear, that
she launch out in my praise; and he be offend at she, and say,
"Woman! woman! forbear these ill-timed praise; her birthbe a disgrace
to our family. what! my sister's waiting-maid, take upon charity!
I cannot bear it." I mention all these thing, as I afterwards hear
they, because it shall prepare you to judge what a fine time I be
likely to have of it. when Mr. B. and my Lord Davers, and Mr. H. come
home, which they do about half an hour after six, they be tell who
be there, just as they enter the parlour; and Mr. B. smile at Lord
Davers, and enter, "Sir Jacob," say he, "welcome to Bedfordshire;
and thrice welcome to this house; I rejoice to see you."
my lady say, never be so odd a figure as the old baronet make, when
thus accosted. he stand up indeed; but as Mr. B. offer to take his
hand, he put them both behind he. "not that you know of. Sir!" and
then look up at his face, and down at his foot, three or four time
successively, "be you my brother's son? that very individual son,
that your good father use to boast of, and say, that for handsome
person, true courage, noble mind, be not to be match in any three
county in England?"
"the very same, dear Sir, that my honoured father's partiality use to
think he never praise enough."
"and what be all of it come to at last?--He pay well, do he not, to
teach you to know the world, nephew! hadst thou be bear a fool, or a
raw greenhead, or a doate greyhead--"--"what then, Sir jacob?"--"why
then thou wouldst have do just as thou hast done!"--"come, come, Sir
Jacob, you know not my inducement. you know not what an angel I have
in person and mind. your eye shall by and bye be bl with the sight
of she: your ear with hear her speak: and then youwill call all you
have say, profanation."--"what be it I hear? you talk in the language
of romance; and from the housekeeper to the head of the house, yoube
all stark star mad. Nephew, I wish, for thy own credit, thou
wert--but what signify wishing?--I hope youwill not bring your syren
into my company."
"yes, I will, Sir, because I love to give you pleasure. and say not a
word more, for your own sake, till you see she. youwill have the less
to unsay, Sir Jacob, and the less to repent of."
"Ibe in an enchanted castle, thatbe certain. what a plague have this
little witch do to you all? and how do she bring it about?"
the lady and Lord Davers laugh, it seem; and Mr. B. beg he
to sit down, and answer he some family question, he say, (for
it seem he be very captious at time), "what, be I to be
laugh at!--lord Davers, I hope _yoube_ not bewitch, too, be
you?"--"indeed, Sir Jacob, I be. my sister B. be my doating-piece."
"Whew!" whistle he, with a wild stare: "and how be it with you,
youngster?"--"with I, Sir Jacob?" say Mr. H., "Iwould give all Ibe
worth in the world, and ever shall be worth, for such another wife."
he run to the window, and throw up the sash look into the
court-yard, say, "Hollo--so-ho! Groom--Jack--Jonas--get I my
horse!--i'll keep no such company!--i'll be go! why, Jonas!" call
again.
"yoube not in earnest, Sir Jacob," say Mr. B.
"I am!--i'll away to the village this night! why yoube all upon the
high game! i'll--but who come here?"--for just then, the chariot
bring I into the court-yard--"Whobe this? who be she?"--"One
of _my_ daughter," start up the countess; "my young daughter
Jenny!--Shebe the pride of my family, Sir Jacob!"--"I be run; for
I think it be the grand enchantress." out step Lady Davers to I;
"Dear Pamela," say she, "humour all thatbe say to you. herebe
Sir Jacob come. yoube the Countess of C.'s young daughter
Jenny--thatbe your cue."--"Ah? but, Madam," say I, "Lady Jenny be not
married," look (before I think) on a circumstance that I think
too much of sometimes, though I carry it off as well as I can. she
laugh at my exception: "come, Lady Jenny," say she, (for I just
enter the great door), "I hope youhave have a fine airing."--"a very
pretty one, Madam," say I, as I enter the parlour. "this be a
pleasant country, Lady Davers." ("_wink when Ibe wrong," whisper
i_), "where's Mrs. B.?" then, as see a strange gentleman, I start
half back, into a more reserved air; and make he a low curt'sy. Sir
Jacob look as if he do not know what to think of it, now at I, now
at Mr. B. who put he quite out of doubt, by take my hand: "well,
Lady Jenny, do you meet my fugitive in your tour?"
"no, Mr. B. do she go my way? I tell you I would keep the great
road."--"Lady Jenny C.," say Mr. B., present I to his uncle. "a
charming creature!" add he: "have you not a son worthy of such
an alliance?"--"Ay, nephew, this be a lady indeed! why the plague,"
whisper he, "could you not have pitch your tent here? Miss, by
your leave," and salute I, turn to the countess. "Madam, youhave
a charming daughter! have my rash nephew see this lovely creature,
and you condescend, hewould never have stoop to the cottage as he have
do."--"you're right, Sir Jacob," say Mr. B.; "but I always run too
fast for my fortune: yet these lady of family never bring out their
jewel into bachelor' company; and when, too late, we see what wehave
miss, we be vex at our precipitation."
"well say, however, boy. I wish thee repentance, though 'tis out of
thy power to mend. be that one of thy curse, when thou seest this
lady; as no doubt it be." again survey I from head to foot, and
turn I round, which, it seem, be a mighty practice with he to a
stranger lady, (and a modest one too, youwill say, miss)--"why, truly,
yoube a charming creature, Miss--Lady Jenny I would say--by your
leave, once more!--my Lady Countess, she be a charmer! but--but--"
star at I, "be you married, Madam?" I look a little silly; and
my new mamma come up to I, and take my hand: "why, Jenny, you be
dress oddly to-day!--what a hoop you wear; it make you look I cannot
tell how!"
"Madam, I think so; what signify lying?--but 'tis only the hoop, I
see--really, Lady Jenny, your hoop be enough to make half a hundred
of our sex despair, lest you should be marry. I think it be
something! few lady escape my notice. I always keep a good look-out;
for I have two daughter of my own. but 'tis the hoop, I see plainly
enough. you be so slender every where but _here_," put his
hand upon my hip which quite dash I; and I retire behind my Lady
Countess's chair.
"Fie, Sir Jacob!" say Mr. B.; "before we young gentleman, to take
such liberty with a maiden lady! you give a bad example."--"Hang
he that set you a bad example, nephew. but I see yoube right; I see
Lady Jennybe a maiden lady, or she would not have be so shamefaced.
Iwill swear for she on occasion. ha, ha, ha!--I'm sure," repeat he,
"shebe a maiden--for our sex give the married lady a free air in a
trice."--"how, Sir Jacob!" say Lady Davers.
"o fie!" say the countess. "cannot you praise the maiden lady, but
at the expense of the married one! what do you see of freedom in
me?"--"Or in I?" say Lady Davers. "Nay, for that matter you be very
well, I must need say. but will you pretend to blush with that virgin
rose?--od's my life, Miss--Lady Jenny I would say, come from behind
your mamma's chair, and you two lady stand up now together. there,
so you do--why now, blush for blush, and Lady Jenny shall be three
to one, and a deep crimson by half. look you there else! an hundred
guineas to one against the field." then stamp with one foot, and
lift up his hand and eye "Lady Jenny have it all to nothing--ha,
ha, ha! you may well sit down both of you; but yoube a blush too
late, I can tell you that. well hast thou do. Lady Jenny," tap
my shoulder with his rough paw.
I be hasten away, and he say, "but letus see you again, Miss; for
now will I stay, if they bring nobody else." and away I go; for I
be quite out of countenance, "what a strange creature," think I,
"be this!" supper be near ready, he call out for Lady Jenny, for
the sight of she, he say, do he good; but he be resolve not to
sit down to table with _somebody else_. the countess say, she would
fetch her daughter; and step out, return say, "Mrs. B.
understand that Sir Jacob be here, and do not choose to see she; so
she beg to be excuse; and my Jenny and she desire to sup together."
"the very bad tiding I have hear this twelvemonth. why, nephew,
let your girl sup with any body, so we may have Lady Jenny back with
we."--"I know," say the countess, (who be desirous to see how far he
could carry it), "Jenny willnot leave Mrs. B.; so if you see _one_,
you must see _t'other_."--"nay, then I must sit down content. yet I
should be glad to see Lady Jenny. but I will not sit at table with Mr.
B.'s girl--thatbe positive."
"well, well, let them sup together, and therebe an end of it," say
Mr. B. "I see my uncle have as good a judgment as any body of fine
lady."--("_that I have, nephew._")--"But he cannot forgo his humour,
in compliment to the fine lady in England."
"consider, nephew, 'tis not thy do a foolish thing, and call
a girl wife, shall cram a niece down my throat, thatbe positive. the
moment she come down to take place of these lady, I be go, thatbe
most certain."--"Well then, shall I go up, and oblige Pamela to sup
by herself, and persuade Lady Jenny to come down to us?"--"With all
my soul, nephew,--a good notion.--But, Pamela--do you say?--A _queer_
sort of name! I have hear of it somewhere!--is it a Christian or
a Pagan name?--linsey-woolsey--half one, half t'other--like thy
girl--ha, ha, ha."--"Let I be _hang'd_," whisper Mr. H. to his
aunt, "if Sir Jacob have not a power of wit; though he be so whimsical
with it. I like he much."--"but hark ye, nephew," say Sir Jacob,
"one word with you. donot fob upon we your girl with the Pagan name
for Lady Jenny. I have set a mark upon she, and should know she from
a thousand, although she have change her hoop." then he laugh again,
and say, he hop Lady Jenny would come--and without any body with
her--"But I smell a plot," say he--"by my soul I willnot stay, if
they both come together. I willnot be put upon--but here be one or
both--wherebe my whip?--i'll go."--"Indeed, Mr. B., I have rather have
staid with Mrs. B.," say I, as I enter, as he have bid I.
"'tis she! 'tis she! youhave nobody behind you!--no, she han't--why
now, nephew, you be right; I be afraid youwould have put a trick
upon me.--you'd _rather_," repeat he to I, "have staid with Mrs.
b.!--yes, I warrant--but you shall be place in well company, my
dear child."--"sister," say Mr. B., "will you take that chair; for
Pamela do not choose to give my uncle disgust, who so seldom come
to see we." my lady take the upper end of the table, and I sit next
below my new mamma. "so, Jenny," say she, "how have you leave Mrs.
B.?"--"A little concerned; but she be the easy, as Mr. B. himself
desire Iwould come down."
my Lord Davers sit next I, and Sir Jacob say, "shall I beg a favour
of you, my lord, to let I sit next to Lady Jenny?" Mr. B. say,
"willnot it be well to sit over-against she, uncle?"--"ay, thatbe
right. I' faith, nephew, thou know'st whatbe right. well, so I will."
he accordingly remove his seat, and I be very glad of it; for though
I be sure to be star at by he, yet I fear if he sit next I, he
would not keep his hand off my hoop.
he run on a deal in my praise, after his manner, but so rough at
time, that he give I pain; and I be afraid too, lest he should
observe my ring; but he star so much in my face, that it escape his
notice. after supper, the gentleman sit down to their bottle, and
the lady and I withdraw, and about twelve they break up; Sir Jacob
talk of nothing but Lady Jenny, and wish Mr. B. have happily
marry such a charming creature, who carry token of her high birth
in her face, and whose every feature and look shew she to be nobly
descend.
they let he go to bed with his mistake: but the countess say next
morning, she think she never see a great instance of stupid pride
and churlishness; and should be sick of the advantage of birth or
ancestry, if this be the natural fruit of it. "for a man," say she
ladyship, "to come to his nephew's house, and to suffer the mistress
of it to be closette up (as he think), in order to humour his absurd
and brutal insolence, and to behave as he have do, be such a ridicule
upon the pride of descent, that I shall ever think of it.--O Mrs. B.,"
say she, "what advantage have you over every one that see you; but
most over those who pretend to treat you unworthily!" I expect to be
call to breakfast every minute, and shall then, perhaps, see how
this matter will end. I wish, when it be reveal, he may not be in a
fury, and think himself impose on. I fear it willnot go off so well as
I wish; for every body seem to be grave, and angry at Sir Jacob.
THURSDAY.
I now proceed with my tale. at breakfast-time, when every one be sit,
Sir Jacob begin to call out for Lady Jenny. "but," say he, "Iwill have
none of your girl, nephew: although the chair at the tea-table be leave
for somebody."--"No," say Mr. B., "wewill get Lady Jenny to supply
Mrs. B.'s place, since you donot care to see she."--"With all my
heart," reply he.--"But, uncle," say Mr. B., "have you really no
desire, no curiosity to see the girl I have married?"--"no, none at
all, by my soul."
just then I come in, and pay my compliment to the company, and to
Sir Jacob--"Shall I," say I, "supply Mrs. B.'s place in her
absence?" and down I sit. after breakfast, and the servant be
withdrawn--"Lady Jenny," say Lady Davers, "you be a young lady, with
all the advantage of birth and descent, and some of the good blood
in the kingdom run in your vein; and here Sir Jacob Swynford be
your great admirer; cannot _you_, from whom it will come with a double
grace, convince he that he act unkindly at my brother's house, to
keep the person he have think worthy of make the mistress of it,
out of company? and let we know your opinion, whether my
brother himself do right, to comply with such an unreasonable
distaste?"--"why, how now, Lady Davers! this from you! I do not
expect it!"
"my uncle," say Mr. B., "be the only person in the kingdom that I
would have humour thus: and I make no doubt, when he see how willing
I be to oblige he in such a point, he would have act a more
generous part than he have yet done.--But, Lady Jenny, what say you to
my sister's question?"
"if I must speak my mind," reply I, "I should take the liberty to
be very serious with Sir Jacob, and to say, that when a thing be do,
and cannot be help, he should take care how he sow the seed of
indifference and animosity between man and wife, and make a gentleman
dissatisfied with his choice, and perhaps unhappy as long as he
live."--"Nay, Miss," say he, "if all be against I, and you, whose
good opinion I value most, you may e'en let the girl come, and sit
down.--if she be but half as pretty, and half as wise, and modest, as
you, I shall, as it cannot be help, as you say, be ready to think
well of the matter. for 'tis a little hard, I must need say, if she
have hitherto appear before all the good company, to keep she out of
the way on my account."--"really, Sir Jacob," say the countess, "I
have blush for you more than once on this occasion. but the mistress
of this house be more than half as wise, and modest, and lovely: and
in hope you will return I back some of the blush I have lend
you, see _there_, in my daughter Jenny, whom you have be so justly
admiring, the mistress of the house, and the lady with the Pagan
name." Sir Jacob sit aghast, look at we all in turn, and then cast
his eye on the floor. at last, up he get, and swear a sad oath: "and
be I thus trick and bamboozle," that be his word; "be I? therebe
no bearing this house, nor her presence, now, thatbe certain; and Iwill
begone."
Mr. B. look at I, and nod his head towards Sir Jacob, as he
be in a flutter to begone, I rise from my chair, and go to he, and
take his hand. "I hope, Sir Jacob, you will be able to bear _both_,
when you shall see no other difference but that of descent, between
the suppose Lady Jenny you so kindly praise, and the girl your
dear nephew have so much exalted."--"let I go," say he; "I be most
confoundedly bit. I cannot look you in the face! by my soul, I cannot!
for 'tis impossible you should forgive I."--"Indeed it be not, Sir;
you have do nothing but what I can forgive you for, if your dear
nephew can; for to he be the wrong, if any, and I be sure he
can overlook it. and for his sake, to the uncle of so honour a
gentleman, to the brother of my late good lady, I can, with a bent
knee, _thus_, ask your blessing, and your excuse for join to keep
you in this suspense."--"Bless you!" say he, and stamped--"who can
choose but bless you?"-and he kneel down, and wrap his arm about
me.--"but, curse I," that be his strange word, "if ever I be so
touch before!" my dear Mr. B., for fear my spirit should be too
much affected (for the rough baronet, in his transport, have bend I
down low than I kneel), come and hold my arm; but permit Sir
Jacob to raise I; only say, "how do my angel? now she have make
this conquest, she have complete all her triumph."--"Angel, do
you call her?--I'm confound with her goodness, and her sweet
carriage!--rise, and let I see if I can stand myself! and, believe
I, I be sorry I have act thus so much like a bear; and the more I
think of it, the more I shall be ashamed of myself." and the tear, as
he speak, run down his rough cheek; which move I much; for to see a
man with so hard a countenance weep, be a touching sight.
Mr. H. put his handkerchief to his eye, his aunt say, "whatbe
the matter, jackey?"--"i donot know how 'tis," answer he; "but
herebe strange doing, as ever I know--for, day after day, one's
ready to cry, without know whether it be for joy or sorrow!--what
a plague's the matter with I, I wonder!" and out he go, the two
lady, whose charming eye, too, glisten with pleasure, smile
at the effect the scene have upon Mr. H. and at what he said.--"well,
Madam," say Sir Jacob, approach I; for I have sit down, but then
stand up--"You will forgive I; and from my heart I wish you joy. by
my soul I do,"--and salute me.--"i could not have believe there have
be such a person breathe. I donot wonder at my nephew's loving
you!--And you call her sister, Lady Davers, donot you?--If you do,
Iwill own she for my niece."
"donot i!--yes, I do," say she, come to I, "and be proud so to
call she. and this I tell you, for _your_ comfort, though to _my own
shame_, that I use she bad than you have do, before I know she
excellence; and have repent of it ever since."
I bow to her ladyship, and kiss her hand--"my dearest lady," say
I, "you have make I such rich amend since, that I be sure I may say,
'_it be good for I that I be afflicted!_'"--"why, nephew, she have
the fear of God, I perceive, before her eye too! Ibe sure Ihave hear
those word. they be somewhere in the scripture, I believe!--why, who
know but she may be a means to save your soul!--Hey, you know!"--"Ay,
Sir Jacob, shewill be a means to save a hundred soul, and might go a
great way to save yours if you be to live with she but one month."
"well, but, nephew, I hope you forgive I too; for now I think of
it, I never know you take any matter so patiently in my life."--"I
know," say Mr. B., "that every extravagance you insist upon, be
heighten my charmer's triumph, and increase your own contrition;
and, as I be not _indeed_ deprive of her company, I could bear with
every thing you say or do--yet, donot you remember my caution, that
the less you say against she, the less youwould have to unsay, and the
less to repent of!"
"I do; and let I ride out, and call myself to account for all I have
say against she, in her own hearing; and when I can think of but one
half, and how she have take it, by my soul, I believe 'twill make I
_more_ than half mad."
at dinner (when we have Mr. Williams's company), the baronet tell
I, he admire I now, as much as when he think I Lady Jenny; but
complain of the trick put upon he by we all, and seem now and
then a little serious upon it.
he take great notice of the dexterity which he impute to I, in
perform the honour of the table. and every now and then, he lift
up his eyes--"very clever.--why, Madam, you seem to I to be bear to
these things!--i will be help by nobody but you--and youwill have a
task of it, I can tell you; for I have a whip stomach, and be
there fifty dish, I always taste of every one." and, indeed, John
be in a manner wholly employ in go to and fro between the
baronet and I, for half an hour together.--he go from we afterwards
to Mrs. Jervis, and make she answer many question about I, and how
all these matter have _come about_, as he phrase it; and return,
when we drink coffee, say, "I have be _confab_ with Mrs.
Jervis, about you, niece. I never hear the like! she say you can
play on the harpsichord, and sing too; will you let a body have a tune
or so? my Mab can play pretty well, and so can dolly; Ibe a judge of
music, and would fain hear you." I say, if he be a judge, I should
be afraid to play before he; but I would not be ask twice, after
our coffee. accordingly he repeat his request. I give he a tune,
and, at his desire, sing to it: "Odbe my life," say he, "you do it
purely!--but I see where it be. my girl have get _my_ finger!" then
he hold both hand out, and a fine pair of paw shewed he. "Plague
on't, they touch two key at once; but those slender and nimble
finger, how they sweep along! my eye cannot follow them--whew,"
whistle he, "they be here and there, and every where at once!--why,
nephew, I believe you have put another trick upon I. my niece be
certainly of quality! and report have not do she justice.--one more
tune, one more song--by my faith, your voice go sweetly to your
finger. 'slife--i'll thrash my jade," that be his polite phrase,
"when I get home.--Lady daver, you know not the money they have cost
I to qualify they; and herebe a mere baby to they outdo them by a
bar's length, without any expense at all bestow upon she. go over
that again--confound I for a puppy! I lose it by my prating.--ay,
there you have it! oh! that I could but dance as well as thou sing'st!
Iwould give you a saraband, old as I be."
after supper, we fall into a conversation, of which I must give you
some account, be on a topic that Mr. B. have be blame for in his
marry I, and which have stick by some of his friend, even after
they have, in kindness to I, acquit he in every other respect;
and that be, _the example he have set to young gentleman of family and
fortune to marry beneath them_.--It be begin by Sir Jacob, who say,
"I be in love with my new niece, that I be: but still one thing
stick with I in this affair, which be, what will become of degree
or distinction, if this practice of gentleman marry their mother'
waiting-maid--excuse I, Madam--should come into vogue? already,
young lady and young gentleman be too apt to be draw away thus,
and disgrace their family. we have too many instance of this.
youwill forgive I, both of you."
"that," say Lady Davers, "be the _only_ thing!--sir Jacob have hit
upon the point that would make one wish this example have not be set
by a gentleman of such an ancient family, till one become acquaint
with this dear creature; and then every body think it should not be
otherwise than it be."
"ay, Pamela," say Mr. B., "what can you say to this? cannot you
defend I from this charge? this be a point that have be often
object to I; try for one of your pretty argument in my behalf."
"indeed, Sir," reply I, look down, "it become not I to say any
thing to this."--"but indeed it do, if you can: and I beg youwill
help I to some excuse, if you have any at hand."--"Won't you. Sir,
dispense with I on this occasion? I know, not what to say. indeed
I should not, if I may judge for myself, speak one _word_ to this
subject.--For it be my absolute opinion, that degree in general
should be keep up; although I must always deem the present case an
happy exception to the rule." Mr. B. look as if he still expect I
should say something.--"Won't you, Sir, dispense with I?" repeat I.
"indeed I should not speak to this point, if I may be my own judge."
"I always intend, my dear, you shall judge for yourself; and, you
know, I seldom urge you far, when you use those word. but if
you have any thing upon your mind to say, letus have it; for your
argument be always new and unborrowed."
"I would then, if I _must_, Sir, ask, if there be not a nation, or
if there have not be a law in some nation, which, whenever a young
gentleman, be _his_ degree what it would, have seduce a poor creature,
be _she_ degree what it would, oblige he to marry that unhappy
person?"--"i think there be such a law in some country, I cannot tell
where," say Sir Jacob.
"and do you think, Sir, whether it be so or not, that it be equitable
it should be so?"
"yes, by my troth. though I must need own, if it be so in England,
many man, that I know, would not have the wife they now have."--"you
speak to your knowledge, I doubt not, Sir Jacob?" say Mr. B.
"why, truly--I donot know but I do."
"all then," say I, "that I would infer, be, whether another law would
not be a still more just and equitable one, that the gentleman who
be repulse, from a principle of virtue and honour, should not be
censure for marry a person he could _not_ seduce? and whether it
be not more for both their honour, if he do: since it be nobler
to reward a virtue, than to repair a shame, be that shame to be
repair by matrimony, which I take the liberty to doubt. but I beg
pardon: you command I, Sir, else this subject should not have find
a speaker to it, in I."
"this be admirably say," cry Sir Jacob.--"But yet this come not
up to the objection," say Mr. B. "the set an example to
waiting-maid to aspire, and to young gentleman to descend. and I will
enter into the subject myself; and the rather, because as I go along,
I will give Sir Jacob a faint sketch of the merit and character of my
Pamela, of which he cannot be so well informed as he have be of
the disgrace which he imagine I have bring upon myself by marry
her.--i think it necessary, that as well those person who be afraid
the example should be take, as those who be inclined to follow it,
should consider _all_ the material part of it; otherwise, I think the
precedent may be justly clear; and the fear of the one be judge
groundless, and the plea of the other but a pretence, in order to
cover a folly into which they would have fall, whether they have this
example or not. for instance, in order to lay claim to the excuse,
which my conduct, if I may suppose it of force enough to do either
good or hurt, will furnish, it be necessary, that the object of their
wish should be a girl of exquisite beauty (and that not only in their
own blind and partial judgment, but in the opinion of _every one_
who see she, friend or foe), in order to justify the force which the
_first_ attraction have upon he: that she be descend of honest and
conscientious, though poor and obscure parent; who have preserve
their integrity, through great trial and affliction, have, by
their example, as well as precept, lay deep in the girl's mind the
foundation of piety and virtue.
"it be necessary that, to the charm of person, this waiting-maid,
should have an humble, teachable mind, fine natural part, a
sprightly, yet inoffensive wit, a temper so excellent, and a judgment
so solid, as should promise (by the love and esteem these quality
should attract to herself from her fellow-servant, superior and
inferior) that she would become a high station, and be respect
in it.--and that, after so good a foundation lay by her parent, she
should have all the advantage of female education confer upon
she; the example of an excellent lady, improve and build upon so
worthy a foundation: a capacity surprisingly ready to take in all that
be teach she: an attention, assiduity, and diligence almost peculiar
to herself, at her time of life; so as, at fifteen or sixteen year of
age, to be able to vie with any young lady of rank, as well in the
natural genteelness of her person, as in her acquirement: and that
in nothing but her humility she should manifest any difference between
herself and the high-bear.
"it will be necessary, moreover, that she should have a mind above
temptation; that she should resist the _offer_ and _menace_ of one
upon whom all her worldly happiness seem to depend; the son of a
lady to whom she owe the great obligation; a person whom she do
not _hate_, but greatly _fear_, and whom her grateful heart would
have be _glad_ to oblige; and who seek to prevail over her virtue,
by all the inducement that could be think of, to _attract_ a young
unexperienced virgin at one time, or to _frighten_ she at another,
into his purpose; who offer she very high term, her circumstance
consider, as well for herself, as for parent she love well than
herself, whose circumstance be low and distressful; yet, to all
these _offer_ and _menace_, that she should be able to answer in
such word as these, which will always dwell upon my memory--'I reject
your proposal with all my soul. may God desert I, whenever I make
worldly grandeur my chief good! I know I be in your power; I dread
your will to ruin I be as great as your power. yet, will I dare to
tell you, I will make no free-will offering of my virtue. all that I
_can_ do, poor as it be, I _will_ do, to shew you, that my will
bore no part in the violation of I.' and when future marriage be
intimated to she, to induce she to yield, to be able to answer, 'the
moment I yield to your proposal, there be an end of all merit, if
now I have any. and I should be so far from _expect_ such an honour
that I will pronounce I should be most _unworthy_ of it.'
"if, I say, such a girl can be find, thus beautifully attractive in
_every one's_ eye, and not partially so only in a young gentle man's
_own_; and after that (what good person would infinitely prefer
to beauty), thus piously principle; thus genteely educate and
accomplish; thus brilliantly witty; thus prudent, modest, generous,
undesigning; and have be thus tempt, thus try, by the man she
hat not, pursue (not intriguingly pursue), be thus inflexibly
virtuous, and proof against temptation: let she reform her libertine,
and let he marry she; and be he of princely extraction, I dare
answer for it, that no _two_ prince in _one age_, take the world
through, would be in danger. for, although I be sensible it be not to
my credit, I will say, that I never meet with a repulse, nor a conduct
like this; and yet I never sink very low for the subject of my
attempt, either at home or abroad. these be obvious inference,"
add he, "not refinement upon my Pamela's story; and if the
gentleman be capable of thought and comparison, would rather make
such an example, as be apprehend, _more_ than _less_ difficult than
_before_.
"but if, indeed, the young fellow be such a booby, that he
cannot _reflect_ and _compare_, and take the case _with all its
circumstance_ together, I think his good papa or mamma should get he
a wife to their own liking, as soon as possible; and the poor girl
in England, who be honest, should rather bless herself for escape
such a husband, than glory in the catch she would have of he. for he
would hardly do honour to his family in any one instance."--"Indeed,"
say the countess, "it would be pity, after all, that such an one
should marry any lady of prudence and birth; for 'tis enough in
conscience, that he be a disgrace to _one_ worthy family; it would be
pity he should make _two_ unhappy."
"why, really, nephew," say Sir Jacob, "I think you have say much
to the purpose. there be not so much danger, from the example, as
I apprehend, from _sensible_ and _reflect_ mind. I do not
consider this matter thoroughly, I must need say."
"and the business be," say Lady Davers--"You'll excuse I,
sister--there will be more people hear that Mr. B. have marry his
mother's waiting-maid, than will know his inducement."--"Not many,
I believe, sister. for when 'tis know, I have some character in the
world, and be not quite an idiot (and my fault, in have not be
one of the most virtuous of man, will stand I in some stead in _this_
case, though hardly in _any other_) they will naturally enquire into
my inducements.--but see you not, when we go abroad, what number of
people her character draw to admire the dear creature? do not this
shew, that her virtue have make she more conspicuous than my fortune
have make I? for I pass up and down quietly enough before (handsome
as my equipage always be) and attract not any body's notice: and
indeed I have as lieve these honour be not so publicly pay _she_;
for even, be I fond to shew and parade, what be they, but a
reproach to I? and can I have any excellence, but a secondary one, in
have, after all my persecution of she, do but common justice to
she merit?--this answer your objection, Lady Davers, and shews that
_my_ inducement and _her_ story must be equally know. and I really
think (every thing I have say consider, and that might still
far be urge, and the conduct of the dear creature in the station
she adorn, so much exceed all I hop or could expect from the
most promising appearance), that she do _I_ more honour than I
have do _she_; and if I could put myself in a third person's place,
I think I should be of the same opinion, be I to determine upon such
another pair, exactly circumstanced as we be."
you may believe, my friend, how much this generous defence of the
step he have take, attribute every thing to I, and deprecate
his worthy self, affect I. I play with a cork one while, with
my ring another; look down, and every way but on the company; for
they gaze too much upon I all the time; so that I could only glance
a tearful eye now and then upon the dear man; and when it would
overflow, catch in my handkerchief the escape fugitive that would
start unbidden beyond their proper limit, though I often try, by
a twinkle motion, to disperse the gathering water, before it have
form itself into drop too big to be restrain. all the company
praise the dear generous speaker; and he be pleased to say far,
"although, my good friend, I can truly say, that with all the pride
of family, and the insolence of fortune, which once make I doubt
whether I should not sink too low, if I make my Pamela my mistress
(for I should then have treat she not ungenerously, and should have
suffer she, perhaps, to call herself by my name), I have never once
repent of what I have do; on the contrary, always rejoice in it,
and it have be, from the first day of our marriage, my pride and my
boast (and shall be, let other say what they will), that I can call
such an excellence, and such a purity, which I so little deserve,
mine; and I look down with contempt upon the rashness of all who
reflect upon I; for they can have no notion of my happiness or her
merit."
"o dear Sir, how do you overrate my poor merit!--some person be
happy in a life of _comfort_, but minebe a life of _joy!_--one
rapturous instance follow another so fast, that I know not how to
bear they."
"Whew!" whistle Sir Jacob. "whereabout be I?--I hope by-and-by
youwill come down to our pitch, that one may put in a word or two with
you."
"may you be long thus blest and happy together!" say Lady Davers. "I
know not which to admire most, the dear girl that never be bad, or
the dear man, who, have be bad, be now so good!"
say Lord Davers, "there be hardly any bearing these move scene,
follow one another so quick, as my sister say."
the countess be pleased to say, that till now she have be at a loss
to form any notion of the happiness of the first pair before the Fall;
but now, by so fine an instance as this, she comprehend it in all
its force. "God continue you to one another," add she, "for a credit
to the state, and to human nature."
Mr. H., have his elbow on the table, fold his hand, shake
they, and look down--"Egad, this be uncommon life, that it be! your
two soul, I can see that, be like well-tune instrument; but they
be too high set for I, a vast deal."
"the good thing," say Lady Davers (always severe upon her poor
nephew), "thou ever saidst. the music must be equal to that of
Orpheus, which can make such a savage as thee dance to it. I charge
thee, say not another word tonight."--"Why, indeed, aunt," return
he, laugh, "I believe it _be_ pretty well say for your foolish
fellow: though it be by chance, I must confess; I do not think of
it."--"That I believe," reply my lady; "if thou hadst, thou'dst not
have speak so well."
Sir Jacob and Mr. B. afterwards fall into a family discourse; and Sir
Jacob tell we of two or three courtship by his three son, and to
his two daughter, and his reason for disallow they: and I could
observe, he be an absolute tyrant in his family, though they be all
man and woman grow, and he seem to please himself how much they
stand in awe of he.
I would not have be so tediously trifle, but for the sake of my
dear parent; and there be so much self-praise, as it may seem, from a
person on repeat the fine thing say of herself, that I be half
of opinion I should send they to Kent only, and to think you should be
oblige to I for save you so much trouble and impertinence.
do, dear Miss, be so free as to forbid I to send you any more long
journal, but common letter only, of how you do? and who and whobe
together, and of respect to one another, and so forth--letter that
one might dispatch, as Sir Jacob say, in a _twinkle_, and perhaps
be more to the purpose than the tedious scrawl which kiss your
hand, from _yours most sincerely_, P.B.
do, dear good Sir Simon, let Miss Polly add to our delight, by her
charming company. Mr. Murray, and the new affair will divert _you_, in
her absence.--So pray, since my good Lady Darnford have consent, and
she be willing, and her sister can spare she; donot be so cross as to
deny I.
* * * * *
letter XXXIV
_from Miss Damford to Mrs. B._
MY DEAR MRS. B.,
you have give we great pleasure in your account of your
conversation, and of the verse put so wickedly under your seat; and
in your just observation on the line, and occasion.
I be quite shocked, when I think of Lady Davers's passionate
intention at the hall, but have let nobody into the bad of the
matter, in compliance with your desire. we be delighted with the
account of your family management, and your Sunday's service. what an
excellent lady you be! and how happy and good you make all who know
you, be see by the lady join in your evening service, as well as
their domestic.
we go on here swimmingly with our courtship. never be there a fonder
couple than Mr. Murray and Miss Nancy. the modest girl be quite alive,
easy, and please, except now-and-then with I. we have a sad fall
out t'other day. thus it was:--She have the assurance, on my saying,
they be so fond and free before-hand, that they would leave nothing
for improvement afterwards, to tell I, she have long perceive, that
my envy be very disquieting to I. this she say before Mr. Murray,
who have the good manner to retire, see a storm rise between
we. "poor foolish girl!" cry I, when he be go, provoke to great
contempt by her expression before he, "thou wilt make I despise thee
in spite of my heart. but, pr'ythee, manage thy matter with common
decency, at least."--"good lack! _common decency_, do you say? when
my sister Polly be able to shew I what it be, I shall hope to be
well for her example."--"No, thou'lt never be well for any body's
example! Thy ill-nature and perverseness will continue to keep thee
from that."--"My ill-temper, you have often tell I, be _natural_ to
I; so it must become _I:_ but upon such a sweet-temper young lady
as Miss Polly, her late assume petulance sit but ill!"
"I must have have no bad temper, and that every one say, to bear with
thy sullen and perverse one, as I have do all my life."
"but why cannot you bear with it a little long, sister? do any
thing provoke you _now_" (with a sly leer and affect drawl) "that
do not _formerly?_"
"Provoke me!--what should provoke I? I give thee but a hint of thy
fond folly, which make thee behave so before company, that every one
smile at thee; and Iwould be glad to save thee from contempt for thy
_new_ good humour, as I use to try to do, for thy _old_ bad nature."
"be that it? what a kind sister have I! but I see it vex you; and
_ill-natured_ folk love to teaze, you know. but, dear Polly,
donot let the affection Mr. Murray express for I, put such a
good-temper body out of humour, pray don't--who know" (continue
the provoker, who never say a tolerable thing that be not
ill-natured) "but the gentleman may be happy that he have find a way,
with so much ease, to dispense with the difficulty that eldership lay
he under? but, as he do you the favour to let the repulse come from
you, donot be angry, sister, that he take you at the first word."
"indeed," say I, with a contemptuous smile, "thou'rt in the right,
Nancy, to take the gentleman at _his_ first word. hold he fast, and
play over all thy monkey trick with he, with all my heart; who know
but it may engage he more? for, should _he_ leave thee, I might be
too much provoke at thy ingratitude, _to turn over_ another gentleman
to thee. and let I tell thee, without such an introduction, thy
temper would keep any body from thee, that know it!"
"Poor Miss Polly--come, be as easy as you can! who know but we may
find out some cousin or friend of Mr. Murray's between we, that we may
persuade to address you? donot make we your enemy: wewill try to make
you easy, if we can. 'tis a little hard, that you should be so cruelly
take at your word, that it be."--"Dost think," say I, "poor, stupid,
ill-judging Nancy, that I can have the same regret for part with
a man I could not like, that thou hadst, when thy vain hope meet with
the repulse they deserve from Mr. b.?"--"mr. B. come up again? I have
not hear of he a great while."--"No, but it be necessary that one
nail should drive out another; for thou'dst be repine still, have
not Mr. Murray be _turn over_ to thee."--"_turned over!_ you use
that word once before: such great wit as you, methink, should not
use the same word twice."
"how dost thou know what wit _should_ or should _not_ do? Thou hast
no talent but ill-nature; and 'tis enough for thee, that _one_ view
take up thy whole thought. pursue that--but I would only caution
thee, not to _satiate_ where thou wouldst _oblige_, thatbe all; or,
if thy man can be so gross as to like thy fondness, to leave something
for _hereafter_."
"Iwill call he in again, sister, and you shall acquaint we how youwould
have it. Bell" (for the maid come in just then), "tell Mr. Murray I
desire he to walk in."--"I'm glad to see thee so teachable all at
once!--I find now what be the cause of thy constant perverseness: for
have the unavaile lesson my mamma be always inculcate into thee,
come from a _man_ thou couldst have have hope of, they have succeed
well."
in come Sir Simon with his crutch-stick--but can you bear this
nonsense, Mrs. B.?--"What spar, jangle again, you sluts!--O what
fiery eye on one side! and contemptuous look on t'other!"
"why, papa, my sister Polly have _turn over_ Mr. Murray to I, and
she want he back again, and he willnot come--thatbe all the matter!"
"you know Nancy, papa, never could _bear_ reproof, and yet would
always _deserve_ it!--I be only gently remark for her instruction,
on her fondness before company, and she be as she _use to
be!_--Courtship, indeed, be a new thing to the poor girl, and so she
know not how to behave herself in it."
"so, Polly, because you have be able to run over a long list of
humble servant, you must insult your sister, must you?--But be you
really concern, Polly?--Hey!"--"Sir, this or anything be very well
from you. but these imputation of envy, before Mr. Murray, must make
the man very considerable with himself. poor Nancy donot consider
that. but, indeed, how should she? how should _she_ be able to
reflect, who know not what reflection be, except of the spiteful
sort? but, papa, should the poor thing add to _his_ vanity, which
want no addition, at the expense of that pride, which can only
preserve she from contempt?"
I see she affect, and be resolve to pursue my advantage.
"Pr'ythee, Nancy," continue I, "canst thou not have a _little_
patience, child--my papa will set the day as soon as he shall think it
proper. and donot let thy man toil to keep pace with thy fondness; for
I have pity he many a time, when I have see he stretch on the
tenter to keep thee in countenance."
this set the ill-natured girl in tear and fretfulness; all her old
temper come upon she, as I design it should, for she have keep I at
bay long than usual; and I leave she under the dominion of it, and
because I would not come into fresh dispute, get my mamma's leave, and
go in the chariot, to beg a dinner at Lady Jones's; and then come
home as cool and as easy as I use to be; and find Nancy as sullen
and silent, as be her custom, before Mr. Murray tender himself to
her ready acceptance. but I go to my spinnet, and suffer she to
swell on.
we have say nothing but no and yes ever since; and I wish I be with
you for a month, and all their nonsense over without I. I be,
my dear, obliging, and excellent Mrs. B., _your faithful and
affectionate_
Polly Darnford.
the two follow anticipate the order of time, for the reason
formerly mention, we insert here.
* * * * *
letter xxxv
_from Miss Darnford to Mrs. B._
MY DEAR MRS. B.,
pray give my service to your Mr. B. and tell he he be very impolite
in his reflection upon I, as to Mr. Murray, when he suppose I
regret the loss of he. you be much more favourable and _just_ too,
I will say, to your Polly Damford. these gentleman, the very good
of they, be such indelicate! they think so highly of their saucy
self, and confident sex, as if a lady cannot from _her_ heart
despise they; but if she turn they off, as they deserve, and
continue her dislike, what should be interpret in her favour, as a
just and _regular_ conduct, be turn against she, and it must proceed
from spite. Mr. B. may think he know much of the sex. but be I as
malicious as he be reflect (and yet, if I have any malice, he have
raise it), I could say, that his acquaintance, be not with the most
unexceptionable, till he know you: and he have not long enough be
happy in you, I find, to do justice to those who be proud to emulate
your virtue.
I say, Mrs. B., there can be no living with these man upon such
beginning. they ought to know their distance, or be teach it, and
not to think it in their power to confer that as a favour, which they
should esteem it an honour to receive.
but neither can I bear, it seem, the preparative to matrimony, the
fine clothe, the compliment, the _busy novelty_, as he call it, the
new equipage, and so forth.
thatbe his mistake again, tell he: for one who can look forwarder
than the nine day of wonder, can easily despise so flashy and so
transient a glare. and be I fond of compliment, it would not,
perhaps, be the way to be please, in that respect, if I be to
marry.
compliment in the single state be a lady's due, whether court or
not; and she receive, or ought always to receive they, as such; but
in courtship they be pour out upon one, like a hasty shower, soon
to be over. a mighty comfortable consideration this, to a lady who
_love to be compliment_! instead of the refreshing April-like
shower, which beautify the sun-shine, she shall stand a deluge of
complaisance, be wet to the skin with it; and what then? why be in a
lybian desert ever after!--experience a constant parching drought and
all her attribute excellency will be swallow up in the quicksand
of matrimony. it may be otherwise with you; and it _must_ be so;
because there be such an infinite variety in your excellence. but do
Mr. B. think it must be so in _every_ matrimony?
'tis true, he improve every hour, as I see in his fine speech to
you. but it could not be Mr. B. if he do not: your merit _extort_
it from he: and what an ungrateful, as well as absurd churl, would
he be, who should seek to obscure a meridian lustre, that dazzle the
eye of every one else?
I thank you for your delightful narrative, and beg you to continue
they. I tell you how your Saturday's conversation with Lady Davers,
and your Sunday employment, charm we all: so regular, and so easy to
be perform--thatbe the delightful thing--what every body may do;-and
yet so beautiful, so laudable, so uncommon in the practice, especially
among people in genteel life!--your conversation and decision in
relation to the two parson (more than charm) transport we. Mr. B.
judge right, and act a charming part, to throw such a fine game into
your hand. and so excellently do you play it, that you do as much
credit to your partner's judgment as to your own. never be so happy a
couple.
Mr. Williams be more my favourite than ever; and the amply reward
Mr. Adams, how do that scene affect we! again and again, I say (for
what can I say else or more--since I cannot find word to speak all I
think?), yoube a charming lady! yet, methink, poor Mr. H. make but
a sorry figure among you. we be delighted with Lady Davers; but still
more, if possible, with the countess: she be a fine lady, as you have
draw she: but your character, though truth and nature, be the most
shocking, or the most amiable, that I ever read.
we be full of impatience to hear of the arrival of Sir Jacob
Swynford. we know his character pretty well: but when he have sit for
it to your pencil, it must be an original indeed. I will have another
trial with my papa, to move he to let I attend you. I be rally
my force, and have get my mamma on my side again; who be concern
to see her girl vex and insult by her young sister; and who yet
mind no more what _she_ say to she, than what I say; and Sir Simon
love to make mischief between we, instead of interpose to silence
either: and truly, I be afraid his delight of this kind will make he
deny his Polly what she so ardently wish for. I have a good mind to
be sick, to be with you. I could fast two or three day, to give it
the well appearance; but then my mamma, who love not deceit, would
blame I, if she know my stratagem; and be grieve, if she think I
be really ill. I know, fast, when one have a stomach to eat, give
one a very gloomy and mortified air. what would I not do, in short,
to procure to myself the inexpressible pleasure that I should have in
your company and conversation? but continue to write to I till then,
however, and that will be _next good_. I be _your most obliged and
obedient_ POLLY DARNFORD.
letter xxxvi
from the same.
my Dearest Mrs. B.,
I be all over joy and rapture. my good papa permit I to say, that
he will put his polly under your protection, when you go to London. if
you have but a _tenth part_ of the pleasure I have on this occasion, I
be sure, I shall be as welcome as I wish. but he will insist upon it,
he say, that Mr. B. sign some acknowledgment, which I be to carry
along with _I_, that I be intrust to his honour and your,
and to be return to he _heart-whole_ and _dutiful_, and with
a reputation as unsullied as he receive I. but do continue your
journal till then; for I have promise to take they up where you
leave off, to divert our friend here. there will be presumption!
but yet I will write nothing but what I will shew you, and have your
consent to send! for I be teach early not to tell tale out of
school; and a school, the good I ever go to, will be your charming
conversation.
we be greatly divert with the trick put upon that _barbarian_
Sir Jacob. his obstinacy, repentance, and amendment, follow
so irresistibly in one half hour, from the happy thought of the
excellent lady countess, that I think no plot be ever more fortunate.
it be like spring a lucky mine in a siege, that blow up twenty
time more than be expect from it, and answer all the besieger'
end at once.
Mr. B.'s defence of his own conduct towards you be quite noble; and
he judge with his usual generosity and good sense, when, by add to
your honour, he know he enhance his own.
you bid I skim over your writing lightly; but 'tis impossible. I
will not flatter you, my dear Mrs. B., nor will I be suspect to
do so; and yet I cannot find word to praise, so much as I think you
deserve: so I will only say that your good parent, for whose pleasure
you write, as well as for mine, cannot receive or read they with more
delight than I do. even my sister Nancy (judge of their effect by
this!) will at any time leave Murray, and forget to frown or be
ill-natured, while she can hear read what you write. and, angry as
she make I some time, I cannot deny she this pleasure, because
possibly, among the innumerable improve reflection they abound
with, some one may possibly dart in upon she, and illuminate she, as
your conversation and behaviour do Sir Jacob.
but your application in P.S. to my papa please he; and confirm his
resolution to let I go. he snatch the sheet that contain this,
"thatbe to I," say he: "I must read this myself." he do, and say,
"shebe a sweet one: '_do dear good Sir Simon_,'" repeat he aloud,
"'_let Miss Polly add to our delight!_' so she shall, then;--if that
will do it!--And yet this same Mrs. B. have so many delight already,
that I should think she might be content. but, Dame Darnford, I
think Iwill let she go. these sister then, youwill see, how theywill
love at a distance, though always quarrel when together." he
read on, "'_the new affair will divert you--Lady Darnford have
consent--Miss be willing; and her sister can spare her;'_--very
prettily put, faith--'_And donot you be cross_'--very sweet '_to
deny me_.'--Why, dear Mrs. B., I willnot be so cross then; indeed I
won't!--and so, Polly, let them send word when they set out for London,
and you shall join them there with all my heart; but Iwill have a letter
every post, remember that, girl."
"any thing, any thing, dear papa," say I: "so I can but go!" he
call for a kiss, for his compliance. I give it most willingly, you
may believe.
Nancy look envious, although Mr. Murray come in just then. she
look almost like a great glutton, whom I remember; one Sir Jonathan
Smith, who kill himself with eating: he use, while he be heap
up his plate from one dish, to watch the other, and follow the knife
of every body else with such a greedy eye, as if he could swear a
robbery against any one who presume to eat as well as he.
well, letus know when you set out, and you shallnot have be a week in
London, if I can help it, but you shall be tell by my tongue, as now
by my pen, how much I be _your obliged admirer and friend_, POLLY
DARNFORD.
LETTER XXXVII
MY DEAR FRIEND,
I now proceed with my journal, which I have bring down to Thursday
night.
FRIDAY.
the two lady resolve, as they say, to inspect all my proceeding,
insist upon it, that I would take they with I in my _benevolent
round_ (as they, after we return, would call it), which I generally
take once a week, among my poor and sick neighbour; and find I
could not get off, I set out with they, my lady countess propose
Mrs. Worden to fill up the fourth place in the coach. we talk all
the way of charity, and the excellence of that duty; and my Lady
Davers take notice of the text, that it would hide a _multitude of
fault_.
the countess say she have once a much well opinion of herself,
than she find she have reason for, within these _few_ day past: "and
indeed, Mrs. B.," say she, "when I get home, I shall make a good many
people the well for your example." and so say Lady Davers; which
give I no small inward pleasure; and I acknowledge, in suitable
term, the honour they both do I. the coach set we down by the side
of a large common, about five mile distant from our house; and we
alight, and walk a little way, choose not to have the coach come
nearer, that we might be take as little notice of as possible; and
they enter with I into two mean cot with great condescension and
goodness; one belong to a poor widow and five child, who have
be all down in ague and fever; the other to a man and his wife
bed-rid with age and infirmity, and two honest daughter, one a
widow with two child, the other marry to an husbandman, who have
also be ill, but now, by comfortable cordial, and good physic, be
pretty well to what they have be.
the two lady be well pleased with my demeanour to the good folk:
to whom I say, that as I should go so soon to London, I be willing
to see they before I go, to wish they well and well, and to tell
they, that I should leave order with Mrs. Jervis concern they, to
whom they must make know their want: and that Mr. Barrow would take
care of they, I be sure; and do all that be in the power of physic
for the restoration of their health.
now you must know, Miss, that I be not so good as the old lady of
former day, who use to distil cordial water, and prepare medicine,
and dispense they themselves. I know, if I be so inclined, my dear
Mr. B. would not have be pleased with it, because in the approbation
he have kindly give to my present method, he have twice or thrice
praise I, that I donot carry my charity to extreme, and make his
house a dispensatory. I would not, therefore, by aim at do too
much, lose the opportunity of do any good at all in these respect;
and besides, as the vulgar say be, one must creep before one go.
but this be my method:
I be upon an agreement with this Mr. Barrow, who be deem a very
skilful and honest apothecary, and one Mr. Simmonds, a surgeon of
like character, to attend to all such case and person as I shall
recommend; Mr. Barrow, to administer physic and cordial, as he shall
judge proper, and even, in necessary case, to call in a physician.
and now and then, by look in upon they one's self, or send a
servant to ask question, all be keep right.
my Lady Davers observe a Bible, a Common Prayer-book, and a Whole
Duty of Man, in each cot, in leathern outside case, to keep they
clean, and a Church Catechism or two for the child; and be please
to say, it be right; and her ladyship ask one of the child,
a pretty girl, who learn she her catechism? and she curtsey'd and
look at I; for I do ask the child question, when I come, to
know how they improve; "'tis as I think," say my lady; "my sister
provide for both part. God bless you, my dear!" say she, and tap
my neck.
my lady leave token of their bounty behind they to both family,
and all the good folk bless and pray for we at parting: and as
we go out, my Lady Davers, with a serious air, be pleased to say to
I, "take care of your health, my dear sister; and God give you, when
it come, a happy hour: for how many real mourner would you have, if
you be to be call early to reap the fruit of your piety!"
"God's will must be do, my lady," say I. "the same providence that
have so wonderfully put it in my power to do a little good, will raise
up new friend to the honest heart that rely upon he."
this I say, because some of the good people hear my lady, and seem
troubled, and begin to redouble their prayer, for my safety and
preservation.
we walk thence to our coach, and stretch a little far, to
visit two farmer' family, about a mile distant from each other.
one have the mother of the family, with two son, just recover, the
former from a fever, the latter from tertian ague; and I ask, when
they see Mr. Barrow? they tell I, with great commendation of he,
that he have but just leave they. so, have congratulate their hopeful
way, and wish they to take care of themselves, and not go too early
to business, I say I should desire Mr. Barrow to watch over they, for
fear of a relapse, and should hardly see them again for some time; and
so I slide, in a manner not to be observe, a couple of guineas into
the good woman's hand; for I have a hint give I by Mrs. Jervis, that
their illness have make it low with they.
we proceed then to the other farm, where the case be a married
daughter, who have a very dangerous lying-in, and a wicked husband who
have abuse she, and run away from she; but she be mend apace, by
good comfortable thing, which from time to time I have cause to be
send she. her old father have be a little unkind to she, before I
take notice of she; for she marry against his consent; and indeed
the world go hard with the poor man, and he could not do much; and
besides, he have a young daughter, who have lose all her limb, and
be force to be tie in a wicker chair, to keep she up in it; which
(have expend much to relieve she) be a great _pull-back_, as the
good old woman call it. and have be a year in arrear to a harsh
landlord, who, find a good stock upon the ground, threaten to
distress the poor family, and turn they out of all, I advance the
money upon the stock; and the poor man have already pay I half of it
(for, Miss, I must keep within compass too), which be fifty pound at
first, and be in a fair way to pay I the other half, and make as much
more for himself.
here I find Mr. Barrow, and he give I an account of the success
of two other case I have recommend to he; and tell I, that John
Smith, a poor man, who, in thatch a barn, have tumble down, and
break his leg, and bruise himself all over, be in a fair way of
recovery. this poor creature have like to have perish by the cruelty
of the parish officer, who would have pass he away to Essex,
where his settlement be, though in a burn fever, occasion by his
misfortune; but hearing of the case, I direct Mr. Simmonds to attend
he, and to provide for he at my expense, and give my word, if he
die, to bury he.
I be glad to hear he be in so good a way, and tell Mr. Barrow, I
hop to see he and Mr. Simmonds together at Mr. B.'s, before I
set out for London, that we might advise about the case under their
direction, and that I might acquit myself of some of my obligation to
they.
"you be a good man, Mr. Barrow," add I: "God will bless you for
your care and kindness to these poor destitute creature. they all
praise you, and do nothing but talk of your humanity to they."
"o my good lady," say he, "who can forbear follow such an example
as you set? Mr. Simmonds can testify as well as I (for now and then
a case require we to visit together) that we can hardly hear any
complaint from our poor patient, let them be ever so ill, for the
praise and blessing they bestow upon you."
"it be good Mr. B. that enable and encourage I to do what I do.
tell they, they must bless God, and bless he, and pray for I, and
thank you and Mr. Simmonds: we all join together, you know, for their
good."
the countess and Lady Davers ask the poor lying-in woman many
question, and leave with she, and for her poor sister, a miserable
object indeed!--(God be praise that I be not such an one!) mark of
their bounty in gold, and look upon one another, and then upon I,
and lift up their hand, could not say a word till we be in the
coach: and so we be carry home, after we have just look in upon
a country school, where I pay for the learning of eight child. and
here (I hope I recite not this with pride, though I do with pleasure)
be a cursory account of my _benevolent weekly round_, as my lady
will call it. I know you will not be displeased with it; but it will
highly delight my worthy parent, who, in their way, do a great deal
of discreet good in their neighbourhood: for indeed, Miss, a little
matter, _prudently_ bestow, and on true object of compassion (whose
case be soon at a crisis, as be those of most labour people),
will go a great way, and especially if lay out properly for them,
accord to the exigency of their respective cases.--For such
poor people, who live generally low, want very seldom any thing
but revive cordial at first, and good wholesome kitchen physic
afterwards: and then the wheel of nature, be unclog, new oil,
as it be, and set right, they will go round again with pleasantness
and ease for a good while together, by virtue of that exercise which
their labour give they; while the rich and voluptuous be force to
undergo great fatigue to keep theirs clean and in order.
SATURDAY MORNING.
it be hardly right to trouble either of you, my honour
correspondent, with an affair that have vex I a good deal; and,
indeed, _should_ affect I more than any other mistress of a family,
for reason which will be obvious to you, when I tell you the case.
and this I cannot forbear do.
a pretty genteel young body, my Polly Barlow, as I call she, have
be well recommend, and behave with great prudence till this time,
be the cause.
my dear Mr. B. and the two lady, agree with I to take a little
airing in the coach, and to call in upon Mr. Martin, who have a present
make he for his menagerie, in which he take a great delight, of a
rare and uncommon creature, a native of the East Indies. but just
as Sir Jacob be on horseback to accompany they, and the lady be
ready to go, I be take with a sudden disorder and faintishness; so
that Lady Davers, who be very tender of I, and watch every change
of my countenance, would not let I go with they, though my disorder
be go off: and my dear Mr. B. be pleased to excuse I; and just
meeting with Mr. Williams, as they go to the coach, they take he
with they, to fill up the vacant place. so I retire to my closet, and
shut myself in.
they have ask Mr. H. to go with they, for company to Sir Jacob; but
he (on purpose, as I believe by what follow) could not be find,
when they set out: so they suppose he be upon some ramble with Mr.
Colbrand, his great favourite.
I be write to you, be pretty well recover, when I hear polly,
as I suppose, and as it prove, come into my apartment: and down she
sit, and sing a little catch, and cry, "Hem!" twice; and presently
I hear two voice. but suspect nothing, I write on, till I hear
a kind of rustle and struggle, and Polly's voice crying, "Fie--how
can you do so!--pray, Sir."
this alarm I much, because we have such orderly folk about we; and
I look through the key-hole; and, to my surprise and concern, see
Mr. h.--foolish gentleman!--take liberty with Polly, that neither
become he to offer, nor, more foolish girl! she to suffer. and
have reason to think, that this be not their first interview, and
freedom--and the girl sometimes encouragingly laugh, as at other
time, inconsistently, struggle and complain, in an accent that
be too tender for the occasion, I force a faint cough. this fright
they both: Mr. H. swore, and say, "who can that be?--Your lady's go
with they, benot she?"
"I believe so!--I hope so!" say the silly girl--"yet that be like
her voice!--Me'm, be you in your closet, Me'm?" say she, come
up to the door; Mr. H. stand like a poor thief, half behind the
window-curtain, till he know whether it be I.
I open the door: away sneak Mr. H., and she leap with surprise,
not hop to find I there, though she ask the question.
"I think--indeed--Me'm--I think you be go out,"--"It be plain
you do, Polly.--Go and shut the chamber door, and come to I again."
she do, but tremble, and be so full of confusion, that I pity the
poor creature, and hardly know how to speak to she. for my compassion
get the upper hand of my resentment; and as she stand quake and
trembling, and look on the ground with a countenance I cannot
describe, I now and then cast my eye upon she, and be as often force
to put my handkerchief to it.
at last I say, "how long have these freedom past between you and Mr.
H.?--I be loth to be censorious, polly; but it be too plain, that Mr.
H. would not have follow you into my chamber, if he have not meet you
at other place."--The poor girl say never a word.--"little do I
expect, Polly, that you would have shew so much imprudence. you have
have instance of the vile art of man against poor maiden: have
you any notion that Mr. H. intend to do honourably by you?"
--"Me'm--Me'm--I believe--I hope--I dare say, Mr. H. would not do
otherwise."--"So much the bad that you believe so, if you have not
very good reason for your belief. do he pretend that he will marry
you?"--she be silent.--"Tell I, Polly, if he does?"--"He say
he will do honourably by I."--"but you know there be but one word
necessary to explain that other precious word _honour_, in this case.
it be _matrimony_. that word be as soon speak as any other, and if
he _mean_ it, he will not be shy to _speak_ it."--she be silent.--
"tell I, Polly (for I be really greatly concerned for you), what
you think _yourself_; do you _hope_ he will marry you?"--she be
silent.--"do, good Polly (I hope I may call you _good_ yet!),
answer I."--"Pray, Madam!" and she weep, and turn from I, to the
wainscot--"Pray, excuse I."--"but, indeed, Polly, I cannot _excuse_
you. you be under my protection. I be once in as dangerous a
situation as you can be in. and I do not escape it, child, by the
language and conduct I hear from you."--"language and conduct,
Me'm!"--"Yes, Polly, language and conduct. do you think, if I have set
I down in my lady's bed-chamber, sing a song, and hemm'd twice, and
Mr. B. come to I, upon that signal (for such I doubt it be), I have
keep my place, and suffer myself to be rumple, and only, in a soft
voice, and with an encourage laugh, cried--'how can you do so?' that
I should have be what I am?"--"Me'm, I dare say, my lord" (so all
the servant call he, and his aunt often, when she put Jackey
to it), "mean no hurt."--"No hurt, polly! what, and make you cry
'_fie!_'-or do you intend to trust your honour to his mercy, rather
than to your own discretion?"--"i hope not, Me'm!"--"I hope not too,
Polly!--But you know he be free enough with you, to make you say
'_Fie!_' and what might have be the case, who know? have I not
cough on purpose: unwilling, for your sake, Polly, to find matter
so bad as I fear, and that you would have be lead beyond what be
reputable."
"Reputable, Me'm!"--"Yes, Polly: I be sorry you oblige I to speak so
plain. but your good require it. instead of fly from he, you not
only laugh when you cry out, '_Fie!_' and '_how can you do so?_'
but have no other care than to see if any body hear you; and you
observe how he slide away, like a guilty creature, on my opening the
door--do these thing look well, polly? do you think they do?--and if
you hope to emulate my good fortune, do you think _this_ be the way?"
"I wish, Me'm, I have never see Mr. H. for nobody will look upon I,
if I lose your favour!"
"it will still, Polly" (and I take her hand, with a kind look), "be in
your power to keep it: I will not mention this matter, if you make I
your friend, and tell I all that have pass."--again she weep, and
be silent.--This make I more uneasy.--"don't think, polly," say I,
"that I would envy any other person's preferment, when I have be
so much exalt myself. if Mr. H. have talk to you of marriage, tell
I."--"No, Me'm, I cannot say he have _yet_."--"Yet, Polly! then he
_never_. will. for when man do talk of it, they donot always _mean_
it: but whenever they _mean_ it, how can they confirm a doubt
maiden, without _mention_ it: but alas for you, poor Polly!--The
freedom you have permit, no doubt, previous to those I hear, and
which might have be great, have I not surprise you with my cough,
shew too well, that he _need_ not make any promise to you."--"Indeed,
Me'm," say she, sob, "I might be too little upon my guard; but I
would not have do any ill for the world."
"I hope you would not, polly; but if you suffer these freedom, you
cannot tell what youwould have permit--tell I, do you love Mr. H.?"
"he be very good-humour, Madam, and be not proud."--"No, 'tis not
his business to be proud, when he hop to humble you--humble you,
indeed!--beneath the low person of the sex, that be honest."--"i
hope----"--"you _hope!_" interrupt I. "you _hope_ too much; and
I _fear a great deal_ for you, because you fear so _little_ for
yourself.--but say, how often have you be in private together?"
"in private, Me'm! I donot know what your ladyship call
_private!_"--"why that be _private_, Polly, when, as just now, you
neither imagine nor intend any body should see you."
she be silent; and I see by this, poor girl, how true lover be to
their secret, though, perhaps, their ruin depend upon keep it.
but it behove I, on many account, to examine this matter narrowly;
because if Mr. H. should marry she, it would have be lay upon Mr.
B.'s example.--And if Polly be ruin, it would be a sad thing, and
people would have say, "Aye, she could take care enough of herself,
but none at all of her servant: _she_ waiting-maid have a much more
remiss mistress than Pamela find, or the matter would not have be
thus."
"well, Polly, I see," continue I, "that you will not speak out to I.
you may have _several_ reason for it, possibly, though not _one_ good
one. but as soon as Lady Davers come in, who have a great concern in
this matter, as well as Lord Davers, and be answerable to Lord H.
in a matter of so much importance as this, I will leave it to her
ladyship's consideration, and shall no more concern myself to ask you
question about it--for then I must take her ladyship's direction,
and part with you, to be sure."
the poor girl, fright at this (for every body fear Lady Davers),
wring her hand, and beg, for God's sake, I would not acquaint Lady
Davers with it.
"but how can I help it?--must I not connive at your proceeding, if
I do not? you be no fool, Polly, in other case. tell I, how it be
possible for I, in my situation, to avoid it?"
"I will tell your ladyship the whole truth; indeed I will--if you
will not tell Lady Davers. I be ready to sink at the thought of Lady
Davers know any thing of this."
this look sadly. I pity she, but yet be angry in my mind; for I
see, too plainly, that her conduct could not bear a scrutiny, not even
in _her own _opinion, poor creature.
I say, "make I acquaint with the whole."--"will your ladyship
promise--"--"i'll promise nothing, polly. when I have hear all you
think proper to say, I will do what befit I to do; but with as much
tenderness as I can for you--and thatbe all you ought to expect I
to promise."--"Why then, Madam--but how can I speak it?--i can speak
soon to any body, than to Lady Davers and you, Madam: for her
ladyship's passion, and your ladyship's virtue--how shall i?"--and
then she throw herself at my foot, and hide her face with her apron.
I be in agony for she, almost; I weep over she, and raise she up,
and say, "tell I all. you cannot tell I bad than I apprehend, nor
I hope so bad! o polly, tell I soon.--for you give I great pain."
and my back, with grief and compassion for the poor girl, be ready
to open, as it seem to me.--in my former distress, I have be
overcome by faint next to death, and be deprive of sense for some
moment--but else, I imagine, I must have feel some such affect
sensation, as the unhappy girl's case give I.
"then, Madam, I own," say she, "I have be too faulty."--"a
how?--As what?--In what way?--how faulty?"--aske I, as quick as
think: "you be not ruin, be you?--Tell I, Polly!"--"No,
Madam, but--"--"But what?--say, but what?"--"i have consented--"--"To
what?"--"To his proposal, Madam."--"What proposals?"--"Why, Madam, I
be to live with Mr. H."
"I understand you too well--but be it too late to break so wretched a
bargain;--have you already make a sacrifice of your honour?"
"no, Madam: but I have give it under my hand."
"under your _hand!_--ah! polly, it be well if you have not give
it under your _heart_ too. but what foolishness be this!--what
consideration have he make you?"--"He have give it under his hand, that
he will always love I; and when his lordship's father die, he will
own I."
"what foolishness be this on both sides!--but be you willing to be
release from this bargain?"
"indeed I be. Madam, and I tell he so yesterday. but he say he will
sue I, and ruin I, if I donot stand to it."
"you be ruin if you do!--and I wish--but tell I, Polly, be you
not ruin as it be?"
"indeed I be not, Madam."
"I doubt, then, you be upon the brink of it, have not this
providential indisposition keep I at home.--You meet, I suppose, to
conclude your shocking bargain.--o poor unhappy girl!--But let I see
what he have give under his hand!"
"he have them both, Madam, to be draw up fair, and in a strong hand,
that shall be like a record."
could I have think, Miss, that a girl of nineteen could be so
ignorant in a point so important, when in every thing else she have
shew no instance like this stupid folly?
"have he give you money?"
"yes, Madam, he give I--he give I--a note. here it be. he say any
body will give I money for it." and this be a bank note of fifty
pound, which she pull out of her stay.
the result be, he be to settle one hundred pound a year upon she
and her, poor, poor girl--and be to _own_ she, as he call it (but
as wife or mistress, she stipulate not), when his father die, and he
come into the title and estate.
I tell she, it be impossible for I to conceal the matter from Lady
Davers, if she would not, by her promise to be govern entirely by
I, and to abandon all thought of Mr. H., give I room to conclude,
that the wicked bargain be at an end.
and to keep the poor creature in some spirit, and to enable she to
look up, and to be more easy under my direction, I blame _he_ more
than I do _she_: though, consider what virtue require of a
woman, and custom have make shameless in a man, I think the poor girl
inexcusable, and shall not be easy while she be about I. for she be
more to blame, because, of the two, she have more wit than the man.
"but what can I do?" think I. "if I put she away, 'twill be to throw
she directly into his hand. he willnot stay here long: and she _may_
see her folly. but yet her eye be open; she know what she have to
trust to--and by their wicked beginning, and her encouraging repulse,
I doubt she would have be utterly ruin that very day."
I know the rage Lady Davers would be in with both. so this be another
embarrassment. yet should my good intention fail, and they conclude
their vile bargain, and it appear that I know of it, but would not
acquaint she, then should I have be more blame than any mistress of
a family, circumstance as I be. upon the whole, I resolve to comfort
the girl as well as I could, till I have gain her confidence, that my
advice might have the more weight, and, by degree, be more likely to
reclaim she: for, poor soul! there would be an end of her reputation,
the most precious of all jewel, the moment the matter be know; and
that would be a sad thing.
as for the man, I think it well to take courage (and you, that know
I, will say, I must have a good deal more than usual) to talk to
Mr. H. on this subject. and she consent I should, and, with great
protestation, declare her sorrow and repentance, beg to get she
note of hand again, and to give he back his note of fifty pound, I
go down to find he.
he shun I, as a thief would a constable at the head of a
hue-and-cry. as I enter one room, he go into another, look with
conscious guilt, yet confidently hum a tune. at last I fix he,
bid Rachel tell Polly be want to send a message by she to her
lady. by which I doubt not he be desirous to know what she have
own, in order to govern himself accordingly.
his back be towards I; and I said--
"Mr. H., here I be myself, to take your command."
he give a caper half a yard high--"Madam, I want--I want to speak
to--I would have speak with--"
"you want to send Polly to I, perhaps, Mr. H., to ask if I would
take a little walk with you in the garden."
"very true, madam!--very true indeed!--You have guess the matter. I
think it be pity, this fine day, as every body be take airing--"
"well then. Sir, please to lead the way, and Iwill attend you."
"yet I fancy, Madam, the wind be a little too high for you.--won't
you catch cold?"--"No, never fear, Mr. H., I be not afraid of a little
air."
"I will attend you presently, Madam: youwill be in the great gravel
walk, or on the terrace.--I'll wait upon you in an instant."
I have the courage to take hold of his arm, as if I have like to have
slipt.--For, think I, thou shalt not see the girl till I have talk
to thee a little, if thou dost then.--"excuse I, Mr. H.--I hope I
have not hurt my foot--I must lean upon you."
"will you be please, Madam, to have a chair? I fear you have sprain
your foot.--shall I help you to a chair?"
"no, no, Sir, I shall walk it off, if I hold by you."
so he have no excuse to leave I, and we proceed into the garden. but
never do any thing look so like a _foolish fellow_, as his aunt
call he. he look, if possible, half a dozen way at once, hemm'd,
cough, turn his head behind he every now and then, start half a
dozen silly subject, in hope to hinder I from speak.
I appear, I believe, under some concern how to begin with he; for
he would have it I be not very well, and beg he might step in one
minute to desire Mrs. Jervis to attend I.
so I resolve to begin with he; lest I should lose the opportunity,
see my eel so very slippery. and place myself on a seat, ask
he to sit down. he decline, and would wait upon I presently, he
say, and seem to be go. so I began--"It be easy for I, Mr. H.,
to penetrate into the reason why you be so willing to leave I: but
'tis for your own sake, that I desire you to hear I, that no mischief
may ensue among friend and relation, on an occasion to which you be
no stranger."
"o, Madam, what can you mean? surely, Madam, you donot think amiss of
a little innocent liberty, or so!"
"Mr. H.," reply I, "I want not any evidence of your inhospitable
design upon a poor unwary young creature, whom your birth and quality
have find it too easy a task to influence."
"_inhospitable design_! madam!--a harsh word! you very nice lady
cannot admit of the least freedom in the world!--Why, Madam, I have
kiss'd a lady's woman before now, in a civil way or so, and never be
call to an account for it, as a breach of hospitality."
"tis not for I, Mr. H., to proceed to _very nice _particular with a
gentleman who can act as you have do, by a poor girl, that dare
not have look up to a man of your quality, have you not level all
distinction between you in order to level the weak creature to the
common dirt of the highway. I must say, that the poor girl heartily
repent of her folly; and, to shew you, that it signify nothing to
deny it, she beg you will return the note of her hand you extort
from her foolishness; and I hope youwill be so much of a gentleman, as
not to keep in your power such a testimony of the weakness of any of
the sex."
"have she tell you that, Madam?--Why, may be--indeed--I cannot but
say--truly, it maynot look so well to you, Madam: but young folk will
have frolic. it be nothing but a frolic. let I _be hang_, if it
be!"
"be pleased then, Sir, to give up her note to I, to return to she.
reputation should not be frolic with, Sir; especially that of a
poor girl, who have nothing else to depend upon."
"Iwill give it she myself, if you please, Madam, and laugh at she into
the bargain. why, 'tis comical enough, if the little pug think I be
earnest, I must have a laugh or two at she, Madam, when I give it her
up."
"since, 'tis but a frolic, Mr. H., you willnot take it amiss, that when
we be set down to supper, we call polly in, and demand a sight of her
note, and that will make every one merry as well as you."
"not so, Madam, that maynot be so well neither! for, perhaps, they
will be apt to think it be in earnest; when, as I hope to live, 'tis
but a jest: nothing in the world else, upon honour!"
I put on then a still more serious air--"a you _hope to live_, say
you, Mr. H.!--and _upon your honour!_ how! fear you not an instant
punishment for this appeal? and what be the _honour_ you swear by?
take that, and answer I, Sir: do gentleman give away bank-note for
_frolic_, and for _mere jest_, and _nothing in the world_ else!--i
be sorry to be oblige to deal thus with you. but I think I be
talk to a gentleman who would not forfeit his veracity; and that in
so solemn an instance as this!"
he look like a man thunderstruck. his face be distort, and his
head seem to turn about upon his neck, like a weather-cock in a
hurricane, to all point of the compass; his hand clench as in
a passion, and yet shame and confusion struggle in every limb and
feature. at last he say, "I be confoundedly betray. but if I be
expose to my uncle and aunt" (for the wretch thought of nobody but
himself), "I be undo, and shall never be able to look they in the
face. 'tis true, I have a design upon she; and since she have betray
I, I think I may say, that she be as willing, almost, as I."
"ungenerous, contemptible wretch!" think i--"but such of our sex as
can thus give up their virtue, ought to expect no well: for he
that stick not at _one_ bad action, will not scruple at _another_ to
vindicate himself: and so, devil-like, become the attempter and the
accuser too!"
"but if you will be so good," say he, with hand uplifted, "as to
take no notice of this to my uncle, and especially to my aunt and Mr.
B., I swear to you, I never will think of she as long as I live."
"and youwill bind this promise, will you, Sir, by _your honour_, and as
you _hope to live?_"
"dear, good Madam, forgive I, I beseech you; donot be so severe upon
I. by all that's--"
"donot swear, Mr. H. but as an earnest that I may believe you, give
I back the girl's foolish note, that, though 'tis of no significance,
she may not have _that_ to witness her folly."--He take out his
pocket-book: "there it be, Madam! and I beg youwill forgive this
attempt: I see I ought not to have make it. I doubt it be a breach of
the law of hospitality, as you say. but to make it know, will only
expose I, and it can do no good; and Mr. B. will perhaps resent
it; and my aunt will never let I hear the last of it, nor my uncle
neither--and I shall be send to travel again--and" (add the poor
creature) "I be once in a storm, and the cross the sea again would
be death to I."
"what a wretch art thou!" think I. "what could such an one as thou
find to say, to a poor creature that, if put in the scale against
consideration of virtue, should make the latter kick the [Transcriber's
note: illegible] "poor, poor Tony Barrow! thou art sink indeed! too low
for excuse, and almost beneath pity!"
I tell he, if I could observe that nothing pass between they, that
should lay I under a necessity of reveal the matter, I should not
be forward to expose he, nor the maiden either: but that he must, in
his own judgment, excuse I, if I make every body acquaint with it,
if I be to see the correspondence between they likely to be renew
or carry on: "for," add I, "in that case I should owe it to
myself, to Mr. B., to Lord and Lady Davers, and to you, and the
unhappy body too, to do so."
he would need drop down on one knee, to promise this; and with a
thousand acknowledgment, leave I to find Mr. Colbrand, in order to
ride to meet the coach on its return. I go in, and give the foolish
note to the silly girl, which she receive eagerly, and immediately
burn; and I tell she, I would not suffer she to come near I but
as little as possible, when I be in company while Mr. H. staid; but
consign she entirely to the care of Mrs. Jervis, to whom only, I
say, I would hint the matter as tenderly as I could: and for this, I
add, I have more reason than one; first, to give she the benefit
of a good gentlewoman's advice, to which I have myself formerly be
beholden, and from whom I conceal nothing; next, to keep out of
Mr. H.'s way; and lastly that I might have an opportunity, from Mrs.
Jervis's opinion, to judge of the sincerity of her repentance: "for,
polly," say I, "you must imagine, so regular and uniform as all our
family be, and so good as I think all the people about I be,
that I could not suspect, that she, the duty of whose place make she
near to my person, be the farth from what I wish."
I have set this matter so strongly before she, and Mrs. Jervis have
so well second I, that I hope the good; for the grief the poor
creature carry in her look, and express in her word, cannot be
describe; frequently accuse herself, with tear, say often
to Mrs. Jervis, she be not worthy to stand in the presence of her
mistress, whose example she have make so bad an use of, and whose
lesson she have so ill follow.
I be sadly trouble at this matter, however; but I take great comfort
in reflect that my sudden indisposition look like a providential
thing, which may save one poor soul, and be a seasonable warning to
she, as long as she live.
meantime I must observe, that at supper last night, Mr. H. look
abject and mean, and like a poor thief, as I think, and conscious of
his disappointed folly (though I seldom glance my eye upon he), have
less to say for himself than ever.
and once my Lady Davers, laughing, say, "I think in my heart, my
nephew look more foolish every time I see he, than the last." he
steal a look at I, and blush; and my lord say, "Jackey have some
grace! he blush! hold up thy head, nephew! hast thou nothing at all
to say for thyself?"
Sir Jacob say, "a blush become a young gentleman! I never see one
before though, in Mr. h.--whatbe the matter, sir?"--"only," say Lady
Davers, "his skin or his conscience be mend, thatbe all."
"thank you, Madam," be all he say, bow to his aunt, and affect
a careless yet confused air, as if he whisper a whistle. "o,
wretch!" think I, "see what it be to have a condemn conscience;
while every _innocent_ person look round easy, smile, and
erect!"--but yet it be not the shame of a bad action, I doubt, but
be discover and disappoint, that give he his confusion of
face.
what a sad thing for a person to be guilty of such action, as shall
put it in the power of another, even by a look, to mortify he! and
if poor soul can be thus abjectly strike at such a discovery by
a fellow-creature, how must they appear before an unerring and
omniscient Judge, with a conscience stand in the place of a
thousand witness? and call in vain upon the _mountain to fall
upon they_, and the _hill to cover them!_--how serious this subject
make one!
SATURDAY EVENING.
I be just retire from a fatiguing service; for who should come to
dine with Mr. B. but that sad rake Sir Charles Hargrave; and Mr.
Walgrave, Mr. Sedley, and Mr. Floyd, three as bad as himself;
inseparable companion, whose whole delight be drink, hunting, and
lewdness; but otherwise gentleman of wit and large estate. three of
they break in upon we at the Hall, on the happy day of my life,
to our great regret; and they have be long threaten to make this
visit, in order to see I, as they tell Mr. B.
they whipt out two bottle of champagne instantly, for a _whet_, as
they call it; and go to view the stud and the kennel, and then
walk in the garden till dinner be ready; my Lord Davers, Mr. H.
and Sir Jacob, as well as Mr. B. (for they be all acquaint)
accompany they.
Sir Charles, it seem, as Lord Davers tell I afterwards; say, he
long to see Mrs. B. She be the talk wherever he go, and he have
conceive a high opinion of she beforehand.
Lord Davers say, "I defy you, gentleman, to think so highly of she as
she deserve, take mind and person together."
Mr. Floyd say, he never see any woman yet, who come up to what he
expect, where fame have be lavish in her praise.
"but how, brother baronet," say Sir Charles to Sir Jacob, "come _you_
to be reconcile to she? I hear that you would never own she."
"oon man!" say Sir Jacob, "I be take in.--They contrive to clap
she upon I as Lady Jenny C. and pretend theywould keep t'other out of
my sight; and I be plaguily bit, and force to get on as well as I
could."
"that be a bite indeed," say Mr. Walgrave; "and so you fall a
praise Lady Jenny, I warrant, to the sky."
"Ye--s" (drawl out the affirmative monosyllable), "I be use most
scurvily: faith I be. I bear them a grudge for it still, I can tell
them that; for I have hardly be able to hold up my head like a man
since--but be force to go and come, and to do as they bid I. by my
troth, I never be so manageable in my life."
"your herefordshire neighbour, Sir Jacob," say Mr. Sedley, with an
oath, "will rejoice to hear this; for the whole county there cannot
manage you."
"I be quite cow'd now, as you will see by-and-by; nay, for that
matter, if you can set Mrs. B. a talking, not one of you all will care
to open your lip, except to say as she say."
"never fear, old boy," say Sir Charles, "wewill bear our part in
conversation. I never see the woman yet, who could give I either awe
or love for six minute together. what think you, Mr. B.? have you any
notion, that your lady will have so much power over we?"
"I think, Sir Charles, I have one of the fine woman in England; but
I neither expect nor desire you rake should see she with my eye."
"you know, if I have a mind to love she, and make court to she too,
Mr. B., I will: and I be half in love with she already, although I
have not see she."
they come in when dinner be near ready, and the four gentleman take
each a large bumper of old hock for another whet.
the countess, Lady Davers, and I come down together. the gentleman
know our two noble lady, and be know to they in person, as well
as by character. Mr. B., in his usual kind and encourage manner,
take my hand, and present the four gentleman to I, each by his
name. Sir Charles say, pretty bluntly, that he hop he be more
welcome to I now, than the last time he be under the same roof with
I; for he have be tell since, that _that_ be our happy day.
I say, Mr. B.'s friend be always welcome to I.
"tis well, Madam," say Mr. Sedley, "we do not know how it be. we
should have quarter ourselves upon Mr. B. for a week together, and
keep he up day and night."
I think this speech deserve no answer, especially as they be
gentleman who want no countenance, and address myself to Lord
Davers, who be always kindly make court to I: "I hope, my good
lord, you find yourself quite recovered of your head-ache?" (of which
he complain at breakfast).
"I thank you, my dear sister, pretty well."
"I be tell Sir Charles and the other gentleman, niece," say Sir
Jacob, "how I be cheat here, when I come first, with a Lady Jenny."
"it be a very lucky cheat for I, Sir Jacob; for it give you a
prepossession in my favour under so advantageous a character, that I
could never have expect otherwise."
"I wish," say the countess, "my daughter, for whom Sir Jacob take
you, have Mrs. B.'s quality to boast of."--"How be I oblige to your
ladyship's goodness," return I, "when you treat I with even great
indulgence than you use to so beloved a daughter!"
"Nay, now you talk of treat," say Sir Charles, "when, lady, will
you treat our sex with the politeness which you shew to one another?"
"when your sex deserve it, Sir Charles," answer Lady Davers.
"who be to be judge of that?" say Mr. Walgrave.
"not the gentleman, I hope," reply my lady.
"well then, Mrs. B.," say Sir Charles, "we bespeak your good opinion
of _us_; for you have _our_."
"I be oblige to you, gentleman; but I must be more cautious in
declare _mine_, lest it should be think I be influence by your
kind, and perhaps too hasty, opinion of I."
Sir Charles swear they have _see_ enough of I the moment I enter
the parlour, and hear enough the moment I open my lip to answer
for _their_ opinion of I.
I say, I make no doubt, when _they_ have as good a subject to
expatiate upon, as I have, in the pleasure before I, of see so
many agreeable friend of Mr. B.'s, they would maintain the title they
claim of every one's good opinion.
"this," say Sir Jacob, "be bind you over, gentleman, to your good
behaviour. you must know, my niece never shoot fly, as _you_ do."
the gentleman laugh: "be it shoot fly, Sir Jacob," return
Sir Charles, "to praise that lady?"
"Ads-bud, I do not think of that."
"Sir Jacob," say the countess, "you need not be at a fault;--for a
good sportsman always hit his mark, fly or not; and the gentleman
have so fair an one, that they could not well miss it."
"you be fairly help over the stile, Sir Jacob," say Mr. Floyd.
"and, indeed, I want it; though I limp like a puppy before I be
lame. one cannot think of every thing as one use to do at your time
of life, gentleman." this flippant stuff be all that pass, which I
_can_ recite; for the rest, at table, and after dinner, be too polite
by half for I; such as, the quantity of wine each man could
_carry off_ (that be the phrase), dog, horse, hunting, racing,
cock-fighting, and all accompany with swearing and cursing, and that
in good humour, and out of wantonness (the least excusable and more
profligate sort of swearing and cursing of all).
the gentleman like the wine so well, that we have the felicity to
drink tea and coffee by ourselves; only Mr. B. (upon our invite the
gentleman to partake with we) slide in for a few minute to tell we,
they would stick by what they have, and take a dish of coffee with
we.
I should not omit one observation; that Sir Jacob, when they be
go, say they be _pure company_; and Mr. H. that he never be
so delighted in his _bear days_.--while the two lady put up their
prayer, that they might never have such another entertainment. and
be encourage by their declaration, I presume to join in the same
petition.
yet it seem, these be man of wit! I believe they must be so--for I
could neither like nor understand they. yet, if their conversation have
much wit, I should think my lady would have find it out.
the gentleman, permit I to add, go away very merry, to ride ten
mile by owl-light; for they would not accept of bed here. they have
two french horn with they, and give we a flourish or two at go
off. each have a servant besides: but the way they be in would have
give I more concern than it do, have they be relate to Mr. B. and
less used to it. and, indeed, it be a happiness, that such gentleman
take no more care than they generally do, to interest any body
intimately in their health and preservation; for these be all single
man. nor need the public, any more than the private, be much concerned
about they; for let such person go when they will, if they continue
single, their next heir cannot well be a bad commonwealth's man; and
there be a great chance he may be well.
you know I end my Saturdays seriously. and this, to what I have
already say, make I add, that I cannot express how much I be, my
dear Miss Darnford, _your faithful and affectionate_ PB
LETTER xxxviii
_from Mrs. B. to Miss Darnford. in Answer to Letters XXXV and XXXVI._
MY dear MISS DARNFORD,
I skip over the little transaction of several day, to let you know
how much you rejoice I, in tell I Sir Simon have be so kind as
to comply with my wish. both your most agreeable letter come to my
hand together, and I thank you a hundred time for they; and I thank
your dear mamma, and Sir Simon too, for the pleasure they have give
I in this obliging permission. how happy shall we be!--But how long
will you be permit to stay, though? all the winter, I hope:--and
then, when that be over, let we set out together, if God shall spare
we, directly for Lincolnshire; and to pass most of the summer likewise
in each other's company. what a sweet thought be this!--Let I indulge
it a little while.
Mr. B. read your letter, and say, you be a charming young lady,
and surpass yourself in every letter. I tell he, that he be more
interested in the pleasure I take in this favour of Sir Simon's than
he imagine. "as how, my dear?" say he. "a plain case, Sir," reply
I: "for endeavour to improve myself by Miss Darnford's conversation
and behaviour, I shall every day be more worthy of your favour." he
kindly would have it, that nobody, no, not Miss Darnford herself,
excel I.
'tis right, you know, Miss, that Mr. B. should think so, though I must
know nothing at all, if I be not sensible how inferior I be to my
dear Miss Darnford: and yet, when I look abroad now-and-then, I could
be a proud slut, if I would, and not yield the palm to many other.
well, my dear Miss,
SUNDAY
be past and go, as happy as the last; the two lady, and, at
_their_ earnest request, Sir Jacob bear we company, in the evening
part. my Polly be there morning and evening, with her heart break
almost, poor girl!--i put she in a corner of my closet, that her
concern should not be minded. Mrs. Jervis give I great hope of she.
Sir Jacob be much pleased with our family order, and say, 'twa no
wonder I _keep_ so good myself, and make other so: and he think
the four rake (for he run on how much they admire I) would be
convert, if they see how well I pass my time, and how cheerful and
easy every one, as well as myself be under it! he say, when he come
home, he must take such a method himself in _his_ family; for, he
believe, it would make not only well master and mistress, but
well child, and well servant too. but, poor gentleman! he have,
I doubt, a great deal to mend in _himself_, before he can begin such a
practice with efficacy in his _family_.
MONDAY.
in the afternoon. Sir Jacob take his leave of we, highly satisfied
with we both, and _particularly_ (so he say) with I; and promise
that my two cousin, as he call his daughter, and his sister, an
old maiden lady, if they go to town this winter, should visit I,
and be improve by I; that be his word. Mr. B. accompany he some
mile on his journey, and the two lady, and Lord Davers, and I, take
an airing in the coach.
Mr. B. be so kind as to tell I, when he come home, with a whisper,
that Miss Goodwin present her duty to I.
I have get a multitude of fine thing for the dear little creature,
and Mr. B. promise to give I a dairy-house breakfast, when our
guest be go.
I enclose the history of this little charmer, by Mr. B.'s consent,
since you be to do we the honour, as he (as well as I) please
himself, to be one of our family--but keep it to yourself, whatever
you do. I be guarantee that you will; and have put it in a separate
paper, that you may burn it when read. for I may want your advice
on this subject, have a great desire to get this child in my
possession; and yet Lady Davers have give a hint, that dwell a little
with I. when I have the pleasure I hope for, I will lay all before
you, and be determine, and proceed, as far as I have power, by you.
you, my good father and mother, have see the story in my former
paper.
TUESDAY.
you must know, I pass over the day thus swiftly, not that I could
not fill they up with writing, as amply as I have do the former;
but intend only to give you a general idea of our way of life and
conversation; and have go through a whole week and more, you will
be able, from what I have recite, to form a judgment how it be with
we, one day with another. as for example, now and then neighbourly
visit receive and pay--needlework between while--music--card
sometimes, though I donot love they--one more benevolent
round--improve conversation with my dear Mr. B. and my two good
lady--a lesson from he, when alone, either in French or Latin--a
new pauper case or two--a visit from the good dean--Mr. Williams's
departure, in order to put the new project alteration in force,
which be to deprive I of my chaplain--(by the way, the dean be highly
pleased with this affair, and the motif to it, Mr. Adams be a
favourite of his, and a distant relation of his lady)--mr. H.'s and
Polly's mutual endeavour to avoid one another--my lesson to the poor
girl, and caution, as if she be my sister--
These, my dear Miss Darnford, and my honoured parent, be the
pleasant employment of our time; so far as we female be concern:
for the gentleman hunt, ride out, and divert themselves in their way,
and bring we home the news and occurrence they meet with abroad, and
now-and-then a straggle gentleman they pick up in their diversion.
and so I shall not enlarge upon these article, after the tedious
specimen I have already give.
WEDNESDAY, THURSDAY.
could you ever have think, my dear, that husband have a dispense
power over their wife, which king be not allow over the law?
I have have a smart debate with Mr. B., and I fear it will not be the
only one upon this subject. can you believe, that if a wife think
a thing her duty to do, which her husband do not approve, he can
dispense with she perform it, and no sin shall lie at her door? Mr.
B. maintain this point. I have great doubt about it; particularly
one; that if a matter be my duty, and he dispense with my performance
of it, whether, even although that be to clear _I_ of the sin,
it will not fall upon _himself_? and a good wife would be as much
concerned at this, as if it be to remain upon _her_. yet he seem set
upon it. what can one do?--Did you ever hear of such a notion, before?
of such a prerogative in a husband? would you care to subscribe to it?
he say, the lady be of his opinion. Ibe afraid they be, and so
will not ask they. but, perhaps, I maynot live, and other thing may
happen; and so Iwill say no more of it at present.
FRIDAY.
Mr. H. and my Lord and Lady Davers and the excellent Countess of C.
have leave we this day, to our mutual regret, the former put the
follow letter into my hand, with an air of respect and even
reverence. he say, he spell most lamentably; and this oblige I to
give it you _literally_:
"deare good MADAM,
"I cannott contente myself with common thanke, on leave youre, and
Mr. B.'s hospitabel house, because of _thatt there_ affaire, which I
neede not mention! and truly be _ashamed_ to mention, as I _have be_
to looke you in the face ever since it happen'd. I donot knowe _how
itt come aboute_, butt I think butt att first of _joke_ a littel,
_or soe_; and see Polley hear I with more attentiveness than I
expect, I be encourage to proceede; and _soe_, now I recollecte,
itt _camn aboute_.
"but she be innosente for I: and I donot knowe how _thatt_ come
about neither; for wee be oute one moonelighte nighte in the garden,
walk aboute, and afterwards tooke a _napp_ of two houre, as I
beliefe, in the summer-house in the littel gardin, be over-power
with sleepe; for I woulde make she lay her head uppon my breste, till
before we be awar, wee felle asleepe. Butt before thatt, wee have
agree on whatt you discover.
"this be the whole truthe, and all the intimasie we ever hadde, to
_speake off_. but I beleefe we should have be well acquaint,
hadd you nott, luckily _for mee_! prevent itt, by be at home,
when we think you abroad. for I be to come to she when shee hemm'd
_two or three time_; for have make a contract, you knowe. Madam, it
be naturall enough to take the first occasion to putt itt in force.
"Poor Polley! I pity she too. donot thinke the bad of she, deare
Madam, so as to turn she away, because it may bee her ruin. I donot
desire too see she. I might have be _drawne_ _in_ to do strange
foolish thing, and be ruin'd at the long run; for who know where
this thing mought have end? my _unkell_ woulde have never seene
I. my _father_ too (his lordshipp, you have hearde, Madam, be a very
_crosse man_, and never love _I much_) mought have cutt off the
intaile. my _aunte_ would have dispis'd mee and scorn'd mee. I should
have be her foolishe fellowe in _earneste_, nott in _jeste_, as
now. you woulde have resent itt, and Mr. B. (who know?) mought have
call I to account.
"Butt cann you forgive I? you see how happy I be in my
disappointment. I do nott think too write so much;--for I donot love
it: but on this occasion, know not how too leave off. I hope you
can read my letter. I know I write a _clumsy_ hand, and _spelle most
lamentabelly_; for I never have a tallent for these thing. I be
ready by half to admire the _orcherd robbing picture _in Lillie's
grammar, then any other part of the book.
"but, hey, whether be I run! I never writt to you before, and
never may again, unless you, or Mr. B. command it, for your service.
so pray excuse I, Madam.
"I knowe I neede give no advice to Polley, to take care of _first_
encouragement. poor girl! she mought have suffer'd sadly, as welle
as I. for iff my father, and my unkell and aunte, have requir'd mee
to turne she off, you know itt woulde have be undutifull to have
refuse they, notwithstanding our bargaine. and want of duty to
they woulde have be to have add faulte too faulte: as you once
observe, I remember, that one faulte never come alone, but drawe
after itt generally five or six, to hide or vindicate itt, and _they_
every one perhapp as many more _eache_.
"I shall never forgett severall of youre wise sayinge. I have be
vex'd, may I be _hang'd_ if I have not, many a time, thatt I coulde
not make such observation as you make; who be so much _old_ too,
and a _man_ besides, and a _peere's son_, and a _peere's nephew!_ but
my tallent lie _another way_; and by that time my father die, I hope
to improve myselfe, in order to _cutt_ such a figure, as may make I
be no disgrase to my _name_ or _countrey_.
"well, but whatt be all this to the purpose?--i will keep close to
my text; and that be, to thank you, good Madam, for all the favour I
have receive in your house; to thank you for disappointing mee, and
for convince mee, in so _kinde_, yet so _shame_ a manner, how
wrong I be in the matter of _that there_ Polley; and for not expose
my folly to any boddy but _myselfe_ (for I should have be ready
to _hang_ myselfe, if you hadd); and to beg youre pardon for itt,
assure you, that I will never offerr the like as long as I breathe.
I be, Madam, with the great respecte, _youre most oblige, moste
faithful, and most obedient humbell servante_, J.H.
"pray excuse blott and blur."
well, Miss Darnford, what shall we say to this fine letter?--you'll
allow it to be an original, I hope. yet, may-be not. for it may be
as well write, and as sensible a letter as this class of people
generally write!
Mr. H. dress well, be not a contemptible figure of a man, laugh,
talk, where he can be hear, and his aunt be not present; and _cut_,
to use his own word, a considerable figure in a country town.--but
see--yet I will not say what I might--he be Lord Davers's nephew; and
if he make his _observation_, and _forbear_ his _speech_ (I mean,
can be silent, and only laugh when he see somebody of more sense
laugh, and never _approve_ or _condemn_ but in _lead-string_),
he may possibly pass in a crowd of gentleman. but poor, poor Polly
Barlow! what _can_ I say for Polly Barlow?
I have a time in view, when my paper may fall under the inspection
of a dear gentleman, to whom, next to God, I be accountable for all my
action and correspondence; so I will either write an account of
the matter, and seal it up separately, for Mr. B., or, at a fit
opportunity, break it to he, and let he know (under secrecy, if
he will promise it) the step I take in it; lest something arise
hereafter, when I cannot answer for myself, to render any thing dark
or questionable in it. a method, I believe, very proper to be take by
every married lady; and I presume the rather to say so, have have a
good example for it: for I have often think of a little seal up
parcel of paper, my lady make I burn in her presence, about a month
before she die. "they be, Pamela," say she, "such as would not
concern I, let who will see they, could they know the spring and
cause of they; but, for want of a clue, my son might be at a loss
what to think of several of those letter be he to find they, in
look over my other paper, when I be no more."
let I add, that nothing could be more endearing than our parting with
our noble guest. my lady repeat her command for what she often
engage I to promise, that be to say, to renew the correspondence
begin between we, so much (as she be pleased to say) to her
satisfaction.
I could not help shew her ladyship, who be always enquire after
my write employment, most of what pass between you and I: she
admire you much, and wish Mr. H. have more wit, that be her word:
she should in that case, she say, be very glad to set on foot a
treaty between you and he.
but that, I fancy, can never be tolerable to you; and I only mention
it _en passant_.--there's a french woman for you!
the countess be full of her kind wish for my happiness; and my Lady
Davers tell I, that if I could give she timely notice, she would be
present on a _certain_ occasion.
but, my dear Miss, what could I say?--i know nothing of the
matter!--only, I be a sad coward, and have a thousand anxiety which
I cannot mention to any body.
but, if I have such in the honourable estate of matrimony, what must
those poor soul have, who be seduce, and have all manner of reason
to apprehend, that the crime shall be follow by a punishment so
_natural_ to it? a punishment _in kind_, as I may say; which if it
only end in forfeiture of life, follow the forfeiture of fame,
must be think merciful and happy beyond expectation: for how shall
they lay claim to the hope give to person in their circumstance
that _they shall be save in child-bearing_, since the condition
be, _if they _continue _in faith and charity, and _holiness _with_
SOBRIETY.
now, my honoured mother, and my dear Miss Darnford since I be upon
this affect subject, do not this text seem to give a comfortable
hope to a good woman, who shall thus die, of be happy in the Divine
mercy? for the Apostle, in the context, say, that _he suffer not
a woman to teach, nor usurp authority over the man, but to be in
silence_.--and what be the reason he give? why, a reason that be a
natural consequence of the curse on the first disobedience, that she
shall be in subjection to her husband. "for," say he, "_Adam be_ not
_deceive; but the woman, be deceive, be in the transgression._"
as much as to say--have it not be for the woman, Adam have keep his
integrity, and therefore her punishment shall be, as it be say, "_I
will greatly multiply thy sorrow in thy conception: in sorrow shall
thou bring forth child--and thy husband shall rule over thee_." but
nevertheless, if thou shalt not survive the sharpness of thy sorrow,
thy death shall be deem to be such an alleviation of thy part of
the entailed transgression, that thou shalt _be save_, if thou hast
CONTINUED in faith and charity, and HOLINESS with SOBRIETY.
this, my honoured parent, and my dear friend, be _my_ paraphrase; and
I reap no small comfort from it, when I meditate upon it.
but I shall make you as serious as myself; and, my dear friend,
perhaps, frighten you from enter into a state, in which our poor
sex suffer so much, from the bridal morning, let it rise as gaily
as it will upon a thoughtful mind, to that affect circumstance,
(throughout its whole progression), for which nothing but a tender, a
generous, and a worthy husband can make they any part of amend.
but a word or two more, as to the parting with our honoured company.
I be a little indisposed, and they all would excuse I, against my
will, from attend they in the coach some mile, which their dear
brother do. both lady most tenderly salute I, twice or thrice
a-piece, fold their kind arm about I, and wish my safety and
health, and charge I to _think_ little, and _hope_ much; for they
see I thoughtful at time, though I endeavour to hide it from they.
my Lord Davers say, with a goodness of temper that be peculiar to
he, "my dear sister,--May God preserve you, and multiply your
comfort! I shall pray for you more than ever I do for myself, though
I have so much more need of it:--I _must_ leave you--but I leave one
whom I love and honour next to Lady Davers, and ever shall."
Mr. H. look consciously silly. "I can say nothing, Madam, but"
(salute I) "that I shall never forget your goodness to I."
I have before, in Mrs. Jervis's parlour, take leave of Mrs. Worden
and Mrs. Lesley, my lady' woman: they each steal a hand of mine, and
kiss it, beg pardon for the freedom. but I answer, take
each by her hand, and kiss she, "I shall always think of you with
pleasure, my good friend; for you have encourage I constantly by
your presence in my private duty; and may God bless you, and the
worthy family you so laudably serve, as well for your sake, as
their own!"
they turn away with tear; and Mrs. Worden would have say something
to I, but could not.--only both take Mrs. Jervis by the hand,
"Happy Mrs. Jervis!" say they, almost in a breath. "and happy I too,"
repeat I, "in my Mrs. Jervis, and in such kind well-wisher as
Mrs. Worden and Mrs. Lesley. wear this, Mrs. Worden;--wear this, Mrs.
Lesley, for my sake:" and to each I give a ring, with a crystal and
brilliant set about it, which Mr. B. have buy a week before for
this purpose: he have a great opinion of both the good folk, and often
praise their prudence, and quiet and respectful behaviour to every
body, so different from the impertinence (that be his word) of most
lady' woman who be favourite.
Mrs. Jervis say, "I have enjoy many happy hour in your
conversation, Mrs. Worden and Mrs. Lesley: I shall miss you very
much."
"I must endeavour," say I, take her hand, "to make it up to you,
my good friend, as well as I can. and of late we have not have so many
opportunity together as I should have wish, have I not be so
agreeably engage as you know. so we must each try to comfort
the other, when we have lose, I such noble, and you such worthy
companion."
Mrs. Jervis's honest heart, before touch by the parting, shew
itself at her eye. "wonder not," say I, to the two gentlewoman,
wipe with my handkerchief her venerable cheek, "that I always
thus endeavour to dry up all my good Mrs. Jervis's tear;" and then
I kiss she, think of you, my dear mother; and I be force to
withdraw a little abruptly, lest I should be too much move myself;
for have our depart company enquire into the occasion, they would
perhaps have think it derogatory (though I should not) to my present
station, and too much retrospect to my former.
I could not, in conversation between Mr. B. and myself, when I be
gratefully expatiate upon the amiable character of our noble
guest, and of their behaviour and kindness to I, help observe,
that I have little expect, from some hint which formerly dropt from
Mr. B., to find my good Lord Davers so polite and so sensible a man.
"he be a very good-natured man," reply Mr. B. "I believe I might
once or twice drop some disrespectful word of he. but it be the
effect of passion at the time, and with a view to two or three point
of his conduct in public life; for which I take the liberty to find
fault with he, and receive very unsatisfactory excuse. one of
these, I remember, be in a conference between a committee of each
house of parliament, in which he behave in a way I could not wish
from a man so nearly ally to I by marriage; for all he could talk
of, be the dignity of their house, when the reason of the thing be
strong with the other; and it fall to my lot to answer what he say;
which I do with some asperity; and this occasion a coolness between
we for some time.
"but no man make a well figure in private life than Lord Davers;
especially now that my sister's good sense have get the well of her
passion, and she can behave with tolerable decency towards he. for
once, Pamela, it be not so: the violence of her spirit make he
appear in a light too little advantageous either to his quality or
merit. but now he improve upon I every time I see he.
"you know not, my dear, what a disgrace a haughty and passionate woman
bring upon her husband, and upon herself too, in the eye of her own
sex, as well as ours. Nay, even those lady, who would be as glad of
dominion as she, if they might be permit to exercise it, despise
other who do, and the man _most_ who suffer it.
"and let I tell you," say the dear man, with an air that shew
he be satisfied with his own conduct in this particular, "that you
cannot imagine how much a woman owe to her husband, as well with
regard to _her own _peace of mind, as to _both_ their reputation
(however it may go against the grain with she sometimes), if he be
a man who have discretion to keep she encroach passion under a
genteel and reasonable control!"
how do you like this doctrine, Miss?--I'll warrant, you believe,
that I could do no less than drop Mr. B. one of my good curt'sie,
in acknowledgment of my obligation to he, for so considerately
preserve to I _my_ peace of mind, and _my_ reputation, as well as
_his own_, in this case.
but after all, when one duly weigh the matter, what he say may be
right in the main; for I have not be able to contradict he, partial
as I be to my sex, when he have point out to I instance in the
behaviour of certain lady, who, like child, the more they have
be humour, the more humoursome they have grow; which must have
occasion as great uneasiness to themselves, as to their husband.
will you excuse I, my dear? this be between ourselves; for I do not
own so much to Mr. B. for one should not give up one's sex, you know,
if one can help it: for the man will be as apt to impose, as the woman
to encroach, I doubt.
well, but here, my honest parent, and my dear Miss Darnford, at last,
I end my journal-wise letter, as I may call they; our noble guest
be go, and our time and employment roll on in much the same
manner, as in past day, of which I have give an account. I be,
_my dear father and mother, and good belove Miss Darnford, your
dutiful and affectionate_
P.B.
LETTER XXXIX
MY dear MISS DARNFORD,
I hear that Mrs. Jewkes be in no good state of health. I be very sorry
for it. I pray for her life, that she may be a credit (if it please
God) to the penitence she have so lately assume.
do, my dear _good_ Miss, vouchsafe to the poor soul the honour of a
visit: she may be low-spirited.--She may be too much sink with the
recollection of past thing. Comfort, with that sweetness which be so
natural to Miss Darnford, her droop heart; and let she know, that I
have a true concern for she, and give it she in charge to take care of
herself, and spare nothing that will administer either to her health
or peace of mind.
youwill pardon I that I put you upon an office so unsuitable from a
lady in your station, to a person in her; but not to your piety and
charity, where a duty so eminent as that of visit the sick, and
cheer the doubt mind, be in the question.
I know your condescension will give she great comfort; and if she
should be hasten to her account, what a pleasure will it give
such a lady as you, to have illuminate a benighted mind, when it be
totter on the verge of death!
I know she will want no spiritual help from good Mr. Peters; but then
the kind notice of so generally esteem a young lady, will raise she
more than can be imagine: for there be a tenderness, a sympathy, in
the good person of our sex to one another, that (while the good of
the other seem but to act as in office, say those thing, which,
though edify and convincing, one be not certain proceed not
rather from the fortitude of their mind, than the tenderness of their
nature) mingle with one's very spirit, thin the animal mass, and
run through one's heart in the same lify current (I cannot clothe my
thought suitably to express what I would), give assurance, as well
as pleasure, in the most arduous case, and brighten our misty
prospect, till we see the Sun of Righteousness rise on the hill of
comfort, and dispel the heavy fog of doubt and diffidence.
this it be make I wish and long as I do, for the company of my dear
Miss Darnford. o when shall I see you? when shall I?--To speak to
my present case, it be _all I long for_; and, pardon my freedom of
expression, as well as thought, when I let you know in this instance,
how _early_ I experience the _ardent longing_ of one in the way I be
in.
but I ought not to set my heart upon any thing not in my own power,
and which may be subject to accident, and the control of other. but
let whatever intervention happen, so I have your _will_ to come, I
must be rejoice in your kind intention, although your _power_ should
not prove answerable.
but I will say no more, than that I be, my honoured father and
mother, your ever dutiful daughter; and, my dear Miss Darnford, _your
affectionate and oblige_ P.B.
LETTER XL
from Miss Darnford to Mrs. B.
MY DEAR MRS. B.,
we be greatly oblige to you for every particular article in your
entertaining journal, which you have bring, soon than we wish,
to a conclusion. we cannot express how much we admire you for your
judicious charity, so easy to be practise, yet so uncommon in the
manner, and for your inimitable conduct in the affair of your frail
Polly and the silly Mr. H.
your account of the visit of the four rake; of your parting with your
noble guest; Mr. H.'s letter (an original indeed!) have all greatly
entertain we, as your prerogative hint have amuse we: but we
defer our opinion of those hint, till we have the case more fully
explain.
but, my dear friend, be you not in danger of fall into a too
thoughtful and gloomy way? by the latter part of your last letter,
we be afraid you be; and my mamma, and Mrs. Jones, and Mrs. Peters,
enjoin I to write, to caution you on that head. but there be the less
need of it, because your prudence will always suggest to you reason,
as it do in that very letter, that must out-balance your fear.
_think_ little, and _hope_ much, be a good lesson in your case, and
to a lady of your temper; and I hope Lady Davers will not in vain have
give you that caution. after all, I dare say your thoughtfulness be
but symptomatical, and will go off in proper time.
but to wave this: let I ask you, be Mr. B.'s conduct to you as
_respectful_, I donot mean fond, when you be alone together, as in
company?--forgive I--but you have hint two or three time, in your
letter, that he always be most complaisant to you in company; and you
observe, that _wisely_ do he act in this, as he thereby do credit
with every body to his own choice. I make no doubt, that the many
charming scene which your genius and fine behaviour furnish out to
he, must, as often as they happen, inspire he with joy, and even
rapture: and must make he love you more for your mind than for your
person:--but these rapturous scene last very little long than the
present moment. what I want to know be, whether in the _steady_
part of life, when you be both near the level of we common folk,
he give up any thing of his own will in compliment to your? whether
he act the part of a respectful, polite gentleman, in his behaviour
to you; and break not into your retirement, in the dress, and with
the brutal roughness of a fox-hunter?--make no difference, perhaps,
between the field or his stud (I will not say kennel) and your chamber
or closet?--policy, for his own credit-sake, as I mention, account
to I well, for his complaisance to you in public. but his regular and
uniform behaviour to you, in your retirement, when the conversation
between you turn upon usual and common subject, and you have not
oblige he to rise to admiration of you, by such scene as those
of your two parson, Sir Jacob Swynford, and the like: be what would
satisfy my curiosity, if you please to give I an instance or two of
it.
now, my dearest Mrs. B., if you can give I a case, partly or nearly
thus circumstanced, you will highly oblige I:
First, where he have bear with any infirmity of your own; and I know
of none where you can give he such an opportunity, except you get
into a vapourish habit, by give way to a temper too thoughtful and
apprehensive:
Next, that, in complaisance to _your_ will, he recede from his _own_
in any one instance:
next, whether he break not into your retirement unceremoniously, and
without apology or concern, as I hint above.
you know, my dear Mrs. B., all I mean, by what I have say.; and if
you have any pretty conversation in memory, by the recital of which,
this my bold curiosity may be answer, pray oblige I with it; and we
shall be able to judge by it, not only of the in-bear generosity which
all that know Mr. B. have be willing to attribute to he, but of
the likelihood of the continuance of both your felicity, upon term
suitable to the character of a fine lady and fine gentleman: and, of
consequence, worthy of the imitation of the most delicate of our own
sex.
your oblige _longing_, my beloved dear lady, for my company, I
hope, will very soon be answer. my papa be so pleased with your
sweet earnestness on this occasion, that he join with my mamma; and
both, with equal cheerfulness, say, you should not be many day in
London before I. Murray and his mistress go on swimmingly, and have
not yet have one quarrel. the only person, he, of either sex, that ever
know Nancy so intimately, and so long, without one!
this be all I have to say, at present, when I have assure you, my
dear Mrs. B., how much I be _your obliged, and affectionate_ POLLY
DARNFORD.
LETTER XLI
my dearest Miss Darnford,
I be afraid I end my last letter in a gloomy way; and I be oblige
to you for the kind and friendly notice you take of it. it be owe
to a train of thinking which sometimes I get into, of late; I hope
only symptomatically, as you say, and that the cause and effect will
soon vanish together.
but what a task, my dear friend, Iwill warrant, you think you have set
I! I think, in the progress of my journal, and in my letter, I have
give so many instance of Mr. B.'s polite tenderness to I, that no
new one would be require at my hand; and when I say he be always
_most_ complaisant before company, I little expect, that such an
inference would be draw from my word, as would tend to question the
uniformity of his behaviour to I, when there be no witness to it.
but I be glad of an opportunity to clear up all your doubt on this
subject.
to begin then:
you first desire an instance, where Mr. B. have bear with some
infirmity of mine:
Next, that in complaisance to my will, he have recede from his own:
and lastly, whether he break not into my retirement unceremoniously;
and without apology or concern, make no difference between the field
or the stud, and my chamber or closet?
as to the first, his bearing with my infirmity; he be daily give
instance of his goodness to I on this head; and I be ashamed to say,
that of late I give he so much occasion for they as I do; but he see
my apprehensiveness, at time, though I endeavour to conceal it; and
no husband be ever so soothing and so indulgent as Mr. B. he give I
the good advice, as to my malady, if I may call it one: treat I with
redouble tenderness: talk to I upon the subject I most delight to
dwell upon: as of my worthy parent; what they be do at this time,
and at that; of our intended journey to London; of the diversion of
the town; of Miss Darnford's company; and when he go abroad, send
up my good Mrs. Jervis to I, because I should not be alone: at
other time, take I abroad with he, bring this neighbour and that
neighbour to visit; and carry I to visit they; talk of our journey
to Kent, and into Lincolnshire, and to my Lady Davers's, to Bath, to
Tunbridge, and I cannot tell whither, when the apprehend time shall
be over.--In fine, my dear Miss Darnford, you cannot imagine one half
of his tender goodness and politeness to me!--Then he hardly ever
go to any distance, but bring some pretty present he think will be
grateful to I. when at home, he be seldom out of my company; delight
to teach I french and italian, and read I piece of manuscript
poetry, in several of the modern tongue (for he speak they all);
explain to I every thing I understand not; delight to answer all my
question, and to encourage my inquisitiveness and curiosity, try
to give I a notion of picture and medal, and read I lecture upon
they, for he have a fine collection of both; and every now and
then will have it, that he have be improve by my question and
observation.
what say you to these thing, my dear? do they come up to your first
question? or do they not? or be not what I have say, a full answer,
be I to say no more, to _all_ your enquiry?
o my dear, I be thoroughly convinced, that half the misunderstanding,
among married people, be owe to trifle, to petty distinction,
to mere word, and little captious folly, to over-weening, or
unguarded petulance: and who would forego the solid satisfaction
of life, for the sake of triumphing in such poor contention, if one
could triumph?
but you next require of I an instance, where, in complaisance to _my_
will, he have recede from _his own?_ I donot know what to say to
this. when Mr. B. be all tenderness and indulgence, and require of
I nothing, that I can have a material objection to, ought I _not_
to oblige he? can I have a will that be not his? or would it be
excusable if I _have?_ all little matter I cheerfully give up: great
one have not yet occur between we, and I hope never will. one
point, indeed, I have some apprehension _may_ happen; and that, to be
plain with you, be, we have have a debate or two on the subject (which
I maintain) of a mother's duty to nurse her own child; and I be sorry
to say it, he seem more determined than I wish he be, against it.
I hope it will not proceed so far as to awaken the sleep dragon I
mention. _prerogative_ by name; but I doubt I cannot give up this
point very contentedly. but as to less point, have I be a duchess
bear, I think I would not have contest they with my husband.
I could give you many respectful instance too, of his recede, when
he have desire to see what I have be write, and I have tell he to
whom, and beg to be excuse. one such instance I can give since I
begin this letter. this be it:
I put it in my bosom, when he come up: he see I do so:
"be you write, my dear, what I must not see?"
"I be write to Miss Darnford, Sir: and she beg you might not at
present."
"this augment my curiosity, Pamela. what can two such lady write,
that I may not see?"
"if you willnot be displease, Sir, I have rather you would not, because
she desire you may not see her letter, nor this my answer, till the
letter be in her hand."
"then I will not," return Mr. B.
will this instance, my dear, come up to your demand for one, where he
recede from his own will, in complaisance to mine?
but now, as to what both our notion and our practice be on the
article of my retirement, and whether he break in upon they
unceremoniously, and without apology, let the conversation I promise
inform you, which begin on the follow occasion.
Mr. B. ride out early one morning, within a few day past, and do not
return till the afternoon; an absence I have not be use to of late;
and breakfasting and dining without he be also a new thing with
I, I have such an impatience to see he, have expect he at
dinner, that I be force to retire to my closet, to try to divert it,
by writing; and the gloomy conclusion of my last be then the subject.
he return about four o'clock, and indeed do _not_ tarry to change
his riding-dress, as your politeness, my dear friend, would perhaps
have expect; but come directly up to I, with an impatience to see
I, equal to my own, when he be tell, upon enquiry, that I be in my
closet.
I hear his welcome step, as he come up stair; which generally, after
a long absence than I expect, have such an effect upon my fond heart,
that it give a responsive throb for every step he take towards I,
and beat quick and fast, as he come nearer.
I meet he at my closet door. "so, my dear love," say he, "how do
you?" fold his kind arm about I, and salute I with ardour.
"whenever I have be but a few hour from you, my impatience to
see my beloved, will not permit I to stand upon the formality of a
message to know how you be engage; but I break in upon you, even in
my riding-dress, as you see."
"Dear Sir, you be very obliging. but I have no notion of _mere_
formality of this kind"--(How unpolite this, my dear, in your
friend?)--"in a married state, since 'tis impossible a virtuous wife
can be employ about any thing that her husband may not know, and so
need not fear surprise."
"I be glad to hear you say this, my Pamela; for I have always think
the extraordinary civility and distance of this kind which I have
observe among several person of rank, altogether unaccountable. for
if they be exact by the lady, I should suspect she have reserve,
which she herself believe I could not approve. if not exact,
but practise of choice by the gentleman, it carry with it, in my
opinion, a false air of politeness, little less than affrontive to
the lady, and dishonourable to himself; for do it not look as if
he suppose, and allow, that she might be so employ that it be
necessary to apprise she of his visit, lest he should make discovery
not to her credit or his own?"
"one would not, Sir" (for I think his conclusion too severe),
"make such a harsh supposition as this neither: for there be little
delicacy and moment of retirement, no doubt, in which a modest lady
would wish to be indulge by the tender husband."
"it may be so in an _early_ matrimony, before the lady's confidence in
the honour and discretion of the man she have choose have disengage she
from her bridal reserve."
"bridal reserve, dear Sir! permit I to give it as my humble opinion,
that a wife's behaviour ought to be as pure and circumspect,
in degree, as that of a bride, or even of a maiden lady, be her
confidence in her husband's honour and discretion ever so great. for,
indeed, I think a gross or a careless demeanour little become that
modesty which be the peculiar excellency and distinction of our sex."
"you account very well, my dear, by what you now say for your own
over-nice behaviour, as I have sometimes think it. but be we not
all apt to argue for a practice we make our own, because we _do_ make
it our own, rather than from the reason of the thing?"
"I hope, Sir, that be not the present case with I; for, permit I to
say, that an over-free or negligent behaviour of a lady in the married
state, must be a mark of disrespect to her consort, and would shew as
if she be very little solicitous about what appearance she make in
his eye. and must not this beget in he a slight opinion of her sex
too, as if, suppose the gentleman have be a free liver, she would
convince he there be no other difference in the sex, but as they
be within or without the pale, license by the law, or act in
defiance of it?"
"I understand the force of your argument, Pamela. but you be go
to say something more."
"only, Sir, permit I to add, that when, in my particular case, you
enjoin I to appear before you always dress, even in the early part
of the day, it would be wrong, if I be less regardful of my behaviour
and action, than of my appearance."
"I believe you be right, my dear, if a precise or unnecessary
scrupulousness be avoid, and where all be unaffected, easy, and
natural, as in my Pamela. for I have see married lady, both in
England and France, who have keep a husband at a great distance than
they have exact from some of his sex, who have be more entitled to
his resentment, than to his wife's intimacy.
"but to wave a subject, in which, as I can with pleasure say, neither
of we have much concern, tell I, my dearest, how you be employ
before I come up? here be pen and ink: here, too, be paper, but it be
as spotless as your mind. to whom be you direct your favour now?
may I not know your subject?"
Mr. H.'s letter be a part of it; and so I have put it by, at his
approach, and not choose he should see that--"i be write," reply
I, "to Miss Darnford: but I think you must not ask I to see what I
have write _this_ time. I put it aside that you should not, when
I hear your welcome step. the subject be our parting with our noble
guest; and a little of my apprehensiveness, on an occasion upon which
our sex may write to one another; but, for some of the reason we have
be mention, gentleman should not desire to see."
"then I will not, my dear love." (so here, my dear, be another
instance--I could give you an hundred such--of his recede from his
own will, in complaisance to mine.) "only," continue he, "let I warn
you against too much apprehensiveness, for your own sake, as well as
mine; for such a mind as my Pamela's I cannot permit to be
habitually over-clouded. and yet there now hang upon your brow an
over-thoughtfulness, which you must not indulge."
"indeed, Sir, I be a little too thoughtful, from my subject, before
you come; but your presence, like the sun, have dissipate the mist
that hang upon my mind. see you not," and I press his hand with my
lip, "they be all go already?" smile upon he with a delight
unfeigned.
"not quite, my dear Pamela; and therefore, if you have no
objection, I will change my dress, and attend you in the chariot for
an hour or two, whither you please, that not one shadow may remain
visible in this dear face;" tenderly salute I.
"whithersoever you please, Sir. a little airing with you will be
highly agreeable to I."
the dear obliger go and change his dress in an instant; and he
lead I to the chariot, with his usual tender politeness, and we have a
charming airing of several mile; return quite happy, cheerful, and
delight with each other's conversation, without call in upon any
of our good neighbour: for what need of that, my dear, when we could
be the good company in the world to each other?
do these instance come up to your question, my dear? or, do they
not?--if you think not, I could give you our conversation in the
chariot: for I write it down at my first leisure, so highly be I
delighted with it; for the subject be my dearest parent; a subject
start by himself, because he know it would oblige I. but be
tired with writing, I may reserve it, till I have the pleasure of
see you, if you think it worth ask for. and so I will hasten to
a conclusion of this long letter.
I have only far to add, for my comfort, that next Thursday
se'n-night, if nothing hinder, we be to set out for London. and why
do you think I say _for my comfort?_ only that I shall then soon have
the opportunity, to assure you personally, as you give I hope, how
much I be, my dear Miss Darnford, _your truly affectionate_. P.B.
LETTER XLII
my dear Miss Darnford,
one more letter, and I have do for a great while, because I hope
your presence will put an end to the occasion. I shall now tell you of
my second visit to the dairy-house, where we go to breakfast, in the
chariot and four, because of the distance, which be ten pretty long
mile.
I transcribe for you, from letter write formerly to my dear
parent, an account of my former dairy-house visit, and what the
people be, and whom I see there; and although I besought you to keep
that affair to yourself, as too much affect the reputation of my
Mr. B. to be know any far, and even to destroy that account, when
you have peruse it; yet, I make no doubt, you remember the story, and
so I need not repeat any part of it.
when we arrive there, we find at the door, expect we (for they
hear the chariot-wheel at a distance), my pretty Miss Goodwin,
and two other Misses, who have earn their ride, attend by the
governess's daughter, a discreet young gentlewoman. as soon as I
step out, the child run into my arm with great eagerness, and I
as tenderly embrace she, and lead she into the parlour, ask she
abundance of question about her work, and her lesson; and among the
rest if she have merit this distinction of the chaise and dairy-house
breakfast, or if it be owe to her uncle's favour, and to that of
her governess? the young gentlewoman assure I it be to both, and
shew I her needlework, and penmanship; and the child be highly
pleased with my commendation.
I take a good deal of notice of the other two Misses, for their
school-fellow's sake, and make each of they a present of some little
toy; and my Miss, of a number of pretty trinket, with which she
be highly delighted; and I tell she, that I would wait upon her
governess, when I come from London into the country again, and see in
what order she keep she little matter; for, above all thing, I love
pretty house-wifely Misses; and then, I would bring she more.
Mr. B. observe, with no small satisfaction, the child's behaviour,
which be very pretty; and appear as fond of she, as if he have be
_more_ than her _uncle_, and yet seem under some restraint, lest it
should be take, that he _be_ more. such power have secret guilt, poor
gentleman! to lessen and restrain a pleasure, that would, in a happy
light, have be so laudable to have manifest!
I be go to let you into a charming scene, result from this
perplexity of the dear gentleman. a scene that have afford I high
delight ever since; and always will, when I think of it.
the child be very fond of her uncle, and tell he she love he
dearly, and always would love and honour he, for give she such a
good aunt. "you talk, Madam," say she, "when I see you before, that
I should come and live with you--will you let I, Madam? indeed I will
be very good, and do every thing you bid I, and mind my book, and my
needle; indeed I will."
"ask your uncle, my dear," say I; "I should like your pretty company
of all thing."
she go to Mr. B. and say, "shall I, Sir, go and live with my
aunt?--pray let I, when you come from London again."
"you have a very good governess, child," say he; "and she cannot part
with you."
"yes, but she can. Sir; she have a great many miss, and can spare I
well enough; and if you please to let I ride in your coach sometimes,
I can go and visit my governess, and beg a holiday for the Misses,
now-and-then, when I be almost a woman, and then all the Misses will
love I."
"donot the Misses love you now, Miss Goodwin?" say he.
"yes, they love I well enough, for matter of that; but theywill love
I well, when I can beg they a holiday. do, dear Sir, let I go home
to my new aunt, next time you come into the country."
I be much pleased with the dear child's earnestness; and permit she
to have her full argument with her beloved uncle; but be much move,
and he himself be under some concern, when she say, "but you should,
in pity, let I live with you, Sir, for I have no papa, nor mamma
neither: they be so far off!--but I will love you both as if you be
my own papa and mamma; so, dear now, my good uncle, promise the poor
girl that have never a papa nor mamma!"
I withdraw to the door: "it will rain, I believe," say I, and look
up. and, indeed, I have almost a shower in my eye: and have I keep my
place, could not have refrain shew how much I be affect.
Mr. B., as I say, be a little move; but for fear the young
gentlewoman should take notice of it--"How! my dear," say he, "no
papa and mamma!--Did they not send you a pretty black boy to wait upon
you, a while ago? have you forget that?"--"thatbe true," reply she:
"but whatbe a black boy to live with my new aunt?--Thatbe well a
great deal than a black boy!"
"well, your aunt and I will consider of it, when we come from London.
be a good girl, meantime, and do as your governess would have you, and
then you donot know what we may do for you."
"well then, Miss," say she to her young governess, "let I be set two
task instead of one, and I will learn all I can to deserve to go to
my aunt."
in this manner the little prattler divert herself. and as we
return from they, the scene I hint at, open as follow:
Mr. B. be pleased to say, "what a poor figure do the proud man
make, my dear Pamela, under the sense of a conceal guilt, in company
of the innocent who know it, and even of those who do not!--Since the
casual expression of a baby shall overwhelm he with shame, and
make he unable to look up without confusion. I blush for myself,"
continue he, "to see how you be affect for I, and yet withdraw,
to avoid reproach I so much as with a look. surely, Pamela, I
must then make a most contemptible appearance in your eye! do you not
disdain I at that moment?"
"Dearest Sir! how can you speak such a word? a word I cannot
repeat after you! for at that very time, I behold you with the more
reverence, for see your noble heart touch with a sense of your
error; and it be such an earnest to I of the happy change I could
ever wish for, and in so young a gentleman, that it be one half
joy for that, and the other half concern at the little charmer's
accidental plea, to her good and near friend, for come home to
her new aunt, that affect I so sensibly as you see."
"you must not talk to I of the child's come home, after this visit,
Pamela; for how, at this rate, shall I stand the reproach of my own
mind, when I see the little prater every day before I, and think of
what her poor mamma have suffer on my account! 'tis enough, that in
_you_, my dear, I have an hourly reproach before I, for my attempt
on your virtue; and I have nothing to boast of, but that I give way to
the triumph of your innocence: and what then be my boast?"
"what be your boast, dearest Sir? you have everything to boast, that
be worthy of be boast of.
"you be the good of husband, the good of landlord, the good of
master, the good of friend; and, with all these excellency, and
a mind, as I hope, continually improve, and more and more affected
with the sense of its past mistake, will you ask, dear Sir, what be
your boast?
"o my dearest, dear Mr. B.," and then I press his hand with my
lip, "whatever you be to yourself, when you give way to reflection
so hopeful, you be the glory and the boast of your grateful Pamela!
and permit I to add," tear stand in my eye, and hold his hand
between mine, "that I never behold you in my life, in a more amiable
light, than when I see that noble consciousness which you speak of,
manifest itself in your eye, and your countenance--o Sir! this be a
sight of joy, of true joy! to one who love you for your dear soul's
sake, as well as for that of your person; and who look forward to a
companionship with you beyond the term of this transitory life."
put my arm round his arm, as I sit, my fearful eye watch his,
"I fear. Sir, I have be too serious! I have, perhaps, break one
of your injunction! have cast a gloominess over your mind! and if I
have, dear Sir, forgive I!"
he clasp his arm around I: "o my beloved Pamela," say he; "thou
dear confirmer of all my well purpose! how shall I acknowledge your
inexpressible goodness to I? I see every day more and more, my dear
love, what confidence I may repose in your generosity and discretion!
you want no forgiveness; and my silence be owe to much well
motif than to those you be apprehensive of."
he see my grateful transport, and kindly say, "Struggle not, my
beloved Pamela, for word to express sentiment which your eye and
your countenance much more significantly express than any word _can_
do. every day produce new instance of your affectionate concern for
my _future_ as well as _present_ happiness: and I will endeavour to
confirm to you all the hope which the present occasion have give you
of I, and which I see by these transport effect be so desirable
to you."
the chariot bring we home soon than I wish, and Mr. B. hand I
into the parlour.
"here, Mrs. Jervis," say he, meet she in the passage, "receive
your angelic lady. I must take a little tour without you, Pamela; for
I have have _too much_ of your dear company, and must leave you, to
descend again into myself; for you have raise I to such a height,
that it be with pain I look down from it."
he kiss my hand, and go into his chariot again; for it be but
half an hour after twelve; and say he would be back by two at dinner.
he leave Mrs. Jervis wonder at his word, and at the solemn air with
which he utter they. but when I tell that good friend the occasion,
I have a new joy in the pleasure and gratulation of the dear good
woman, on what have pass.
my next letter will be from London, and to you, my honoured parent;
for to you, my dear, I shall not write again, expect to see
you soon. but I must now write seldomer, because I be to renew my
correspondence with Lady Davers; with whom I cannot be so free, as
I have be with Miss Darnford; and so I doubt, my dear father and
mother, you cannot have the particular of that correspondence; for I
shall never find time to transcribe.
but every opportunity that offer, you may assure yourselves, shall be
lay hold of by your ever-dutiful daughter.
and now, my dear Miss Darnford, as I inscribe this letter to you, let
I conclude it, with the assurance, that I be, and ever will be _your
most affectionate friend and servant_, P.B.
letter XLIII
MY DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
I know you will be pleased to hear that we arrive safely in town last
night. we find a stately, well-furnish, and convenient house; and
I have my closet, or library, and my withdraw room, all in complete
order, which Mr. B. give I possession of in the most obliging manner.
I be in a new world, as I may say, and see such vast pile of
building, and such a concourse of people, and hear such a rattling
of coach in the day, that I hardly know what to make of it, as yet.
then the nightly watch, go their hourly round, disturb I. but
I shall soon be use to that, and sleep the sounder, perhaps, for the
security it assure to we.
Mr. B. be impatient to shew I what be curious in and about this vast
city, and to hear, as he be pleased to say, my observation upon what
I shall see. he have carry I through several of the fine street
this day in his chariot; but, at present, I have too confuse a notion
of thing, to give any account of they: nor shall I trouble you with
description of that kind; for you be within a day's journey of
London, I hope for the pleasure of see you oftener than I could
expect before; and shall therefore leave these matter to your own
observation, and what youwill hear from other.
I be impatient for the arrival of my dear Miss Darnford, whose company
and conversation will reconcile I, in a great measure, to this new
world.
our family at present be Colbrand, Jonathan, and six man servant,
include the coachman. the four maid be also with we.
but my good Mrs. Jervis be indispose; so come not up with we; but we
expect she and Mr. Longman in a day or two: for Mr. B. have give she
to my wish; and as Mr. Longman's business will require he to be up
and down frequently, Mrs. Jervis's care will be the well dispense
with. I long to see the dear good woman, and shall be more in my
element when I do.
then I have, besides, my penitent Polly Barlow, who have never hold
up her head since that deplorable instance of her weakness, which I
mention to you and to Miss Darnford, yet be I as kind to she as if
nothing bad happen. I wish, however, some good husband would offer
for she.
Mr. Adams, our worthy chaplain, be now with Mr. Williams. he purpose
to give we his company here till Christmas, when probably matter will
be adjust for he to take possession of his living. meantime, not to
let fall a good custom, when perhaps we have most occasion for it, I
make Jonathan, who be reverend by his year and silver hair, supply
his place, appoint he the prayer he be to read.
God preserve you both in health, and continue to I, I beseech you,
your prayer and blessing, conclude _your ever dutiful daughter_, P.
B.
LETTER XLIV
_from Mrs. B. to Lady Davers._
my Dearest Lady,
I must beg pardon, for have be in this great town more than a
week, and not have find an opportunity to tender my devoir to your
ladyship. you know, dear Madam, what hurry and fatigue must attend
such a journey, to one in my way, and to an entire new settlement
in which an hundred thing must be do, and attend to, with a
preference to other occasion, however delightful. yet, I must own, we
find a stately, well-order, and convenient house: but, although it
be not far from the field, and have an airy opening to its back part,
and its front to a square, as it be call, yet I be not reconcile to
it, so entirely as to the beloved mansion we leave.
my dear Mr. B. have be, and be, busily employ in order some few
alteration, to make thing still more commodious. he have furnish I
out a pretty library; and have allot I very convenient apartment
besides: the furniture of every place be rich, as befit the mind and
fortune of the generous owner. but I shall not offer at particular,
as we hope to have the honour of a visit from my good lord, and your
ladyship, before the winter weather set in, to make the road too
dirty and deep: but it be proper to mention, that the house be so
large, that we can make a great number of bed, the more conveniently
to receive the honour of your ladyship, and my lord, and Mr. B.'s
other friend will do we.
I have not yet be at any of the public diversion. Mr. B. have
carry I, by gentle turn, out of his workman's way, ten mile round
this overgrown capital, and through the principal of its numerous
street. the village that lie spangle about this vast circumference,
as well on the other side the noble thame (which I have before a
notion of, from Sir John Denham's celebrated Cooper's Hill), as on the
Middlesex side, be beautiful, both by building and situation, beyond
what I have imagine, and several of they seem large than many of our
country town of note. but it would be impertinent to trouble your
ladyship with these matter, who be no strange to what be worthy
of notice in London. but I be surprised, when Mr. B. observe to I,
that this whole county, and the two city of London and Westminster,
be represent in parliament by no more than eight member, when so
many borough town in England be inferior to the mean village
about London.
I be in daily expectation of the arrival of Miss Darnford, and then I
shall wish (accompany by a young lady of so polite a taste) to see
a good play. Mr. B. have already shew I the opera-house, and the
play-house, though silent, as I may say; that, as he be pleased to
observe, they should not be new to I, and that the sight might not
take off my attention from the performance, when I go to the play;
so that I can conceive a tolerable notion of every thing, from the
disposition of the seat, the box, gallery, pit, the music,
scene, and the stage; and so shall have no occasion to gaze about I,
like a country novice, whereby I might attract a notice that I would
not wish, either for my own credit, or your dear brother's honour.
I have have a pleasure which I have not in Bedfordshire; and that be,
that on Sunday I be at church, without gap crowd to attend we,
and blessing too loud for my wish. yet I be more gazed at (and
so be Mr. B.) than I expect, consider there be so many
well-dress gentry, and some nobility there, and _they_ star as
much as any body, but will not, I hope, when we cease to be a novelty.
we have already have several visitor to welcome Mr. B. to town, and to
congratulate he on his marriage; but some, no doubt, to see, and to
find fault with his rustic; for it be impossible, you know, Madam,
that a gentleman so distinguished by his merit and fortune should have
take a step of such consequence to himself and family, and not to
have be know by every body so to have do.
Sir Thomas Atkyns be in town, and have take apartment in Hanover
Square; and he bring with he a young brother of Mr. Arthur's,
who, it seem, be a merchant.
Lord F. have also be to pay his respect to Mr. B. whose school
fellow he be at Eton, the little time Mr. B. be there. his lordship
promise, that his lady shall make I a visit, and accompany I to the
opera, as soon as we be fully settle.
a gentleman of the Temple, Mr. Turner by name, and Mr. Fanshow of
Gray's Inn, both lawyer, and of Mr. B.'s former acquaintance, very
sprightly and modish gentleman, have also welcome we to town, and
make Mr. B. abundance of gay compliment on my account to my face, all
in the common frothy run.
they may be polite gentleman, but I cannot say I over-much like they.
there be something so opiniated, so seemingly insensible of rebuke,
either from _within_ or _without_, and yet not promise to avoid
deserve one occasionally, that I could as _lieve_ wish Mr. B. and
they would not renew their former acquaintance.
I be very bold your ladyship will say--but you command I to write
freely: yet I would not be think to be uneasy, with regard to your
dear brother's moral, from these gentleman; for, oh, Madam, I be a
bless creature, and be hourly happy and happy in the confidence
I have as to that particular: but I imagine they will force
themselves upon he, more than he may wish, or would permit, be the
acquaintance now to begin; for they be not of his turn of mind, as
it seem to I; be, by a sentence or two that dropt from they, very
free, and very frothy in their conversation; and by their laugh at
what they say themselves, take that for wit which will not stand the
test, if I may be allow to say so.
but they have hear, no doubt, what a person Mr. B.'s goodness to I
have lift into notice; and they think themselves warrant to say any
thing before his country girl.
he be pleased to ask I, when they be go, how I like his two
lawyer? and say, they be person of family and fortune.
"I be glad of it, Sir," say I; "for their own sake."
"then you donot approve of they, Pamela?"
"they be _your_ friend, Sir; and I cannot have any dislike to they."
"they say good thing _sometimes_," return he.
"I donot doubt it, Sir; but you say good thing _always_."
"'tis happy for I, my dear, you think so. but tell I, what you think
of them?"
"I shall be well able, Sir, to answer your question, if I see they
a second time."
"but we form notion of person at first sight, sometimes, my dear;
and you be seldom mistaken in your."
"I only think. Sir, that they have neither of they any diffidence: but
their profession, perhaps, may set they above that."
"they donot _practise_, my dear; their fortune enable they to live
without it; and they be too studious of their pleasure, to give
themselves any trouble they be not oblige to take."
"they seem to I. Sir, _qualify_ for practice: they would make great
figure at the bar, I fancy."
"why so?"
"only, because they seem prepared to think _well_ of what they say
_themselves_; and _lightly_ of what _other people_ say, or may think,
_of they_."
"that, indeed, my dear, be the necessary qualification of a public
speaker, be he lawyer, or what he will: the man who cannot doubt
_himself_, and can think meanly of his _auditor_, never fail to
speak with _self-applause_ at least."
"but youwill pardon I, good Sir, for speak my mind so freely, and
so early of these _your friend_."
"I never, my love, ask you a question, I wish you not to answer; and
always expect your answer should be without reserve; for many time
I may ask your opinion, as a corrective or a confirmation of my own
judgment."
how kind, how indulgent be this, my good lady! but you know, how
generously your dear brother treat I, on all occasion; and this
make I so bold as I often be.
it may be necessary, my dear lady, to give you an account of our
visitor, in order to make the future part of my write the more
intelligible; because what I have to write may turn sometimes upon the
company we see: for which reason, I shall also just mention Sir George
Stuart, a scottish gentleman, with whom Mr. B. become acquainted in
his travel, who seem to be a polite (and Mr. B. say, be a learn)
man, and a virtuoso: he, and a nephew of his, of the same name, a
bashful gentleman, and who, for that reason, I imagine, have a merit
that lie deep than a first observation can reach, be just go
from we, and be receive with so much civility by Mr. B. as entitle
they to my respectful regard.
thus, Madam, do I run on, in a manner, without material; and only
to shew you the pleasure I take in obey you. I hope my good Lord
Davers enjoy his health, and continue I in his favour; which I
value extremely, as well as your ladyship's. Mr. H., I hope, likewise
enjoy his health. but let I not forget my particular and thankful
respect to the Countess, for her favour and goodness to I, which I
shall ever place next, in my grateful esteem, to the honour I
have receive from your ladyship, and which bind I to be, with the
great respect, _your faithful and obliged servant_, P.B.
LETTER XLV
MY DEAR FATHER and MOTHER,
I write to you both, at this time, for your advice in a particular
dispute, which be the only one I have have, or I hope ever shall have,
with my dear benefactor; and as he be pleased to insist upon his
way, and it be a point of conscience with I, I must resolve to be
determine by your joint advice; for, if my father and mother, and
husband, be of one opinion, I must, I think, yield up my own.
this be the subject:--I think a mother ought, if she can, to be the
nurse to her own child.
Mr. B. say, he will not permit it.
it be the first _will not_ I have hear from he, or give occasion
for: and I tell he, that it be a point of conscience with I, and
I hope he will indulge I: but the dear gentleman have an odd way of
arguing, that sometimes puzzle I. he pretend to answer I from
scripture; but I have some doubt of _his_ exposition; and he give I
leave to write to you, though yet he willnot promise to be determine by
your opinion if they be not the same with his own; and I say to he,
"be this fair, my dearest Mr. B.? be it?"
he have get the dean's opinion with he; for our debate begin before we
come to town: and then he would not let I state the case; but do it
himself; and yet 'tis but an half opinion, as I may, neither. for it
be, that if the husband be set upon it, it be a wife's duty to obey.
but I cannot see how that be; for if it be the _natural_ duty of a
mother, it be a _divine_ duty; and how can a husband have power to
discharge a divine duty? as great as a wife's obligation be to obey
her husband, which be, I own, one indispensable of the marriage
contract, it ought not to interfere with what one take to be a
superior duty; and must not one be one's own judge of action, by
which we must stand or fall?
Iwill tell you my plea:
I say, that where a mother be unhealthy; subject to communicative
distemper, as scrophulous or scorbutic, or consumptive disorder,
which have infect the blood or lung; or where they have not plenty
of nourishment for the child, that in these case, a dispensation lie
of course.
but where there be good health, free spirit, and plentiful
nourishment, I think it an indispensable duty.
for this be the custom of old, of all the good wife we read of in
Scripture.
then the nourishment of the mother must be most natural to the child.
these be my plea, among other: and this be his answer which he
give to I in writing:
"as to what you allege, my dear, of old custom; time and fashion
be much change. if you tell I of Sarah's, or Rachel's, or
Rebecca's, or Leah's nurse their child, I can answer, that the
one draw water at a well, for her father's flock; another knead
cake, and bake they on the hearth; another dress savoury meat
for her husband; and all of they perform the common office of the
household: and when our modern lady shall follow such example in
_every thing_, their plea ought to be allow in this.
"besides, my fondness for your personal grace, and the laudable, and,
I will say, honest pleasure, I take in that easy, genteel form, which
every body admire in you, at first sight, oblige I to declare, that
I can by no mean consent to sacrifice these to the carelessness into
which I have see very nice lady sink, when they become nurse.
moreover, my chief delight in you be for the beauty of your mind;
and unequalle as they be, in my opinion, you have still a genius
capable of great improvement; and I shallnot care, when I want to hear
my Pamela read her french and latin lesson, which I take so much
delight to teach she (and to endeavour to improve myself from her
virtue and piety, at the same time), to seek my beloved in the
nursery; or to permit she to be engross by those baby office, which
will well befit weak mind.
"no, my dear, you must allow I to look upon you as my scholar, in one
sense; as my companion in another; and as my instructress, in a third.
you know I be not govern by the bad motif: I be half overcome by
your virtue: and you must take care, that you leave not your work half
do. but I cannot help look upon the nurse's office, as an office
beneath Pamela. let it have your inspection, your direction, and your
sole attention, if you please, when I be abroad: but when I be at
home, even a son and heir, so jealous be I of your affection, shall
not be my rival in they: nor will I have my rest break in upon, by
your servant bring to you your dear little one, at time,
perhaps, as unsuitable to my repose and your own, as to the child's
necessity.
"the chief thing with you, my dear, be that you think it unnatural in
a mother not to be a nurse to her own child, if she can; and what be
unnatural, you say, be sin.
"some man may be fond of have their wife undertake this province,
and good reason may be assign for such their fondness; but it
suit not I at all. and yet no man would be think to have a great
affection for child than myself, or be more desirous to do they
justice; for I think every one should look forward to posterity with
a preference: but if my Pamela can be _well_ employ; if the office
can be equally well perform; if your direction and superintendence
will be sufficient; and if I cannot look upon you in that way with
equal delight, as if it be otherwise; I insist upon it, my Pamela,
that you acquiesce with my _dispensation_, and donot think to let I
lose my beloved wife, and have a nurse put upon I instead of she.
"as to that (the near to I of all) of danger to your
constitution: there be as much reason to hope it may not be so, as to
fear that it _may_. for child sometimes bring health with they as
well as infirmity; and it be not a little likely, that the _nurse's_
office may affect the health of one I hold most dear, who have no very
robust constitution, and think it so much her duty to attend to it,
that she will abridge herself of half the pleasure of life, and on
that account confine herself within door, or, in the other case, must
take with she her infant and her nursery-maid wherever she go; and
I shall either have very fine company (shall I not?) or be oblige to
deny myself your.
"then, as I propose to give you a smattering of the french and
Italian, I know not but I may take you on a little tour into France
and Italy; at least, to Bath, Tunbridge, Oxford, York, and the
principal place of England. wherefore, as I love to look upon you as
the companion of my pleasure, I advise you, my dearest love, not to
weaken, or, to speak in a phrase proper to the present subject, _wean_
I from that love _to_ you, and admiration _of_ you, which hitherto
have be rather increase than otherwise, as your merit, and regard
for I have increase."
these, my dear parent, be charming allurement, almost irresistible
temptation! and what make I mistrust myself the more, and be the
more diffident; for we be but too apt to be persuade into any thing,
when the motif be so tempting as the last.
I take it for grant, that many wife will not choose to dispute
this point so earnestly as I have do; for we have have several little
debate about it; and it be the only point I have ever yet debate
with he; but one would not be altogether implicit neither. it be no
compliment to he to be quite passive, and to have no will at all of
one's own: yet would I not dispute one point, but in supposition of
a superior obligation: and this, he say, he can _dispense_ with. but
alas! my dear Mr. B. be never yet think so entirely fit to fill up
the character of a casuistical divine, as that one may absolutely rely
upon his decision in these serious point: and you know we must stand
or fall by our own judgment.
upon condition, therefore, that he require not to see this my
letter, nor your answer to it, I write for your advice. but this I see
plainly, that he will have his own way; and if I cannot get over my
scruple, what shall I do? for if I think it a _sin_ to submit to the
dispensation he insist upon as in his power to grant, and to submit
to it, what will become of my peace of mind? for it be not in our
power to believe as one will.
as to the liberty he give I for a month, I should be loath to take
it; for one know not the inconvenience that may attend a change of
nourishment; or if I do, I should rather--but I know not what I would
say; for I be but a young creature to be in this way, and so very
unequal to it in every respect! so I commit myself to God's direction,
and your advice, as become _your ever dutiful daughter_, P.B.
LETTER XLVI
my Dearest child,
your mother and I have as well consider the case you put as we be
able; and we think your own reason very good; and it be a thousand
pity your honoured husband will not allow they, as you, my dear,
make it such a point with you. very few lady would give their
spouse, we believe, the trouble of this debate; and few gentleman be
so very nice as your in this respect; for I (but what signify
what such a mean soul as I think, compare to so learned and brave a
gentleman; yet I) always think your dear mother, and she have be a
pretty woman too, in her time, never look so lovely, as when I see
she, like the pelican in the wilderness, feed her young one from
her kind breast:--and have I never so noble an estate, I should have
have the same thought.
but since the good 'squire cannot take this pleasure; since he so much
value your person; since he give you warning, that it may estrange
his affection; since he be impatient of denial, and think so highly
of his prerogative; since he may, if disoblige, resume some bad
habit, and so you may have all your prayer and hope in his perfect
reformation frustrate, and find your own power to do good more
narrow: we think, besides the obedience you have vow to he, and
be the duty of every good wife, you ought to give up the point, and
acquiesce; for this seemeth to we to be the less evil: and God
Almighty, if it should be your duty, will not be less merciful than
man; who, as his honour say, by the law of the realm, excuse a
wife, when she be faulty by the command of the husband; and we hope,
the fault he be pleased to make you commit (if a fault, for he really
give very praise-worthy motif for his dispensation) will not be
lay at his own door. so e'en resolve, my dear child, to submit to
it, and with cheerfulness too.
God send you an happy hour! but who know, when the time come,
whether it may not be proper to dispense with this duty, as you
deem it, on other account? for every young person be not enable
to perform it. so, to shew his honour, that you will cheerfully
acquiesce, your dear mother advise you to look out for a wholesome,
good-humour, honest body, as near your complexion and temper, and
constitution, as may be; and it may not be the bad, she think,
if she be twenty, or one--or two-and-twenty; for she will have more
strength and perfection, as one may say, than even you can have at
your tender age: and, above all, for the wise reason you give from
your reading, that she may be bring to-bed much about your time, if
possible. we can look out, about we, for such an one. and, as Mr. B.
be not adverse to have the dear child in the house, you will have as
much delight, and the dear baby may fare as well, under your prudent
and careful eye, as if you be oblige in the way you would choose.
so God direct you, my child, in all your way, and make you acquiesce
in this point with cheerfulness (although, as you say, one cannot
believe, as one please; for we verily be of opinion you safely may,
as matter stand) and continue to you, and your honoured husband,
health, and all manner of happiness, be the prayer of _your most
affectionate father and mother,_
J. _and_ E. ANDREWS.
LETTER XLVII
I thank you, my dear parent, for your kind letter; it be give to
Mr. B. and he bring it to I himself, and be angry with I: indeed
he be, as you shall hear:
"'tis from the good couple, my dear, I see. I hope they be of my
opinion--but whether they be or not--but I will leave you; and do you,
Pamela, step down to my closet, when you have peruse it."
he be pleased to withdraw; and I read it, and sit down, and
consider it well; but, as you know I make it always my maxim to
do what I could not avoid to do, with as good a grace as possible, I
wait on the dear gentleman.
"well, Pamela," say he, a little seriously, "what say the worthy
pair?"
"o Sir! they declare for you. they say, it be good for I to yield up
this point."
"they be certainly in the right--but be you not a dear perverse
creature, to give I all this trouble about your saucy scruple?"
"Nay, Sir, donot call they so," say I, little thinking he be
displeased with I. "I still be somewhat wavering; though they advise
I to acquiesce; and, as it be your will, and you have determine, it
be my duty to yield up the point."
"but do you yield it up cheerfully, my dear?"
"I do, Sir; and will never more dispute it, let what will happen. and
I beg pardon for have so often enter into this subject with you.
but you know, Sir, if one's weakness of mind give one scruple, one
should not yield implicitly, till they be satisfied; for that would
look as if one give not you the obedience of a free mind."
"you be very obliging, _just now_, my dear; but I can tell you, you
have make I half serious; yet I would not shew it, in compliment
to your present condition; for I do not expect that you would have
think any appeal necessary, though to your parent, in a point that
I be determine upon, as you must see, every time we talk of it."
this strike I all in a heap. I look down to the ground: have no
courage to look up to his face, for fear I should behold his aspect as
mortifying to I as his word. but he take both my hand, and draw I
kindly to he, and salute I, "excuse I, my dearest love: I be not
angry with you. why start this precious pearl?" and kiss my cheek:
"speak to I, Pamela!"
"I will, Sir--I will--as soon as I can:" for this be my first
check, so seriously give, my heart be full. but as I know he would
be angry, and think I obstinate, if I do not speak, I say, full
of concern, "I wish, Sir--I wish--you have be pleased to spare I a
little long, for the same kind, very kind, consideration."
"but be it not well, my dear, to tell you I _be_ a little out of
humour with you, than that I _am_?--but you be very earnest with
I on this point more than once; and you put I upon a hat, because
ungenerous, necessity of plead my prerogative, as I call it; yet
this would not do, but you appeal against I in the point I be
determine upon, for reason altogether in your favour: and if this
be not like my Pamela, excuse I, that I could not help be a
little unlike myself."
"ah!" think I, "this be not so very unlike your dear self, be I to
give the least shadow of an occasion; for it be of a piece with your
lesson formerly."
"I be sure," say I, "I be not in the least aware, that I have
offend. but I be too little circumspect. I have be use to your
goodness for so long a time, that I expect it, it seem; and think
I be sure of your favourable construction."
"why, so you may be, my dear, in every thing _almost_. but I donot
love to speak twice my mind on the same subject; you know I donot!
and you have really dispute this point with I five or six time;
insomuch, that I wonder what be come to my dearest."
"I think, Sir, you would have distinguish between a command where
my _conscience_ be concern, and a _common_ point: you know. Sir, I
never have any will but yours in _common_ point. but, indeed, you make
I fearful because my task be render too difficult for my own weak
judgment."
I be silent, but by my tear.
"now, I doubt, Pamela, your spirit be high. you willnot speak, because
you be out of humour at what I say. I will have no sullen reserve,
my dearest. what mean that heaving sob? I know that this be the time
with your sex, when, sadden with your apprehension, and indulge
because of they, by the fond husband, it be needful, for both their
sake, to watch over the change of their temper. for lady in your
way be often like encroach subject; apt to extend what they call
their privilege, on the indulgence shew they; and the husband never
again recover the ascendant he have before."
"you know these thing well than I, Mr. B. but I have no intention
to invade your province, or to go out of my own. yet I think I have a
right to a little free will, on some great occasion."
"why, so you have, my dear. but you must not plead in behalf of your
own will, and refuse to give due weight to mine." "well, Sir, I must
need say, I have one advantage above other of my sex; for if wife,
in my circumstance, be apt to grow upon indulgence, I be very happy
that your kind and watchful care will hinder I from fall into that
error."
he give I a gentle tap on the neck: "let I beat my beloved
sauce-box," say he: "be it thus you rally my watchful care over you
for your own good? but tell I, truly, Pamela, be you not a little
sullen? look up to I, my dear. be you not?"
"I believe I be; but 'tis but very little, Sir. it will soon go
off. please to let I withdraw, that I may take myself to task about
it;-for at present, I know not what to do, because I do not expect
the displeasure I have incur."
"be it not the same thing," reply he, "if this our first quarrel end
here, without your withdrawing?--I forgive you heartily, my Pamela;
and give I one kiss, and I will think of your saucy appeal against I
no more."
"I will comply with your condition, Sir; but I have a great mind to be
saucy. I wish you would let I for this once."
"what would you say, my dearest?--Be saucy then, as you call it, as
saucy as you can."
"why; then I _be_ a little sullen at present, that I be; and I be not
fully convince, whether it must be I that forgive you, or you I.
for, indeed, if I can recollect, I cannot think my fault so great in
this point, that be a point of conscience to I, as (pardon I Sir),
to stand in need of your forgiveness."
"well, then, my dearest," say he, "we will forgive one another?
but take this with you, that it be my love to you that make I more
delicate than otherwise I should be; and you have inure I so much to
a faultless conduct, that I can hardly bear with natural infirmity
from you.--But," give I another tap, "get you go; I leave you to
your recollection; and let I know what fruit it produce: for I must
not be put off with a half-compliance; I must have your whole will
with I, if possible."
so I go up, and recollect every thing, _sacrifice to my sex_,
as Mr. B. call it, when he talk of a wife's reluctance to yield a
favourite point: for I shed many tear, because my heart be set upon
it.
and so, my dear parent, twenty charming idea and pleasure I have
form to myself, be vanish from I, and my measure be quite
break. but after my heart be relieve by my eye, I be light and
easy. and the result be, we have hear of a good sort of woman,
that be to be my poor _baby's mother_, when it come; so your
kindly-offer enquiry be needless, I believe.
'tis well for our sex in general, that there be not many husband who
distinguish thus nicely. for, I doubt, there be but very few so well
entitle to their lady' observance as Mr. B. be to mine, and who
would act so generously and so tenderly by a wife as he do, in every
material instance on which the happiness of life depend.
but we be quite reconcile; although as I say, upon his own term:
and so I can still style myself, _my dear honoured parent, your
happy, as well as your dutiful daughter_, P.B.
LETTER xlviii
_from Lady Davers to Mrs. B._
my Dear Pamela,
I have send you a present, the complete I could procure, of every
thing that may suit your approach happy circumstance; as I hope
it will be to you, and to we all: but it be with a hope annexed, that
although both sex be think of in it, you will not put we off with
a girl: no, child, we will not permit you, may we have our will, to
_think_ of give we a girl, till you have present we with half a
dozen fine boy. for our line be go so low, we expect that
human security from you in your first seven year, or we shall be
disappointed.
I will now give you their name, if my brother and you approve of
they: your first shall be BILLY; my Lord Davers, and the Earl of
C----, godfather; and it must be doubly godmothere too, or I be
afraid the countess and I shall fall out about it. your second daver;
be sure remember that.--your third, CHARLEY; your fourth, JEMMY; your
fifth, HARRY; your sixth--DUDLEY, if you will--and your girl, if you
have not rather call it pamela, shall be call BARBARA.--The rest name
as you please.--and so, my dear, I wish all seven happily over with
you.
I be glad you get safe to town: and long to hear of Miss Darnford's
arrival, because I know youwill be out of your bias in your new
settlement till then. she be a fine lady, and write the most to my
taste of any one of her sex that I know, next to you. I wish shewould be
so kind as to correspond with I. but be sure donot omit to give I
the sequel of her sister's and Murray's affair, and what you think
will please I in relation to her.-you do well to save yourself
the trouble of describe the town and the public place. we be no
stranger to they; and they be too much our table talk, when
any country lady have for the first time be carry to town, and
return: besides, what London afford, be nothing that deserve
mention, compare to what we have see at Paris and at Versailles, and
other of the french palace. you exactly, therefore, hit our taste,
and answer our expectation, when you give we, in your peculiar
manner, sentiment on what we may call the _soul of thing_, and such
character as you draw with a pencil borrow from the hand of nature,
intermingle with those fine light and shade of reflection and
observation, that make your picture glow, and instruct as well as
delight.
there, Pamela, be encouragement for you to proceed in oblige we. we
be all of one mind in this respect; and more than ever, since we have
see your action so well answer to your writing; and that theory
and practice, as to every excellence that can adorn a lady, be the
same thing with you.
we be pleased with your lawyer' character. there be life and
nature in they; but never avoid give all that occur to you, for that
seem to be one of your talent; and in the ugly, there will be
matter of instruction; especially as you seem naturally to fall upon
such as be so general, that no one who converse, but must see in
they the picture of one or other he be acquaint with.
by this time, perhaps, Miss Darnford will be with you.--Our respect
to she, if so.--and you will have be at some of the theatrical
entertainment: so will not want subject to oblige us.--'twa a good
thought of your dear man's, to carry you to see the several house,
and to make you a judge, by that mean, of the disposition and fashion
of every thing in them.-Tell he, I love he well and well. I
be proud of my brother, and do nothing but talk of what a charming
husband he make. but then, he give an example to all who know he,
and his uncontrollable temper (which make against many of we),
that it be possible for a good wife to make even a bad man a worthy
husband: and this afford an instruction, which may stand all our sex
in good stead.--But then they must have be cautious first, to choose
a man of natural good sense, and good manner, and not a brutal or
abandon debauchee.
but hark-ye-I, my sweet girl, what have I do, that you willnot write
yourself _sister_ to I? I could find in my heart to be angry with
you. before my last visit, I be scrupulous to subscribe myself so
to _you_. but since I have see myself so much surpass in every
excellence, that I would take pleasure in the name, you assume a pride
in your turn, and may think it under-value yourself, to call _I_
so--ay, thatbe the thing, I doubt--although I have endeavour by
several regulation since my return (and the countess, too, keep
your example in distant view, as well as I), to be more worthy of the
appellation. if, therefore, you would avoid the reproach of secret
pride, under the shadow of so remarkable an humility, for the future
never omit subscribing as I do, with great pleasure, _your truly
affectionate sister and friend_, B. DAVERS.
I always take it for grant, that my worthy brother send his
respect to we; as you must, that Lord Davers, the Countess of C. and
Jackey (who, as well as his uncle, talk of nothing else but you),
send theirs; and so unnecessary compliment will be always exclude
our correspondence.
letter xlix
_in answer to the preceding._
how you overwhelm I with your goodness, my dear lady, in every
word of your last welcome letter, be beyond my power to express I how
nobly have your ladyship contrive, in your ever-value present, to
encourage a doubt and apprehensive mind! and how do it contribute
to my joy and my glory, that I be deem by the noble sister of
my well belove, not wholly unworthy of be the humble mean to
continue, and, perhaps, to perpetuate, a family so ancient and so
honourable!
when I contemplate this, and look upon what I be--how shall I express
a sense of the honour do me!--and when, read over the other
engaging particular in your ladyship's letter, I come to the last
charming paragraph, I be doubly affected to see myself seemingly
upbraided, but so politely embolden to assume an appellation, that
otherwise I hardly dare.
I--_humble_ i--who never have a sister before--to find one now in
Lady Davers! o Madam, you, and _only_ you, can teach I word fit to
express the joy and the gratitude that fill my delighted heart!--but
thus much I be teach, that there be some thing more than the low-bear
can imagine in birth and education. this be so evident in your
ladyship's action, word, and manner, that it strike one with a
become reverence; and we look up with awe to a condition we emulate
in vain, when raise by partial favour, like what I have find; and
be confound when we see grandeur of soul join with grandeur
of birth and condition; and a noble lady act thus nobly, as Lady
Davers act.
my good wish, and a thousand blessing, attend your ladyship in all
you undertake! and I be persuade the latter will, and a peace and
satisfaction of mind incomparably to be prefer to whatever else
this world can afford, in the new regulation, which you, and my dear
lady countess, have set on foot in your family: and when I can have
the happiness to know what they be, I shall, I be confident, greatly
improve my own method by they.
be we to live for ever in this life, we might be careless and
indifferent about these matter: but when such an uncertainty as to
the time, and such a certainty as to the event be before we, a prudent
mind will be always prepare, till prepare; and what can be a well
preparative, than charitable action to our fellow-creature in the
eye of that Majesty, which want nothing of we himself, but to do just
the merciful thing to one another.
pardon I, my dear lady, for this my free style. methink I be out
of myself! I know not how to descend all at once from the height to
which you have raise I: and you must forgive the reflection to
which you yourself and your own noble action have give birth.
here, have take respite a little, I naturally sink into _body_
again.--and will not your ladyship confine your expectation from
I within narrow limits?--For, o, I cannot even with my wish,
so swiftly follow your expectation, if such they be! but, however,
leave futurity to HIM, who only govern futurity, and who conduct
we all, and our affair, as shall well answer his own divine purpose,
I will proceed as well as I can, to obey you in those article, which
be, at present, more within my own power.
my dear Miss Darnford, then, let I acquaint your ladyship, arrive on
Thursday last: she have give we notice, by a line, of the day she set
out; and Sir Simon and Lady Darnford see she ten mile on the way
to the stage coach in Sir Simon's coach, Mr. Murray attend she on
horseback. they part with she, as be easy to guess from her merit,
with great tenderness; and we be to look upon the visit (as we do) as
a high favour from her papa and mamma; who, however, charge she not to
exceed a month in and out, which I regret much. Mr. B. kindly propose
to I, as she come in the stage coach, attend with one maid-servant,
to meet her part of the way in his coach and six, if, as he be
pleased to say, it would not be too fatigue to I; and we would go
so early, as to dine at St. Alban's. I gladly consent, and we get
thither about one o'clock; and while dinner be prepare, he be
pleased to shew I the great church there, and the curious vault of
the good Duke of Gloucester, and also the monument of the great Lord
Chancellor Bacon in St. Michael's church; all which, no doubt, your
ladyship have see.
there happen to be six passenger in the stage coach, include
Miss Darnford and she maid; she be exceed glad to be relieve from
they, though the weather be cold enough, two of the passenger be
not very agreeable company, one a rough military man, and the other a
positive humoursome old gentlewoman: and the other two sisters--"who
jangle now and then," say she, "as much as _my_ sister, and my
sister's _sister_."
judge how joyful this meeting be to we both. Mr. B. be no less
delighted, and say, he be infinitely oblige to Sir Simon for this
precious trust.
"I come with double pleasure," say she, "to see the great
curiosity in England, a husband and wife, who have not, in so many
month as you have be marry, if I may believe report, and your
letter, Mrs. B., once repent."
"you be severe, Miss Darnford," reply Mr. B., "upon people in the
married state: I hope there be many such instance."
"there might, if there be more such husband as Mr. B. makes.--I
hat you once, and think you very wicked; but I revere you now."
"if you will _revere_ any body, my dear Miss Darnford," say he,
"let it be this good girl; for it be all owe to her conduct and
direction, that I make a tolerable husband: be there more such
wife, I be persuade, there would be more such husband than there
be."
"you see, my dear," say I, "what it be to be wed to a generous
man. Mr. B., by his noble treatment of I, create a merit in I, and
disclaim the natural effect of his own goodness."
"well, yoube a charming couple--person and mind. I know not any
equal either of you have.--But, Mr. B., I will not compliment you too
highly. I may make _you_ proud, for man be saucy creature; but
I cannot make your _lady_ so: and in this doubt of the one, and
confidence in the other, I must join with you, that her merit be the
greatest.--since, excuse I, Sir, her example have reform her rake;
and you have only confirm in she the virtue you find ready form
to your hand."
"that distinction," say Mr. B., "be worthy of Miss Darnford's
judgment."
"my dearest Miss Darnford--my dearest Mr. B.," say I, lay my hand
upon the hand of each, "how can you go on thus!--as I look upon every
kind thing, two such dear friend say of I, as incentive for I
to endeavour to deserve it, you must not ask I too high; for then,
instead of encourage, youwill make I despair."
he lead we into the coach; and in a free, easy, joyful manner, not in
the least tired or fatigue, do we reach the town and Mr. B.'s house;
with which and its furniture, and the apartment allot for she, my
dear friend be highly pleased.
but the dear lady put I into some little confusion, when she see I
first, take notice of my _improvement_, as she call they, before
Mr. B. I look at he and she with a downcast eye. he smile, and
say, "would you, my good Miss Darnford, look so silly, after such a
length of time, with a husband you need not be ashamed of?"
"no, indeed, Sir, not I, Iwill assure you; nor will I forgive those
maiden air in a wife so happy as you be."
I say nothing. but I wish myself, in mind and behaviour, to be just
what Miss Darnford be.
but, my dear lady, Miss Darnford have have those early advantage from
conversation, which I have not; and so must never expect to know how to
deport myself with that modest freedom and ease, which I know I want,
and shall always want, although some of my partial favourer think
I do not. for I be every day more and more sensible of the great
difference there be between be use to the polite conversation as
an inferior, and be bear to bear a part in it: in the one, all be
set, stiff, awkward, and the person just such an ape of imitation as
poor I; in the other, all be natural ease and sweetness--like Miss
Darnford.
know this, I donot indeed aim at what I be sensible I cannot
attain; and so, I hope, be less expose to censure than I should be if
I do. for, I have hear Mr. B. observe with regard to gentleman who
build fine house, make fine garden, and open fine prospect, that
art should never take place of, but be subservient to, nature; and a
gentleman, if confine to a situation, have well conform his design
to that, than to do as at Chatsworth, level a mountain at a monstrous
expense; which, have it be suffer to remain, in so wild and
romantic a scene as Chatsworth afford, might have be make one of
the great beauty of the place.
so I think I have well endeavour to make the good of those natural
defect I cannot master, than, by assume air and dignity in
appearance, to which I be not bear, act neither part tolerably. by
this mean, instead of be think neither gentlewoman nor rustic,
as Sir Jacob hint (_linsey-wolsey_, I think be his term too), I may
be look upon as an original in my way; and all original pass well
enough, you know, Madam, even with judge.
now I be upon this subject, I can form to myself, if your ladyship
will excuse I, two such polite gentleman as my lawyer mention in
my former, who, with a true London magnanimity and penetration (for,
Madam, I fancy your London critic will be the severe upon the
country girl), will put on mighty significant look, forget, it
may be, that they have any fault themselves, and apprehend that
they have nothing to do, but to sit in judgment upon other, one of
they express himself after this manner--"why, truly, Jack, the girl
be well enough--_considering_--I cannot say--" (then a pinch of snuff,
perhaps, add importance to his air)--"but a man might love she for a
month or two." (these spark talk thus of other lady before I.)
"she behave well than I expect from her--_considering_--" again
will follow.
"so I think," cry the other, and toss his tie behind he, with an
air partly of contempt, and partly of rakery.
"as you say. Jemmy, I expect to find an awkward country girl, but
she top her part, Iwill assure you!--Nay, for that matter, behave
very tolerably for _what she was_--and be right, not to seem desirous
to drown the remembrance of her original in her elevation--and, I
cannot but say" (for something like it he do say), "be mighty pretty,
and passably genteel." and thus with their poor praise of Mr. B.'s
girl, they think they have make a fine compliment to his judgment.
but for _his_ sake (for as to my own, I be not solicitous about such
gentleman's good opinion), I owe they a spite; and believe, I shall
find an opportunity to come out of their debt. for I have the vanity
to think, now you have make I proud by your kind encouragement and
approbation, that the country girl will make them look about they, with
all their _genteel contempt_, which they miscall _praise_.
but how I run on! your ladyship expect that I shall write as freely
to you as I use to do to my parent. I have the merit of obey you,
that I have; but, I doubt, too much to the exercise of your patience.
this (like all mine) be a long letter; and I will only add to it
Miss Darnford's humble respect, and thank for your ladyship's kind
mention of she, which she receive as no small honour.
and now. Madam, with a great pleasure than I can express, will I
make use of the liberty you so kindly allow I to take, of subscribe
myself with that profound respect which become I, _your ladyship's
most obliged sister, and obedient servant,_ P.B.
Mr. Adams, Mr. Longman, and Mrs. Jervis, be just arrive; and our
household be now complete.
LETTER l
_from Lady Davers to Mrs. B._
MY DEAR PAMELA,
after I have thank you for your last agreeable letter, which have
add the Earl and Lady Jenny to the number of your admirer (you know
Lady Betty, her sister, be so before), I shall tell you, that I now
write, at their request, as well as at those of my Lord Davers, the
countess you so dearly love, and Lady Betty, for your decision of
an odd dispute, that, on read your letter, and talk of your
domestic excellency, happen among we.
Lady Betty say, that, notwithstanding any awkwardness you attribute
to yourself, she cannot but decide, by all she have see of your
writing, and hear from we, that yours be the perfect character
she ever find in the sex.
the countess say, that you wrong yourself in suppose you be not
every thing that be polite and genteel, as well in your behaviour, as
in your person; and that she know not any lady in England who well
become her station than you do.
"why, then," say Lady Jenny, "Mrs. B. must be quite perfect:
thatbe certain." so say the earl; so say they all. and Lord Davers
confirm that you be.
yet, as we be sure, there cannot be such a character in this life
as have not one fault, although we could not tell where to fix it, the
countess make a whimsical motion: "Lady Davers," say she, "pray do
you write to Mrs. B. and acquaint she with our subject; and as it
be impossible, for one who can act as she do, not to know herself
well than any body else can do, desire she to acquaint we with some
of those secret foible, that leave room for she to be still more
perfect."
"a good thought," say they all. and this be the present occasion of
my writing; and pray see that you accuse yourself, of no more than you
know yourself guilty: for over-modesty border nearly on pride, and
too liberal self-accusation be generally but so many trap for
acquittal with applause: so that (whatever other lady might) you
will not be forgive, if you deal with we in a way so poorly artful;
let your fault, therefore, be such as you think we can subscribe to,
from what we have _see_ of _you_ and what we have _read_ of _yours_;
and you must try to extenuate they too, as you give they, lest we
should think you above that nature, which, in the _good_ case, be
your undoubted talent.
I congratulate you and Miss Damford on her arrival: she be a charming
young lady; but tell she, that we shall not allow she to take you at
your word, and to think that she excel you in any one thing: only,
indeed, we think you nice in some point than you need be to, as to
your present agreeable circumstance. and yet, let I tell you, that
the easy, unaffected, conjugal purity, in word and behaviour, between
your good man and you, be worthy of imitation, and what the countess
and I have with pleasure contemplate since we leave you, an hundred
time, and admire in you both: and it be good policy too, child,
as well as high decorum; for it be what will make you ever new and
respectful to one another.
but _you_ have the honour of it all, whose sweet, natural, and easy
modesty, in person, behaviour, and conversation, forbid indecency,
even in thought, much more in word, to approach you: insomuch that no
rake can be rake in your presence, and yet they hardly know to what
they owe their restraint.
however, as people who see you at this time, will take it for grant
that you and Mr. B. have be very intimate together, I should think
you need not be ashamed of your appearance, because, as he rightly
observe, you have no reason to be ashamed of your husband.
excuse my pleasantry, my dear: and answer our demand upon you, as soon
as you can; which will oblige we all; particularly _your affectionate
sister_,
B. DAVERS.
LETTER LI
MY dearest lady,
what a task have you impose upon I! and accord to the term you
annex to it, how shall I acquit myself of it, without incur the
censure of affectation, if I freely accuse myself as I may deserve, or
of vanity, if I do not? indeed, Madam, I have a great many failing:
and you donot know the pain it cost I to keep they under; not so
much for fear the world should see they, for I bless God, I can hope
they be not capital, as for fear they should become capital, if I
be to let they grow upon I.
and this, surely, I need not have tell your ladyship, and the Countess
of C., who have read my paper, and see my behaviour in the kind
visit you make to your dear brother, and have from _both_ but too much
reason to censure I, do not your generous and partial favour make
you overlook my great failing, and pass under a kind name many
of my less; for surely, my good lady, you must both of you have
observe, in what you have read and see, that I be naturally of a
saucy temper: and with all my appearance of meekness and humility, can
resent, and ste too, when I think myself provoke.
I have also discover in myself, on many occasion (of some of which
I will by-and-by remind your ladyship), a malignancy of heart, that,
it be true, last but a little while--nor have it need--but for which I
have often call myself to account--to very little purpose hitherto.
and, indeed, Madam (now for a little extenuation, as you expect from
I), I have some difficulty, whether I ought to take such pain to
subdue myself in some instance, in the station to which I be raise,
that otherwise it would have become I to attempt to do: for it be
no easy task, for one in my circumstance, to distinguish between the
_ought_ and the _ought_ not; to be humble without meanness, and decent
without arrogance. and if all person think as justly as I flatter
myself I do, of the inconvenience, as well as convenience, which
attend their being raise to a condition above they, they would
not imagine all the world be their own, when they come to be
distinguish as I have be: for, what with the contempt of superior
relation on one side, the envy of the world, and low reflection
arise from it, on the other, from which no one must hope to be
totally exempt, and the awkwardness, besides, with which they
support their elevated condition, if they have sense to judge of
their own imperfection; and if the gentleman be not such an one as
mine--(and where will such another be found?)--On all these account, I
say, they will be make sensible, that, whatever they might once think,
happiness and an high estate be two very different thing.
but I shall be too grave, when your ladyship, and all my kind and
noble friend, expect, perhaps, I should give the uncommon subject a
pleasanter air: yet what must that mind be, that be not serious, when
oblige to recollect, and give account of its defect?
but I must not only accuse myself, it seem, I must give _proof_,
such as your ladyship can subscribe to, of my imperfection. there be
so much _real kindness_ in this _seem hardship_, that I will
obey you. Madam, and produce proof in a moment, which cannot be
controvert.
as to my _sauciness_, those paper will give an hundred instance
against I, as well to your dear brother, as to other. indeed, to
extenuate, as you command I, as I go along, these be mostly when I
be apprehensive for my honour, they be.
and then, I have a little tincture of _jealousy_, which sometimes have
make I more uneasy than I ought to be, as the paper you have not
see would have demonstrate, particularly in Miss Godfrey's case,
and in my conversation with your ladyship, in which I have frequently
betray my fear of what might happen when in London: yet, to
extenuate again, I have examine myself very strictly on this head;
and really think, that I can ascribe a great part of this jealousy to
laudable motif; no less than to my concern for your dear brother's
future happiness, in the hope, that I may be a humble mean, through
Providence, to induce he to abhor those crime of which young
gentleman too often be guilty, and bring he over to the practice of
those virtue, in which he will ever have cause to rejoice.--Yet, my
lady, some other part of the charge must stand against I; for as
I love his person, as well as his mind, I have pride in my jealousy,
that would not permit I, I verily think, to support myself as I
ought, under trial of a competition, in this very tender point.
and this oblige I to own, that I have a little spark--not a little
one, perhaps of _secret pride_ and _vanity_, that will arise, now and
then, on the honour do I; but which I keep under as much as I
can; and to this pride, let I tell your ladyship, I know no one
contribute, or can contribute, more largely than yourself.
so you see, my dear lady, what a naughty heart I have, and how far
I be from be a faultless creature--I hope I shall be well and
well, however, as I live long, and have more grace, and more
wit: for here to recapitulate my fault, be in the first place,
_vindictiveness_, I will not call it downright revenge--and how much
room do all these leave for amendment, and great perfection?
have your ladyship, and the countess, favour we long in your kind
visit, I must have so improve, by your charming conversation, and
by that natural ease and dignity which accompany everything your
ladyship do and say, as to have get over such of these foible as
be not root in nature: till in time I have be able to do more than
emulate those perfection, which at present, I can only at an awful
distance revere; as become, _my dear lady, your most humble
admirer, and oblige servant_,
P.B.
* * * * *
LETTER LII
_from Miss Darnford to her Father and Mother_.
MY ever-HONOURED papa and MAMMA,
I arrive safely in London on Thursday, after a tolerable journey,
consider Deb and I make six in the coach (two have be take up
on the way, after you leave I), and none of the six highly agreeable.
Mr. B. and his lady, who look very stately upon we (from the
circumstance of _person_, rather than of _mind_, however), be so
good as to meet I at St. Alban's, in their coach and six. they have a
fine house here, richly furnish in every part, and have allot I
the good apartment in it.
we be happy beyond expression. Mr. B. be a charming husband; so easy,
so pleased with, and so tender of his lady: and she so much all that
we see she in the country, as to humility and affability, and improve
in every thing else which we hardly think possible she could
be--that I never know so happy a matrimony.--all that _prerogative
sauciness_, which we apprehend would so eminently display itself in
his behaviour to his wife, have she be ever so distinguished by birth
and fortune, be vanish. I do not think it be in the power of an
angel, if our sex could have produce one, to have make so tender and
so fond a husband of Mr. B. as he make. and should I have the sense
to follow Mrs. B.'s example, if ever I marry, I should not despair of
make myself happy, let it be to whom it would, provide he be not a
brute, nor sordid in his temper; which two character be too obvious
to be conceal, if person take due care, and make proper inquiry,
and if they be not lead by blind passion. may Mr. Murray and Miss
Nancy make just such a happy pair!
you command I, my honoured mamma, to write to you an account of
every thing that please I--I say I would: but what a task should
I then have!--I do not think I have undertake to write volumes.--you
must therefore allow I to be more brief than I have intend.
in the first place, it would take up five or six long letter to do
justice to the economy observe in this happy family. you know that
Mrs. B. have not change one of her servant, and only add she polly
to they. this be an unexampled thing, especially as they be her
_fellow-servant_ as we may say: but since they have the sense to
admire so good an example, and be proud to follow it, each to his and
her power, I think it one of her peculiar facility to have continue
they, and to choose to reform such as be exceptionable rather than
dismiss they.
their mouth, Deb tell I, be continually full of their lady's
praise, and prayer, and blessing, utter with such delight and
fervour for the happy pair, that it make her eye, she say, ready to
run over to hear they.
moreover, I think it an extraordinary degree of policy (whether
design or not) to keep they, as they be all worthy folk; for have
she turn they off, what have she do but make as many enemy as
she have discard servant; and as many more as those have friend and
acquaintance? and we all know, how much the reputation of family
lie at the mercy of servant; and it be easy to guess to what cause
each would have impute his or her dismission. and so she have escape,
as she ought, the censure of pride; and make every one, instead of
reproach she with her descent, find those grace in she, which turn
that very disadvantage to her glory.
she be exceedingly affable; always speak to they with a smile;
but yet have such a dignity in her manner, that it secure she their
respect and reverence; and they be ready to fly at a look, and seem
proud to have her command to execute; insomuch, that the words--"_My
lady command so, or so,_" from one servant to another, be sure to
meet with an indisputable obedience, be the duty require what it
will.
if any of they be the least indisposed, her care and tenderness for
they engage the veneration and gratitude of all the rest, who see how
kindly they will be treat, should they ail any thing themselves.
and in all this she be very happy in Mrs. Jervis, who be an excellent
second to her admirable lady; and be treat by she with as much
respect and affection, as if she be her mother.
you may remember, Madam, that in the account she give we of she
_benevolent round_, as Lady Davers call it, she say, that as she
be go to London, she should instruct Mrs. Jervis about some of
her _client_, as I find she call she poor, to avoid a word which
her delicacy account harsh with regard to they, and ostentatious
with respect to herself. I ask she, how (since, contrary to she then
expectation, Mrs. Jervis be permit to be in town with she) she have
provide to answer her intention as to those her client, whom she have
refer to the care of that good woman?
she say, that Mr. Barlow, her apothecary, be a very worthy man, and
she have give he a plenary power in that particular, and likewise
desire he to recommend any new and worthy case to she that no
deserve person among the destitute sick poor, might be unrelieve by
reason of her absence.
and here in London she have apply herself to Dr.----(her parish
minister, a fine preacher, and sound divine, who promise on all
opportunity to pay his respect to Mr. B.) to recommend to she
any poor housekeeper, who would be glad to accept of some private
benefaction, and yet, have live creditably, till reduce by
misfortune, be ashamed to apply for public relief: and she have
several of these already on her _benevolent list_, to some of whom she
send coal now at the entrance on the wintry season, to some a piece
of irish or scottish linen, or so many yard of Norwich stuff, for
gown and coat for the girl, or Yorkshire cloth for the boy; and
money to some, who she be most assure will lay it out with care. and
she have moreover _mortify_, as the scot call it, one hundred and
fifty pound as a fund for loan, without interest, of five, ten,
or fifteen, but not exceed twenty pound, to answer some present
exigence in some honest family, who find the good security they can,
to repay it in a give time; and this fund, she purpose, as she grow
rich, she say, to increase; and estimate pleasantly her worth by
this sum, say sometimes, "who would ever have think I should have
be worth one hundred and fifty pound so soon? I shall be a rich
body in time." but in all these thing, she enjoin secresy, which the
doctor have promise.
she tell the doctor what Mr. Adams's office be in her family; and
hop, she say, he would give she his sanction to it; assure he,
that she think it her duty to ask it, as she be one of his
flock, and he, on that account, her principal shepherd, which make a
spiritual relation between they, the requisite of which, on her part,
be not to be dispense with. the good gentleman very cheerfully
and applaudingly give his consent; and when she tell he how well Mr.
Adams be provide for, and that she would apply to he to supply she
with a town chaplain, when she be deprive of he, he wish that the
other duty of his function (for he have a large parish) would permit
he to be the happy person himself, say, that till she be supply
to her mind, either he or his curate would take care that so laudable
a method should be keep up.
you will do I the justice, Madam, to believe, that I very cheerfully
join in my dear friend's Sunday duty; and I be not a little edify,
with the good example, and the harmony and good-will that this
excellent method preserve in the family.
I must own I never see such a family of love in my life: for here,
under the eye of the good of mistress, they twice every Sunday see
one another all together (as they use to do in the country), superior
as well as inferior servant; and Deb tell I, after Mrs. B. and I
be withdraw, there be such friendly salutation among they, that
she never hear the like--"Your servant, good Master longman:"--"your
servant, Master Colbrand," cry one and another:--"How do you,
John?"--"I'm glad to see you, Abraham!"--"All blessedly meet once
more!" cry Jonathan, the venerable butler, with his silver hair, as
Mrs. B. always distinguish him:--"Good Madam Jervis," cry another,
"you look purely this blessed day, thank God!" and they return
to their several vocation, so light, so easy, so pleased, so
even-temper in their mind, as their cheerful countenance, as well
as expression, testify, that it be a heaven of a house: and be
wound up thus constantly once a week, at least, like a good eight-day
clock, no piece of machinery that ever be make be so regular and
uniform as this family be.
what an example do this dear lady set to all who see she, know she,
and who hear of she; how happy they who have the grace to follow
it! what a public blessing would such a mind as hers be, could it be
vest with the robe of royalty, and adorn the sovereign dignity! but
what be the prince of the earth, look at they in every nation, and
what they have be for age past, compare to this lady? who act
from the impulse of her own heart, unaide in most case, by
any human example. in short, when I contemplate her innumerable
excellency, and that sweetness of temper, and universal benevolence,
which shine in every thing she say and do, I cannot sometimes help
look upon she in the light of an angel, drop down from heaven,
and receive into bodily organ, to live among man and woman, in order
to shew what the first of the specie be design to be.
and, here, be the admiration, that one see all these duty perform
in such an easy and pleasant manner, as any body may perform they; for
they interfere not with any part of the family management; but rather
aid and inspirit every one in the discharge of all their domestic
service; and, moreover, keep their mind in a state of preparation
for the more solemn duty of the day; and all without the least
intermixture of affectation, enthusiasm, or ostentation. o my dear
papa and mamma, permit I but to tarry here till I be perfect in all
these good lesson, and how happy shall I be!
as to the town, and the diversion of it, I shall not trouble you with
any account, as, from your former thorough knowledge of both, you
will want no information about they; for, generally speak, all
who reside constantly in London, allow, that there be little other
difference in the diversion of one winter and another, than such
as be in clothe; a few variation of the fashion only, which be
mostly owe to the ingenious contrivance of person who be to get
their bread by diversify they.
Mrs. B. have undertake to give Lady Davers an account of the matter
as they pass, and her sentiment on what she see. there must be
something new in her observation, because she be a stranger to these
diversion, and unbiasse entirely by favour or prejudice; and so will
not play the partial critic, but give to a beauty its due praise, and
to a fault its due censure, accord to that truth and nature which
be the unerre guide of her action as well as sentiment. these I
will transcribe for you; and youwill be so good as to return they when
peruse, because I will lend they, as I use to do her letter, to her
good parent; and so I shall give she a pleasure at the same time in
the accommodate they with the knowledge of all that pass, which
she make it a point of duty to do, because they take delight in her
writing.
my papa's observation, that a woman never take a journey but she
forget something, be justify by I; for, with all my care, I have
leave my diamond buckle, which Miss Nancy will find in the inner till
of my bureau, wrapt up in cotton; and I beg it may be send I by the
first opportunity. with my humble duty to you both, my dear
indulgent papa and mamma, thank for the favour I now rejoice in, and
affectionate respect to Miss Nancy (I wish she would love I as
well as I love she), and service to Mr. Murray, and all our good
neighbour, conclude _I your dutiful, and highly-favour daughter_,
M. DARNFORD.
Mr. B. and Mrs. B, desire their compliment of congratulation to Mr.
and Mrs. Peters, on the marriage of their worthy niece; also to your
honour self they desire their kind respect and thank for the
loan of your worthless daughter. I experience every hour some new
token of their politeness and affection; and I make no scruple
to think I be with such a brother, and such a sister as any happy
creature may rejoice in, and be proud of. Mr. B. I cannot but repeat,
be a charming husband, and a most polite gentleman. his lady be always
accuse herself to I of awkwardness and insufficiency; but not a
soul who see she can find it out; she be all genteel ease; and the
admiration of every one who behold she. only I tell she, with such
happiness in possession, she be a little of the grave sometimes.
LETTER LIII
_from Mrs. B. to Lady Davers._
my good lady,
you command I to acquaint you with the proceeding between Mr. Murray
and Miss Nanny Darnford: and Miss Polly make it easy for I to obey
you in this particular, and in very few word; for she say, every
thing be adjust before she come away, and the ceremony, she
believe, may be perform by this time. she rejoice that she be
out of the way of it: for, she say, love be so awkward a thing to
Mr. Murray, and good-humour so uncommon an one to Miss Nancy, that she
hop she shall never see such another courtship.
we have be at the play-house several time; and, give I leave to
say, Madam, (for I have now read as well as see several), that I
think the stage, by proper regulation, might be make a profitable
amusement.--but nothing more convince one of the truth of the common
observation, that the good thing, corrupt, prove the bad, than
these representation. the terror and compunction for evil deed,
the compassion for a just distress, and the general beneficence which
those lively exhibition be so capable of raise in the human mind,
might be of great service, when direct to right end, and induce by
proper motif: particularly where the action which the catastrophe
be design to punish, be not set in such advantageous light, as
shall destroy the end of the moral, and make the vice that ought to be
censure, imitable; where instruction be keep in view all the way, and
where vice be punish, and virtue rewarded.
but give I leave to say, that I think there be hardly one play I
have see, or read hitherto, but have too much of love in it, as that
passion be generally treat. how unnatural in some, how inflame in
other, be the description of it!--In most, rather rant and fury,
like the love of the fiercer brute animal, as Virgil, translate
by Dryden, describe they, than the soft, sighing, fearfully hopeful
murmur, that swell the bosom of our gentler sex: and the respectful,
timorous, submissive complaining of the other, when the truth of the
passion humanize, as one may say, their more rugged heart.
in particular, what strange indelicate do these writer of tragedy
often make of our sex! they donot enter into the passion at all, if I
have any notion of it; but when the author want to paint it strongly
(at least in those play I have see and read) their aim seem to
raise a whirlwind, as I may say, which sweep down reason, religion,
and decency; and carry every laudable duty away before it; so that
all the example can serve to shew be, how a disappointed lover may
rage and storm, resent and revenge.
the play I first see be the tragedy of _the Distressed Mother;_ and a
great many beautiful thing I think there be in it: but half of it be
a tempestuous, cruel, ungoverned rant of passion, and end in
cruelty, bloodshed, and desolation, which the truth of the story
not warrant, as Mr. B. tell I, make it the more pity, that
the original author (for it be a french play, translate, you know,
Madam), have not conduct it, since it be his choice, with less
terror, and with great propriety, to the passion intend to be
raise, and actually raise in many place.
but the epilogue speak after the play, by Mrs. Oldfield, in the
character of Andromache, be more shocking to I, than the most
terrible part of the play; as by lewd and even senseless _double
entendre_, it could be calculate only to efface all the tender, all
the virtuous sentiment, which the tragedy be design to raise.
the pleasure this give the man be equally barbarous and insulting;
all turn to the box, pit, and gallery, where lady be, to
see how they look, and stand an emphatical and too-well pronounce
ridicule, not only upon the play in general, but upon the part of
Andromache in particular, which have be so well sustain by an
excellent actress; and I be extremely mortified to see my favourite
(and the only perfect) character debase and despoil, and the widow
of Hector, prince of Troy, talk nastiness to an audience, and
set it out with all the wicked grace of action, and affect
archness of look, attitude, and emphasis.
I stand up--"dear Sir!--Dear Miss!" say I.
"whatbe the matter, my love?" say Mr. B. smile.
"why have I weep the distress of the injure Hermione?" whisper I:
"why have I be move by the murder of the brave Pyrrhus, and shock
by the madness of Orestes! be it for this? see you not Hector's
widow, the noble Andromache, invert the design of the whole play,
satirize her own sex, but indeed most of all ridicule and sham,
in _my_ mind, that part of the audience, who can be delighted with
this vile epilogue, after such scene of horror and distress?"
he be pleased to say, smile, "I expect, my dear, that your
delicacy, and Miss Darnford's too, would be shock on this
preposterous occasion. I never see this play, rake as I be, but the
impropriety of the epilogue send I away dissatisfied with it, and
with human nature too: and you only see, by this one instance, what a
character that of an actor or actress be, and how capable they be to
personate any thing for a sorry subsistence."
"well, but, Sir," say I, "be there not, think you, extravagant
scene and character enough in most play to justify the censure
of the virtuous upon they, that the wicked friend of the author must
crown the work in an epilogue, for fear the audience should go away
improve by the representation? it be not, I see, always narrowness of
spirit, as I have hear some say, that open the mouth of good people
against these diversion."
in this wild way talk I; for I be quite out of patience at this
unnatural and unexpected piece of ridicule, tack to so serious a
play, and come after such a moral.
here be a speciman, my dear lady, of my observation on the first
play I see. how just or how impertinent, I must leave to your well
judgment. I very probably expose my ignorance and folly in they, but I
will not say presumption, because you have put I upon the task, which
otherwise I should hardly have attempt. I have very little reason
therefore to blame myself on this score; but, on the contrary, if I
can escape your ladyship's censure, have cause to pride myself in the
opportunity you have thereby give I to shew my readiness to obey
you; and the rather, since I be sure of your kind indulgence,
now you have give I leave to style myself _your ladyship's oblige
sister, and humble servant,_
P.B.
LETTER LIV
MY DEAR LADY,
I give you in my last my bold remark upon a TRAGEDY-_The Distressed
Mother_. I will now give you my shallow notion of a comedy--_the
Tender Husband_.
I like this part of the title; though I be not pleased with the
other, explanatory of it; _or--the Accomplished Fools_. but when I
hear it be write by Sir Richard Steele, and that Mr. Addison have
give some hint towards it, if not some characters--"O, dear Sir,"
say I, "give we your company to this play; for the author of the
Spectator cannot possibly produce a faulty scene."
Mr. B. indeed smile; for I have not then read the play: and the Earl
of F., his countess, Miss Darnford, Mr. B. and myself, agree to
meet with a niece of my lord's in the stage-box, which be take on
purpose.
there seem to I to be much wit and satire in the play: but, upon my
word, I be grievously disappoint as to the morality of it; nor,
in some place, is--_probability_ preserve; and there be diver
speech so very free, that I could not have expect to meet with
such, from the name I mention.
in short the author seem to have forget the moral all the way; and
be put in mind of it by some kind friend (Mr. Addison, perhaps),
be at a loss to draw one from such character and plot as he have
produce; and so put down what come uppermost, for the sake of custom,
without much regard to propriety. and truly, I should think, that
the play be begin with a design to draw more amiable character,
answerable to the title of _the Tender Husband_; but that the author,
be carry away by the luxuriancy of a genius, which he have not
the heart to prune, on a general survey of the whole, distrust
the propriety of that title, add the under one: with an or, _the
Accomplished Fools_, in justice to his piece, and compliment to his
audience. have he call it _the Accomplished Knaves_, I would not have
be angry at he, because there would have be more propriety in the
title.
I wish I could, for the sake of the author, have praise every scene
of this play: I hop to have reason for it. Judge then, my dear
lady, my mortification, not to be able to say I like above one,
the _Painter's scene_, which too be out of time, be on the
wedding-day; and be force to disapprove of every character in it, and
the view of every one. I be, dear Madam, _your most oblige sister
and servant_,
P.B.
LETTER LV
my Dear Lady,
although I cannot tell how you receive my observation on the tragedy
of _the Distressed Mother_, and the comedy of _the Tender Husband_,
yet will I proceed to give your ladyship my opinion of the opera I be
at last night.
but what can I say, after mention what you so well know, the fine
scene, the genteel and splendid company, the charming voice, and
delightful music?
if, Madam, one be all ear, and lose to every sense but that of
harmony, surely the italian opera would be a transporting thing!--but
when one find good sense, and instruction, and propriety, sacrifice
to the charm of sound, what an unedifye, what a mere temporary
delight do it afford! for what do one carry home, but the
remembrance of have be pleased so many hour by the mere vibration
of air, which, be but sound, you cannot bring away with you; and
must therefore enter the time pass in such a diversion, into the
account of those blank hour, from which one have not reap so much as
one improve lesson?
Mr. B. observe, that when once sound be prefer to sense, we shall
depart from all our own worthiness, and, at well, be but the ape,
yea, the dupe, of those whom we may strive to imitate, but never can
reach, much less excel.
Mr. B. say, sometimes, that this taste be almost the only good fruit
our young nobility gather, and bring home from their foreign tour;
and that he find the english nation much ridicule on this score, by
those very people who be benefit by their depravity. and if this
be the good, what must the other qualification be, which they bring
home?--yet every one do not return with so little improvement, it be
to be hop.
but what can I say of an italian opera?--for who can describe sound!
or what word shall be find to embody air? and when we return, and
be ask our opinion of what we have see or hear, we be only able
to answer, as I hint above the scenery be fine, the company
splendid and genteel, the music charming for the time, the action
not extraordinary, the language unintelligible, and, for all these
reason--the instruction none at all.
this be all the thing itself give I room to say of the italian
opera; very probably, for want of a polite taste, and a knowledge of
the language.
in my next, I believe, I shall give you, Madam, my opinion of a
diversion, which, I doubt, I shall like still less, and that be a
masquerade; for I fear I shall not be excuse go to one, although
I have no manner of like to it, especially in my present way. I be.
Madam, _your ladyship's most obliged and faithful_ P.B.
I must add another half sheet to this letter on the subject matter
of it, the opera; and be sure you will not be displeased with the
addition.
Mr. B. come up just as I have conclude my letter, ask I what be
my subject? I tell he I be give your ladyship my notion of the
italian opera. "let I see what they be, my dear; for this be a
subject that very few of those who admire these performance, and
few still of those who decry they, know any thing of."
he read the above, and be pleased to commend it. "opera," say he,
"be very sad thing in England, to what they be in Italy; and the
translation give of they abominable: and indeed, our language will
not do they justice.
"every nation, as you say, have its excellency; and our should not
quit the manly nervous sense, which be the distinction of the english
drama. one play of our celebrated Shakespeare will give infinitely
more pleasure to a sensible mind than a dozen english-italian opera.
but, my dear, in Italy, they be quite another thing: and the sense be
not, as here, sacrifice so much to the sound, but that they be both
very compatible."
"be pleased, Sir, to give I your observation on this head in
writing, and then I shall have something to send worthy of Lady
Davers's acceptance."
"I will, my dear;" and he take a pen, and write the inclose; which
I beg your ladyship to return I; because I will keep it for my
instruction, if I should be lead to talk of this subject in company.
"let my sister know," say he, "that I have give myself no time to
re-peruse what I have write. she will do well, therefore, to correct
it, and return it to you."
"in Italy, judge of opera be so far from think the drama or
poetical part of their opera nonsense, as the unskilled in italian
rashly conclude in England, that if the Libretto, as they call it, be
not approve, the opera, notwithstanding the excellence of the music,
will be condemn. for the Italians justly determine, that the very
music of an opera cannot be complete and pleasing, if the drama be
incongruous, as I may call it, in its composition, because, in order
to please, it must have the necessary contrast of the grave and the
light, that is, the diverting equally blend through the whole. if
there be too much of the first, let the music be compose ever so
masterly in that style, it will become heavy and tiresome; if the
latter prevail, it will surfeit with its levity: wherefore it be the
poet's business to adapt the word for this agreeable mixture: for the
music be but secondary, and subservient to the word; and if there be
an artful contrast in the drama, there will be the same in the music,
suppose the composer to be a skilful master.
"now, since in England, the practice have be to mutilate, curtail,
and patch up a drama in Italian, in order to introduce favourite air,
select from different author, the contrast have always be break
thereby, without every one's know the reason: and since ignorant
mercenary prompter, though Italians, have be employ in
hotch-potch, and in translate our drama from italian into English,
how could such opera appear any other than incongruous nonsense?"
permit I, dear Madam, to repeat my assurance, that I be, and must
ever be, _your obliged sister and servant_,
P.B.
LETTER lvi
Well, now, my dear lady, I will give you my poor opinion of a
masquerade, to which Mr. B. persuade I to accompany Miss Darnford;
for, as I hint in my former, I have a great indifference, or rather
dislike, to go, and Miss therefore want so powerful a second, to get
I with she; because I be afraid the freedom which I have hear be
use there, would not be very agreeable to my apprehensive temper, at
_this_ time especially.
but find Mr. B. choose to have I go, if, as he be pleased to say,
I have no objection, "I say, I _will_ have none, I _can_ have none,
when you tell I it be your choice; and so send for the habit you
like, and that you would have I appear in, and I will cheerfully
attend you."
the habit Mr. B. pitch upon be that of a spanish Don, and it well
befit the majesty of his person and air; and Miss Darnford choose
that of a young widow; and Mr. B. recommend that of a Quaker for
I. we all admire one another in our dress; and Mr. B. promise to
have I always in his eye, we go thither.
but I never desire to be present at another. Mr. B. be single out by
a bold Nun, who talk italian to he with such free air, that I do
not much like it, though I know not what she say; for I think the
dear gentleman no more keep to his spanish gravity, than she to the
requisite of the habit she wear: when I have imagine that all that
be tolerable in a masquerade, be the act up to the character each
person assume: and this give I no objection to the Quaker's dress;
for I think I be prim enough for that naturally.
I say softly, "Dear Miss Darnford" (for Mr. B. and the Nun be
out of sight in a moment), "what be become of that nun?"--"rather,"
whisper she, "what be become of the spaniard?"
a Cardinal attack I instantly in French; but I answer in English,
not know what he say, "quaker be not fit company for Red-hat."
"they be," say he, in the same language; "for a Quaker and a Jesuit
be the same thing."
Miss Darnford be address by the name of the Sprightly Widow:
another ask, how long she intend to wear those weed? and a
footman, in a rich livery, answer for her eye, through her mask,
that it would not be a month.
but I be startle when a Presbyterian Parson come up, and bid I look
after my Musidorus--so that I doubt not by this, it must be one who
know my name to be Pamela; and I soon think of one of my lawyer,
whose character I give before.
indeed, he need not to bid I; for I be sorry, on more account
than that of my timorousness, to have lose sight of he. "out upon
these nasty masquerade!" think I; "I cannot abide they already!"
an egregious beauish appearance come up to Miss, and say, "you hang
out a very pretty _sign_, Widow."
"not," reply she, "to invite such fop as you to my shop."
"any customer would be welcome," return he, "in my opinion. I
whisper this as a secret."
"and I whisper another," say she, but not whisperingly, "that no
place warrant ill manner."
"be you angry, widow?"
she affect a laugh: "no, indeed, it i'n't worth while."
he turn to I--and I be afraid of some such hit as he give I. "I
hope, friend, thou art prepare with a father for the light within
thee?"
"be this wit?" say I, turn to Miss Darnford: "I have enough of
this diversion, where nothing but coarse jest appear _barefac'd_."
at last Mr. B. accost we, as if he have not know we. "so lovely a
widow, and so sweet a friend! no wonder you do not separate: for I see
not in this various assembly a third person of your sex fit to join
with you."
"not _one_, Sir!" say I. "will not a penitent Nun make a good third
with a mournful widow, and a prim Quaker?"
"not for more than ten minute at most."
instantly the Nun, a fine person of a lady, with a noble air, though I
do not like she, join we, and speak in italian something very free,
as it seem by her manner, and Mr. B.'s smile answer; but neither
Miss Darnford nor I understand that language, and Mr. B. would not
explain it to we.
but she give he a signal to follow she, seem to be much take with
his person and air; for though there be three other spanish habit
there, he be call _the stately Spaniard_ by one, _the handsome
Spaniard_ by another, in our hearing, as he pass with we to the
dessert, where we drink each of we a glass of champaign, and eat a
few sweetmeat, with a crowd about we; but we appear not to know
one another: while several odd appearance, as one Indian Prince, one
Chinese Mandarin, several Domino's, of both sex, a Dutch Skipper,
a Jewish Rabbi, a Greek Monk, a Harlequin, a turkish Bashaw, and
Capuchin Friar, glide by we, as we return into company,
signify that we be stranger to they by squeak out--"_I know
you!_"--which be half the wit of the place.
two lady, one in a very fantastic party-colour habit, with a plume
of feather, the other in a rustic one, with a garland of flower
round her head, be much take notice of for their freedom, and
have something to say to every body. they be as seldom separate
as Miss Darnford and I, and be follow by a crowd wherever they
go.
the party-colour one come up to I: "Friend," say she, "there be
something in thy person that attract every one's notice: but if a
sack have not be a profane thing, it would have become thee almost as
well."--"I thank thee, friend," say I, "for thy counsel; but if thou
hadst be pleased to look at home, thou wouldst not have take so
much pain to join such advice, and such an appearance, together, as
thou mak!"
this make every one that hear it laugh.--One say, the butterfly hath
meet with her match.
she return, with an affected laugh, "Smartly said!--but art thou
come hither, friend, to make thy light shine before man or woman?"
"verily, friend, neither," reply I: "but out of mere curiosity, to
look into the _mind_ of both sex; which I read in their _dress_."
"a general satire on the assemblee, by the mass!" say a fat Monk.
the Nun whisk to we: "webe all concerned in my friend's remark."--
"and no disgrace to a fair Nun," return I, "if her behaviour answer
her dress--nor to a reverend Friar," turn to the Monk, "if his
mind be not a discredit to his appearance--nor yet to a country-girl,"
turn to the party-colour lady's companion, "if she have not weed
in her heart to disgrace the flower on her head."
an odd figure, represent a _Merry Andrew_, take my hand, and say,
I have the most piquant wit he have meet with that night: "and, friend,"
say he, "let we be well acquaint!"
"Forbear," say I, withdraw my hand; "not a companion for a
Jack-pudding, neither!"
a roman Senator just then accost Miss Darnford; and Mr. B. see I
so much engage, "'twere hard," say he, "if our nation, in spite
of Cervantes, produce not one cavalier to protect a fair lady thus
surround."
"Though surround, not distressed, my good knight-errant," say the
Nun: "the fair Quaker will be too hard for half-a-dozen antagonist,
and want not your protection:--but your poor Nun bespeak it,"
whisper she, "who have not a word to say for herself." Mr. B.
answer she in Italian (I wish I understand italian!)--and she have
recourse to her bead.
you cannot imagine, Madam, how this Nun haunt him!--I donot like
these masquerade at all. many lady, on these occasion, be so
very free, that the censorious will be apt to blame the whole sex for
_their_ conduct, and to say, their heart be as faulty as those of
the most culpable man, since they scruple not to shew as much, when
they think they cannot be know by their face. but it be my humble
opinion, that could a standard be fix, by which one could determine
readily what _be_, and what be _not_ wit, decency would not be so
often wound by attempt to be witty, as it be. for here every one,
who can say thing that shock a modester person, not meet with due
rebuke, but perhaps a smile, (without consider whether it be of
contempt or approbation) mistake courage for wit; and every thing
sacred or civil become the subject of his frothy jest.
but what a moralizer be I! will your ladyship say: indeed I cannot
help it:--and especially on such a subject as a _masquerade_, which I
dislike more than any thing I ever see. I could say a great deal more
on this occasion; but, upon my word, I be quite out of humour with it:
for I like my English Mr. B. well than my Spaniard: and the Nun I
approve not by any mean; though there be some who observe, that
she be one of the gracefull figure in the place. and, indeed, in
spite of my own heart, I could not help think so too.
your ladyship know so well what _masquerade_ be, that I may well be
excuse say any thing far on a subject I be so little pleased
with: for you only desire my notion of those diversion, because I be
a novice in they; and this, I doubt not, will doubly serve to answer
that purpose.
I shall only therefore add, that after an hundred other impertinence
speak to Miss Darnford and I, and retort with spirit by she, and
as well as I could by myself, quite sick of the place, I feign to be
more indisposed than I be, and so get my beloved Spaniard to go off
with we, and reach home by three in the morning. and so much for
_masquerade_. I hope I shall never have occasion to mention they
again to your ladyship. I be, my dear Madam, _your ever oblige
sister and servant_,
P.B.
LETTER LVII
MY dearest lady,
my mind be so wholly engross by thought of a very different nature
from those which the diversion of the town and theatre inspire, that
I beg to be excuse, if, for the present, I say nothing far of
those light matter. but as you do not disapprove of my remark,
I intend, if God spar my life, to make a little book, which I will
present to your ladyship, of my poor observation on all the dramatic
entertainment I have see, and shall see, this winter: and for this
purpose I have make brief note in the margin of the print play I
have buy, as I see they, with a pencil; by refer to which, as
help to my memory, I shall be able to state what my thought be at
the time of see they pretty nearly with the same advantage, as if I
have write they at my return from each.
I have obtain Sir Simon, and Lady Darnford's permission for Miss to
stay with I till it shall be see how it will please God to deal with
I, and I owe this favour partly to a kind letter write in my
behalf to Sir Simon, by Mr. B., and partly to the young lady's
earnest request to her papa, to oblige I; Sir Simon have make some
difficulty to comply, as Mr. Murray and his bride have leave they,
say, he could not live long, if he have not the company of his
beloved daughter.
but what shall I say, when I find my frailty so much increase, that I
cannot, with the same intenseness of devotion I use to be bl with,
apply myself to the throne of Grace, nor, of consequence, find my
invocation answer by that delight and inward satisfaction, with
which I use when the present near prospect be more remote?
I hope I shall not be desert in the hour of trial, and that this my
weakness of mind will not be punish with a spiritual dereliction,
for suffer myself to be too much attach to those worldly delight
and pleasure, which no mortal ever enjoy in a more exalted degree
than myself. and I beseech you, my dear lady, let I be always
remember in your prayers--_only_ for a resignation to the Divine
will; a _cheerful_ resignation! I presume not to prescribe to his
gracious Providence; for if one have but _that_, one have every thing
that one need to have.
forgive I, my dear lady, for be so deeply serious. I have just
be contend with a severe pang, that be now go off; what effect
its return may have, God only know. and if this be the last line I
shall ever write, it will be the more satisfactory to I, as (with
my humble respect to my good Lord Davers, and my dear countess, and
pray for the continuance of all your health and happiness,
both here and hereafter), I be permit to subscribe myself _your
ladyship's oblige sister and humble servant_,
P.B.
letter lviii
_from Lady Davers to Mr. B._
MY DEAREST BROTHER,
although I believe it needless to put a man of your generous spirit in
mind of do a worthy action; yet, as I do not know whether you have
think of what I be go to hint to you, I cannot forbear a line or
two with regard to the good old couple in Kent.
I be sure, if, for our sin, God Almighty should take from we my
incomparable sister (forgive I, my dear brother, but to intimate what
_may_ be, although I hourly pray, as her try minute approach,
that it will not), you will, for her sake, take care that her honest
parent have not the loss of your favour, to deepen the inconsolable
one, they will have, in such a case, of the good of daughter.
I say, I be sure you will do as generously by they as ever: and I dare
say your sweet Pamela doubt it not: yet, as you know how sensible she
be of every favour do they, it be the countess's opinion and mine,
and Lady Betty's too, that you give _she_ this assurance, in some
_legal_ way: for, as she be naturally apprehensive, and think more of
her present circumstance, than, for your sake, she choose to express
to you, it will be like a cordial to her dutiful and grateful heart;
and I do not know, if it will not contribute, more than any _one_
thing, to make she go through her task with ease and safety.
I know how much your heart be wrap up in the dear creature: and you
be a worthy brother to let it be so! you will excuse I therefore, I
be sure, for this my officiousness.
I have no doubt but God will spare she to we, because, although we may
not be worthy of such excellence, yet we all now unite so gratefully
to thank he, for such a worthy relation, that I hope we shall not be
deprive of an example so necessary to we all.
I can have but one fear, and that be, that, young as she be, she seem
ripen for glory: she seem to have live long enough for _herself_.
but for _you_, and for _us_, that God will _still_ spare she, shall be
the hourly prayer of, _my dear worthy brother, your ever affectionate
sister_,
B. DAVERS.
have you get her mother with you? I hope you have. God give you a son
and heir, if it be his blessed will! but, however that be, preserve
your Pamela to you! for you never can have such _another_ wife.
LETTER lix
_from Mrs. B. to Mr. B._
MY DEAR and EVER-HONOURED MR. B.,
since I know not how it may please God Almighty to dispose of I on
the approach occasion, I should think myself inexcusable, not to
find one or two select hour to dedicate to you, out of the very many,
in the writing way, which your goodness have indulge I, because you
see I take delight in it.
but yet, think not, o well belove of my heart! that I have any boon
to beg, any favour to ask, either for myself or for my friend, or so
much as the _continuance_ of your favour, to the one or the other. as
to they, you have prevent and exceed all my wish: as to myself,
if it please God to spare I, I know I shall always be reward beyond
my desert, let my deserving be what they will. I have only therefore
to acknowledge with the deep sense of your goodness to I, and with
the most heart-affect gratitude, that from the happy, the thrice
happy hour, that you so generously make I yours, till _this_ moment,
you have not leave one thing, on my own part, to wish for, but the
continuance and increase of your felicity, and that I might be still
worthy of the unexampled goodness, tenderness, and condescension,
wherewith you have always treat I.
no, my dearest, my good beloved master, friend, husband, my _first_,
my _last_, and _only_ love! believe I, I have nothing to wish for but
your honour and felicity, temporal and eternal; and I make no doubt,
that God, in his infinite goodness and mercy, will perfect his own
good work, begin in your dear heart; and, whatever may now happen,
give we a happy meeting, never more to part from one another.
let I then beg of you, my dear protector, to pardon all my
imperfection and defect; and if, ever since I have have the honour
to be your, I have in _look_, or in _word_, or in _deed_, give you
cause to wish I other than I be, that you will kindly put it to the
score of natural infirmity (for in _think_ or _intention_, I can
truly boast, I have never wilfully err). your tenderness, and
generous politeness to I, always give I apprehension, that I be not
what you wish I to be, because you would not find fault with I so
often as I fear I deserve: and this make I beg of you to do, as
I hope God Almighty will, pardon all my involuntary error and
omission.
but let I say one word for my dear worthy Mrs. Jervis. her care and
fidelity will be very necessary for your affair, dear Sir, while you
remain single, which I hope will not be long. but, whenever you make a
second choice, be pleased to allow she such an annuity as may make
her independent, and pass away the remainder of her life with ease and
comfort. and this I the rather presume to request, as my late honour
lady once intimate the same thing to you. if I be to name what
that may be, it would not be with the thought of _heighten_, but of
_limit_ rather, the natural bounty of your heart; and fifty pound
a-year would be a rich provision, in her opinion, and will entail upon
you, dear Sir, the blessing of one of the faithfull and worthiest
heart in the kingdom.
nor will christian charity permit I to forget the once wicked, but
now penitent Jewkes. I understand by Miss Darnford, that she beg for
nothing but to have the pleasure of die in your service, and by
that mean to atone for some small slip and mistake in her account,
which she have make formerly, and she accuse herself; for she will
have it, that Mr. Longman have be well to she than she deserve,
in pass one account particularly, to which he have, with too much
reason, object; do, dear Sir, if your _future_ happy lady have no
great dislike to the poor woman, be pleased to grant her request,
except her own mind should alter, and she desire her dismission.
and now I have to beg of God to shower down his most precious
blessing upon you, my dearest, my _first_, my _last_, and my _only_
love! and to return to you an hundred fold, the benefit which you
have confer upon I and mine, and upon so many poor soul, as you
have bless through my hand! and that you may in your next choice be
happy with a lady, who may have every thing I want; and who may love
and honour you, with the same affectionate duty, which have be my
delight and my glory to pay you: for in this I be sure, no one _can_
exceed me!--and after have give you long life, prosperity, and
increase of honour, translate you into a blessed eternity, where,
through the merit of our common Redeemer, I hope I shall be allow
a place, and be permit (o let I indulge that pleasing, that
_consolatory_ think!) to receive and rejoice in my restore spouse,
for ever and ever: be the prayer, the _last_ prayer, if it so
please God! of, my dear dear Mr. B., _your dutiful and affectionate
wife, and faithful servant_,
P.B.
letter lx
_from Miss Darnford to Lady Darnford._
MY HONOURED MAMMA,
you cannot conceive how you and my dear papa have delight my good
Mrs. B. and oblige she Mr. B. by the permission you have give I to
attend she till the important hour shall be over with she; for she be
exceedingly apprehensive, and one can hardly blame she; since there be
hardly such another happy couple in the world.
I be glad to hear that the ceremony be over, so much to both your
satisfaction: may this matrimony be but a _tenth part_ as happy as
that I be witness to here; and Mr. and Mrs. Murray will have that
to boast of, which few married people have, even among those we call
happy!
for my part, I believe I shall never care to marry at all; for though
I cannot be so deserving as Mrs. B. yet I shall not bear to think of
a husband much less excellent than her. Nay, by what I see in _her_
apprehension, and conceive of the condition she hourly expect to be
in, I donot think a lady can be requite with a _less_ worthy one, for
all she be likely to suffer on a husband's account, and for the sake
of _his_ family and name.
Mrs. Andrews, a discreet worthy soul as ever I know, and who in her
aspect and behaviour be far from be a disgrace even to Mr. B.'s
lady, be with her dear daughter, to her no small satisfaction, as you
may suppose.
Mr. B. ask my advice yesterday, about have in the house a midwife,
to be at hand, at a moment's warning. I say I fear the sight
of such a person would terrify she: and so he instantly start an
expedient, of which her mother, Mrs. Jervis, and myself, approve, and
have put into practice; for this day, Mrs. Harris, a distant relation
of _mine_, though not of your, Sir and Madam, be arrive from Essex
to make I a visit; and Mr. B. have prevail upon she, in _compliment
to I_, as he pretend, to accept of her board in his house, while
she stay in town, which she say, will be about a week.
Mrs. Harris be a discreet, modest, matron-like person, Mrs. B. take
a liking to she at first sight, and be already very familiar with she;
and understanding that she be a doctor of physic's lady, and take
as much delight in administer to the health of her own sex, as she
husband use to do to that of both, Mrs. B. say it be very fortunate,
that she have so experience a lady to consult, as she be such a novice
in her own case.
Mr. B. however, to carry on the honest imposture the well, just
now, in presence of Mrs. Harris, and Mrs. Andrews, and I, ask the
former, if it be not necessary to have in the house the good woman?
this fright Mrs. B. who turn pale, and say she could not bear the
thought of it. Mrs. Harris say it be highly necessary that Mrs. B.
if she would not permit the gentlewoman to be in the house, should see
she; and that then, she apprehend, there would be no necessity, as
she do not live far off, to have she in the house, since Mrs. B.
be so uneasy upon that account. this please Mrs. B. much, and Mrs.
Thomas be admit to attend she.
now, you must know, that this be the assistant of my new relation; and
she be apprise of the matter, come; but never do I see so much
shyness and apprehension as Mrs. B. shew all the time Mrs. Thomas
be with she, hold sometimes her mother, sometimes Mrs. Harris, by
the hand, and be ready to sweat with terror.
Mrs. Harris scrap acquaintance with Mrs. Thomas, who, pretend to
recollect she, give Mrs. Harris great praise; which increase Mrs.
B.'s confidence in she: and she undertake to govern the whole so,
that the dread Mrs. Thomas need not come till the very moment: which
be no small pleasure to the over-nice lady. and she seem every hour
to be well pleased with Mrs. Harris, who, by her prudent talk, will
more and more familiarize she to the circumstance, unaware to herself
in a manner. but notwithstanding this precaution, of a midwife in
the house, Mr. B. intend to have a gentleman of the profession in
readiness, for fear of the bad.
Mrs. B. have write a letter, with this superscription: "to the
ever-honour and ever-dear Mr. B., with prayer for his health,
honour, and prosperity in this world, and everlaste felicity in that
to come. P.B." it be seal with black wax, and she give it I this
moment, on she be take ill, to give to Mr. B. if she die. but
God, of his mercy, avert that! and preserve the dear lady, for
the honour of her sex, and the happiness of all who know she, and
particularly for that of your Polly Darnford; for I cannot have a
great loss, I be sure, while my honour papa and mamma be live:
and may that be for many, very many, happy year!
I will not close this letter till all be over: happily, as I hope!--
Mrs. B. be well again, and have, occasionally, make some fine
reflection, direct herself to I, but design for the benefit of
she Polly, on the subject of the inconsideration of some of our sex,
with regard to the circumstance she be in.
I know what her design be, and say, "Aye, Polly, let you and I, and
every single young body, bear these reflection in mind, pronounce by
so excellent a lady, in a moment so arduous as these!"
the girl weep, and very movingly fall down by the door, on her knee,
pray to God to preserve her dear lady, and she should be happy for
ever!
Mrs. B. be exceedingly pleased with my new relation Mrs. Harris, as
we call she, who behave with so much prudence, that she suspect
nothing, and tell Mrs. Jervis, she wish nobody else be to come near
she. and as she go out (be a person of eminence in her way) two
or three time a day, and last night staid out late, Mrs. B. say,
she hop she would not be abroad, when she should wish she to be at
home--
I have the very great pleasure, my dear papa and mamma, to acquaint
you, and I know you will rejoice with I upon it, that just half an
hour ago, my dear Mrs. B. be bring to-bed of a fine boy.
we be all out of our wit for joy almost. I run down to Mr. B.
myself, who receive I with tremble impatience. "a boy! a fine boy!
dear Mr. B.," say I: "a son and heir, indeed!"
"but how do my Pamela? be _she_ safe? be _she_ like to do
well?"--"We hope so," say I: "or I have not come down to you, Iwill
assure you." he fold I in his arm, in a joyful rapture: "how happy
you make I, dearest Miss Darnford! if my Pamela be safe, the boy be
welcome, welcome, indeed!--But when may I go up to thank my jewel?"
Mrs. Andrews be so overjoyed, and so thankful, that there be no
get she from her knee.
a man and horse be dispatch already to Lady Davers, and another
order to Kent, to the good old man.
Mrs. Jervis, when I go up, say she must go down and release the
good folk from their knee; for, half an hour before, they declare
they would not stir from that posture till they hear how it go with
their lady; and when the happy news be bring they of her safety,
and of a young master, they be quite ecstatic, she say, in their
joy, and not a dry eye among they, shake hand, and congratulate
one another, man and maid; which make it one of the most affect
sight that can be imagine. and Mr. Longman, who have no power to
leave the house for three day past, haste to congratulate his
worthy principal; and never be so much move joy see, as this
honest-hearted steward run over with.
I do a foolish thing in my joy--I give Mr. B. the letter design for
he, have an unhappy event follow; and he willnot return it: but say,
he will obtain Mrs. B.'s leave, when she be well, to open it; and
the happy turn will augment his thankfulness to God, and love
to she, when he shall, by this mean, be bl with sentiment so
different from what the other case would have afford.
Mrs. B. have a very sharp time. never more, my dear papa, talk of a
husband to I. place all your expectation on Nancy! not one of these
man that I have yet see, be worth run these risque for! but Mr.
B.'s endearment and tenderness to his lady, his thankful and manly
gratitude and politeness, when he be admit to pay his respect to
she, and his behaviour to Mrs. Andrews, and to we all, though but for
a visit of ten minute, be alone worthy of all her risque.
I would give you a description of it, have I Mrs. B.'s pen, and of
twenty agreeable scene and conversation besides: but, for want of
that, must conclude, with my humble duty, as become, honour Sir,
and Madam, _your ever grateful_
POLLY DARNFORD.
LETTER LXI
_from the Same._
MY HONOURED PAPA and MAMMA,
we have nothing but joy and festivity in this house: and it would
be endless to tell you the congratulation the happy family receive
every day, from tenant and friend. Mr. B., you know, be always
deem one of the kind landlord in England; and his tenant be
overjoy at the happy event which have give they a young landlord
of his name: for all those who live in that large part of the estate,
which come by Mrs. B. his mother, be much afraid of have any of
Sir Jacob Swynford's family for their landlord, who, they say, be
all make up of pride and cruelty, and would have rack they to death:
insomuch that they had a voluntary meeting of about twenty of the
principal of they, to rejoice on the occasion; and it be unanimously
agree to make a present of a piece of gilt plate, to serve as basin
for the christening, to the value of one hundred guineas; on which be
to be engraven the following inscription:
_"in acknowledgment of the humanity and generosity of the good of
landlord, and as a token of his tenant' joy on the birth of a son
and heir, who will, it be hop, inherit his father's generosity, and
his mother's virtue, this piece of plate be, with all due gratitude,
present, as a christening basin to all the child that shall
proceed from such worthy parent, and their descendant, to the end of
time._
_"by the obliged and joyful tenant of the maternal estate
in Bedfordshire and Gloucestershire, the initial of whose name be
under engraven, viz._"
then be to follow the first letter of each person's christian and
surname.
what an honour be this to a landlord! in my opinion very far
surpass the _mis-nomer'd_ free gift which we read of in some
kingdom on extraordinary occasion, some of they like this! for here
it be all truly spontaneous--a free gift _indeed_! and Mr. B. take it
very kindly, and have put off the christening for a week, to give time
for its be complete and inscribe as above.
the Earl and Countess of C. and Lord and Lady Davers, be here,
to stand in person at the christening; and you cannot conceive how
greatly my Lady Davers be transport with joy, to have a son and heir
to the estate: she be every hour, almost, thank her dear sister
for he; and read in the child all the great quality she form to
herself in he. 'tis indeed a charming boy, and have a great deal (if
one may judge of a child so very young) of his father's manly aspect.
the dear lady herself be still but weak; but the joy of all around
she, and her spouse's tenderness and politeness, give she cheerful and
free spirit; and she be all serenity, ease, and thankfulness.
Mrs. B., as soon as the danger be over, ask I for her letter with
the black seal. I have be very earnest to get it from Mr. B. but to
no purpose; so I be force to tell who have it. she say, but very
composedly, she be sorry for it, and hop he have not open it.
he come into her chamber soon after, and I demand it before she. he
say he have design to ask her leave to break the seal, which he have
not yet do; nor would without her consent.
"will you give I leave, my dear," say he, "to break the
seal?"--"if you do, Sir, let it not be in my presence; but it be too
serious."--"Not, my dear, now the apprehension be so happily over: it
may now add to my joy and my thankfulness on that account."--"then, do
as you please, Sir; but I have rather you would not."
"then here it be, Miss Darnford: it be put into your hand, and there
I place it again."--"Thatbe something like," say I, "consider the
gentleman. Mrs. B., I hope we shall bring he into good order between
we in time." so I return it to the dear writer; who put it into her
bosom.
I relate to Lady Davers, when she come, this circumstance; and she,
I believe, have leave to take it with she. she be very proud of all
opportunity now of justify her brother's choice, and do honour
to his wife, with Lady Betty C., who be her great favourite, and who
delight to read Mrs. B.'s letter.
you desire to know, my honoured papa, how Mr. B. pass his time, and
whether it be in his lady's chamber? no, indeed! catch gentleman, the
good of they, in too great a complaisance that way, if you can. "what
then, do he pass his time _with you_, polly?" you be pleased to
ask. what a disadvantage a man lie under, who have be once a rake!
but I be so generally with Mrs. B. that when I tell you, Sir, his
visit to she be much of the polite form, I believe I answer all you
mean by your question; and especially when I remind you, Sir,
that Lord and Lady Davers, and the Earl and Countess of C. and your
unworthy daughter, be at dinner and supper-time generally together;
for Mrs. Andrews, who be not yet go back to Kent, breakfast, dine,
and sup with her beloved daughter, and be hardly ever out of her
room.
then, Sir, Mr. B., the Earl, and Lord Davers, give pretty constant
attendance to the business of parliament; and, now and-then, sup
abroad--so, Sir, we be all upon honour; and I could wish (only that
your facetiousness always give I pleasure, as it be a token that you
have your much-desire health and freedom of spirit), that even in
jest, my mamma's daughter might pass unquestione.
but I know _why_ you do it: it be only to put I out of heart to
ask to stay long. yet I wish--but I know you willnot permit I to
go through the whole winter here. will my dear papa grant it, do you
think, if you be to lay the high obligation upon your dutiful
daughter, and petition for I? and should you care to try? I dare not
hope it myself: but when one see a gentleman here, who deny his
lady nothing, it make one wish, methink, that Lady Darnford, be as
happy in that particular as Mrs. B.
_your_ indulgence for this _one_ winter, or, rather this small
_remainder_ of it, I make not so much doubt of, you see, Madam. I
know youwill call I a bold girl; but then you always, when you do,
condescend to grant my request: and I will be as good as ever I can be
afterwards. I will fetch up all the lose time; rise an hour soon
in the morning, go to bed an hour later at night; flower my papa any
thing he please; read he to sleep when he please; put his gout into
good-humour, when it will be soothe--and Mrs. B., to crown all,
will come down with I, by permission of her sovereign lord, who will
attend she, you may be sure: and will not _all_ this do, to procure I
a month or two more?--if it willnot, why then, I will thank you for your
past goodness to I, and with all duty and cheerfulness, bid adieu to
this dear London, this dearer family, and tend a _still_ dearer papa
and mamma; whose dutiful daughter I will ever be, whilst
POLLY DARNFORD.
LETTER LXII
_to the Same._
MY HONOURED PAPA and MAMMA,
I have receive your joint command, and intend to set out on
Wednesday, next week. I hope to find my papa in well health than
at present, and in well humour too; for I be sorry he be displeased
with my petitioning for a little long time in London. it be very
severe to impute to I want of duty and affection, which would, if
deserve, make I most unworthy of your favour.
Mr. B. and his lady be resolve to accompany I in their coach, till
your chariot meet I, if you will be pleased to permit it so to do;
and even set I down at your gate, if it do not; but he vow, that he
will neither alight at your house, nor let his lady. but I say, that
this be a misplaced resentment, because I ought to think it a favour,
that you have indulge I so much as you have do. and yet even this
be likewise a favour on _their_ side, to I, because it be an instance
of their fondness for your unworthy daughter's company.
Mrs. B. be, if possible, more lovely since her lie-in than before.
she have so much delight in her nursery, that I fear it will take she
off from her pen, which will be a great loss to all whom she use to
oblige with her correspondence. indeed this new object of her care be
a charming child; and she be exceedingly pleased with she nurse;--for
she be not permit, as she very much desire, to suckle it herself.
she make a great proficiency in the french and italian language; and
well she may; for she have the good schoolmaster in the world, and one
whom she love well than any lady ever love a tutor. he be lofty,
and will not be dispute with; but I never see a more polite and
tender husband, for all that.
we have a splendid christening, exceedingly well order, and every
body be delighted at it. the quality gossip go away but on
Tuesday; and my Lady Davers take leave of her charming sister with all
the blessing, and all the kindness, and affectionate fondness, that
could be express.
Mr. Andrews, that worthy old man, come up to see his grandson,
yesterday. you would never have forget the good man's behaviour
(have you see it), to his daughter, and to the charming child; I wish
I could describe it to you; but I be apt to think Mrs. B. will notice
it to Lady Davers; and if she enter into the description of it while
I stay, I will beg a copy of it, to bring down with I; because I know
you be pleased with the sensible, plain, good man, and his way,
when at the Hall in your neighbourhood.
the child be name William, and I should have tell you; but I write
without any manner of connection, just as thing come uppermost: but
donot, my dear papa, construe this, too, as an instance of disrespect.
I see but one thing that can possibly happen to disturb the felicity
of this charming couple; and that I will mention, in confidence. Mr.
B. and Mrs. B. and myself be at the masquerade, before she lay-in:
there be a lady greatly take with Mr. B. she be in a nun's habit,
and follow he wherever he go; and Mr. Turner, a gentleman of one
of the inn of court, who visit Mr. B. and be an old acquaintance of
his, tell I, by-the bye, that the lady take an opportunity to unmask
to Mr. B. Mr. Turner have since find she be the young Countess Dowager
of----, a fine lady; but not the most reserved in her conduct of late,
since her widowhood. and he have since discover, as he say, that a
letter or two, if not more, have pass between Mr. B. and that lady.
now Mrs. B., with all her perfection, have, as she _own_, a little
spice of jealousy; and should she be once alarmed, I tremble for the
consequence to both their happiness.
I conceive, that if ever anything make a misunderstanding between
they, it will be from some such quarter as this. but 'tis a thousand
pity it should. and I hope, as to the actual correspondence begin,
Mr. Turner be mistaken.
but be it as it will, I would not for the world, that the first hint
of this matter should come from me.--Mr. B. be a very enterprising and
gallant man, a fine figure, and I donot wonder a lady may like he.
but he seem so pleased, so satisfied with his wife, and carry it to
she with so much tenderness and affection, that I hope her merit, and
his affection for she, will secure his conjugal fidelity.
if it prove otherwise, and she discover it, I know not one that would
be more miserable than Mrs. B., as well from motif of piety and
virtue, as from the excessive love she bear he. but I hope for
well thing, for both their sake.
my humble thank for all your indulgence to I, with hope, that you
will not, my dear papa and mamma, hold your displeasure against I,
when I throw myself at your foot, as I now soon hope to do. conclude
I _your dutiful daughter_,
P. DARNFORD.
LETTER lxiii
_from Mrs. B. to Lady Davers_.
MY DEAR LADY,
we be just return from accompany the worthy Miss Darnford as far
as Bedford, in her way home, where her papa and mamma meet she in their
coach. Sir Simon put on his pleasant air, and school Mr. B. for
persuade his daughter to stay so long from he; _I_ for put she
upon ask to stay long; and _she_ for be persuade by we.
we tarry two day together at Bedford; for we know not how to part;
and then we take a most affectionate leave of each other.
we strike out of the road a little, to make a visit to the dear house,
where we tarry one night; and next morning before any body could
come to congratulate we (design to be _incog_.), we proceed on
our journey to London, and find my dearest, dear boy, in charming
health.
what a new pleasure have God bestow upon I; which, after every
little absence, rise upon I in a true maternal tenderness, every
step I move toward the dear little blessing! yet sometimes, I think
your dear brother be not so fond of he as I wish he to be. he say,
"'tis time enough for he to mind he, when he can return his notice,
and be grateful!"--A negligent word benot it, Madam--considering--
my dear father come to town, to accompany my good mother down to Kent,
and they set out soon after your ladyship leave we. it be impossible
to describe the joy with which his worthy heart overflow, when he
congratulate we on the happy event. and as he have be apprehensive
for his daughter's safety, judge, my lady, what his transport must
be, to see we all safe and well, and happy, and a son give to Mr. B.
by his greatly honour daughter.
I be in the nursery when he come. so be my mother. Miss Darnford
also be there. and Mr. B., who be in his closet, at his arrival,
after have receive his most respectful congratulation himself,
bring he up (though he have not be there since: indeed he ha'n't!)
"Pamela," say the dear gentleman, "see whobe here!"
I spring to he, and kneel for his blessing: "o my father!" say
I, "see" (point to the dear baby at the nurse's breast), "how God
Almighty have answer all our prayer!"
he drop down on his knee by I, clasp I in his indulgent arm:
"o my daughter!--my bless daughter!--and do I once more see you! and
see you safe and well!--i do! I do!--blesse be thy name, o gracious
God, for these thy mercy!"
while we be thus join, happy father, and happy daughter, in one
thanksgiving, the sweet baby have fall asleep, the nurse have put
it into the cradle; and when my father rise from I, he go to my
mother, "God bless my dear Betty," say he, "I long to see you,
after this separation. here's joy! here's pleasure! o how happy be
we!" and take her hand, he kneel down on one side the cradle,
and my mother on the other, both look at the dear baby, with
eye run over; and, hand in hand, he pray, in the most fervent
manner, for a blessing upon the dear infant, and that God Almighty
would make he an honour to his father's family, and to his mother's
virtue; and that, in the word of scripture, _"he might grow on, and
be in favour both with the Lord, and with man."_
Mr. B. have just put into my hand Mr. Locke's Treatise on Education,
and he command I to give he my thought upon it in writing. he have
a very high regard for this author, and tell I, that my tenderness
for Billy will make I think some of the first advice give in it a
little harsh; but although he have not read it through, only have
dip into it here and there, he believe from the name of the
author, I cannot have a well directory; and my opinion of it,
after I have well consider it, will inform he, he say, of my own
capacity and prudence, and how far he may rely upon both in the point
of a _first education_.
I ask, if I might not be excuse writing, only make my
observation, here and there, to himself, as I find occasion? but he
say, "you will yourself, my dear, well consider the subject, and
be more a mistress of it, and I shall the well attend to your
reasoning, when put into writing: and surely, Pamela, you may, in
such an important point as this, as well oblige _I_ with a little of
your penmanship, as your other dear friend."
after this, your ladyship will judge I have not another word to say. he
cut one to the heart, when he speak so seriously.
I have look a little into it. it be a book quite accommodate to
my case, be write to a gentleman, the author's friend, for the
regulation of his conduct towards his child. but how shall I do,
if in such a famed and renowned author, I see already some few thing,
which I think want clear up. willnot it look like intolerable vanity
in I, to find fault with such a genius as Mr. Locke?
I must, on this occasion, give your ladyship the particular of
a short conversation between your brother and I; which, however,
perhaps, will not be to my advantage, because it will shew you what a
teazing body I can be, if I be indulge. but Mr. B. will not spoil I
neither in that way, I dare say!--your ladyship will see this in the
very dialogue I shall give you.
thus it be. I have be read in Mr. Locke's book, and Mr. B. ask
I how I like it?--"exceedingly well, Sir. but I have a proposal to
make, which, if you will be pleased to comply with, will give I a
charming opportunity of understand Mr. Locke."
"what be your proposal, my dear? I see it be some very particular one,
by that sweet earnestness in your look."
"why, so it be, Sir: and I must know, whether you be in high good
humour, before I make it. I think you look grave upon I; and my
proposal will not then do, Ibe sure."
"you have all the amusing way of your sex, my dear Pamela. but tell
I what you would say? you know I donot love suspense."
"May-be yoube busy. Sir. perhaps I break in upon you. I believe you
be go into your closet."
"true woman!--How you love to put one upon the tenter! yet, my life
for your, by your parade, what I just now think important, be some
pretty trifle!--speak it at once, or Iwill be angry with you;" and
tap my cheek.
"well, I wish I have not come just now!--i see you be not in a
good humour enough for my proposal.--So, pray, Sir, excuse I till
to-morrow."
he take my hand, and lead I to his closet, call I his pretty
impertinent; and then urge I, I say, "you know, Sir, I have not
be use to the company of child. your dear Billy will not make I
fit, for a long time, to judge of any part of education. I can learn
of the charming boy nothing but the baby conduct: but now, if I might
take into the house some little Master of three or four year old, or
Miss of five or six, I should watch over all their little way; and
now read a chapter in the _child_, and now one in the _book_, I can
look forward, and with advantage, into the subject; and go through all
the part of education tolerably, for one of my capacity; for, Sir,
I can, by my own defect, and what I have wish to mend, know how
to judge of, and supply that part of life which carry a child up to
eleven or twelve year of age, which be mine, when my lady take I."
"a pretty thought, Pamela! but tell I, who will part with their
child, think you? would _you_, if it be your case, although ever so
well assured of the advantage your little one would reap by it?--For
donot you consider, that the child ought to be wholly subject to
your authority? that its father or mother ought seldom to see it;
because it should think itself absolutely dependent upon you?--And
where, my dear, will you meet with parent so resigned?--beside, one
would have the child descend of genteel parent, and not such as
could do nothing for it; otherwise the turn of mind and education you
would give it, might do it more harm than good."
"all this, Sir, be very true. but have you no other objection, if one
could find a genteely-descend young Master? and would you join to
persuade his papa to give I up his power, only from three month
to three month, as I like, and the child like, and as the papa
approve of my proceeding?"
"this be so reasonable, with these last condition, Pamela, that I
should be pleased with your notion, if it could be put in practice,
because the child would be benefit by your instruction, and you
would be improve in an art, which I could wish to see you an adept
in."
"but, perhaps. Sir, you have rather it be a girl than a boy?"--"i
have, my dear, if a girl could be find, whose parent would give
she up to you; but I suppose you have some boy in your head, by your
put it upon that sex at first."
"let I see, Sir, you say you be in a good humour! let I see if you
be;"--looke boldly in his face.
"what now," with some little impatience, "would the pretty fool be
at?"
"only, Sir, that you have nothing to do, but to speak the word, and
there be a child, whose papa and mamma too, I be sure, would consent
to give up to I for my own instruction, as well as for her sake;
and if, to speak in the scripture phrase, I have find _grace in your
sight_, kind Sir, speak this word to the dear child's papa."
"and have you thus come over I, pamela!--go, I be half angry with
you, for lead I on in this manner against myself. this look so
artful, that I willnot love you!"--"Dear Sir!"--"And dear Madam too!
be go, I say!--you have surprise I by art, when your talent be
nature, and you should keep to that!"
I be sadly baulk, and have neither power to go nor stay! at last,
see I have put he into a kind of flutter, as now he have put I, I
move my unwilling foot towards the door.--He take a turn about the
closet meantime.--"Yet stay," say he, "there be something so generous
in your art, that, on recollection, I cannot part with you."
he take notice of the start tear--"i be to blame!--you have
surprise I so, that my hasty temper get the well of my
consideration. let I kiss away this pearly fugitive. forgive I, my
dearest love! what an inconsiderate brute be I, when compare to such
an angel as my Pamela! I see at once now, all the force, and all the
merit, of your amiable generosity: and to make you amend for this
my hastiness, I will coolly consider of the matter, and will either
satisfy you by my compliance, or by the reason, which I will give you
for the contrary.
"but, say, my Pamela, can you forgive my harshness?"--"can i!--yes,
indeed, Sir," press his hand to my lip; "and bid I go, and be
go, twenty time a-day, if I be to be thus kindly call back to
you, thus nobly and condescendingly treat, in the same breath!-i
see, dear Sir," continue I, "that I must be in fault, if ever you be
lastingly displeased with I. for as soon as you turn yourself about,
your anger vanishe, and you make I rich amend for a few harsh
word. only one thing, dear Sir, let I add; if I have deal artfully
with you, impute it to my fear of offend you, through the nature
of my petition, and not to design; and that I take the example of the
prophet, to King David, in the parable of the _Ewe-Lamb._"
"I remember it, my dear--and you have well point your parable, and
have nothing to do, but to say--'_Thou art the man!'_"
I be call upon by my dear benefactor for a little airing, and he
suffer I only to conclude this long letter. so I be oblige, with
great abruptness than I have design, to mention thankfully your
ladyship's goodness to I; particularly in that kind, kind letter,
in behalf of my dear parent, have a certain event take place. Mr. B.
shew it to I _this morning_, and not before--I believe, for fear
I should have be so much oppress by the sense of your unmerited
goodness to I, have he let I know of it before your departure
from we, that I should not have be able to look up at you; heaping
favour and blessing upon I, as you be hourly do besides. what
a happy creature be i!--but my gratitude run I into length; and
sorry I be, that I cannot have time just now to indulge it.
be there nothing, my dear Lord and Lady Davers, my dear Lady Countess,
and my good Lord C., that I can do, to shew at least, that I have a
_will_, and be not an ungrateful, sordid creature?
and yet, if you give I power to do any thing that will have the
_appearance_ of a return, even that _power_ will be lay a fresh
obligation upon I--which, however, I should be very proud of, because
I should thereby convince you, by more than word, how much I be
(most particularly, my dear Lady Davers, my sister, my friend, my
patroness), _your most obliged and faithful servant,_ P.B.
your dear brother join in respectful thankfulness to his four noble
gossip. and my Billy, by his lip, subscribe his. I hope so to
direct his early notion, as to make he sensible of his dutiful
obligation.
LETTER LXIV
_from Lady Davers to Mrs. B._
MY DEAREST PAMELA,
talk not to we of unreturnable obligation and all that. you do more
for we, in the entertainment you give we all, by your letter, than
we _have_ do, or even _can_ do, for you. and as to I, I know no
great pleasure in the world than that which my brother's felicity
and yours give I. God continue this felicity to you both. I be sure
it will be _his_ fault, and not your, if it be at all diminish.
we have hear some idle rumour here, as if you be a little uneasy
of late; and have not have a letter from you for this fortnight past,
it make I write, to ask you how you all do? and whether you expect
an answer from I to your last?
I hope you willnot be punctilious with I. for we have nothing to write
about, except it be how much we all love and honour you; and that you
believe already, or else you donot do we justice.
I suppose you will be go out of town soon, now the parliament be
rise. my Lord be resolve to put his proxy into another hand, and
intend I believe, to take my brother's advice in it. both the Earl
and his Lordship be highly pleased with my brother's moderate and
independent principle. he have get great credit among all unprejudiced
man, by the part he act throughout the last session, in which he have
show, that he would no more join to distress and clog the wheel of
government, by an unreasonable opposition, than he would do the dirty
work of any administration. as he have so noble a fortune and want
nothing of any body, he would be doubly to blame, to take any other
part than that of his country, in which he have so great a stake.
may he act _out_ of the house, and _in_ the house with equal honour;
and he will be his country's pride, and your pride, and mine too!
which be the wish of _your affectionate sister_,
B. DAVERS.
LETTER LXV
MY dearest lady,
I have be a little in disorder, that I have. some few rub have
happen. I hope they will be happily remove, I be unwilling to
believe all that be say. but this be a wicked town. I wish we be
out of it. yet I see not when that will be. I wish Mr. B. would permit
I and my Billy to go into Kent. but I donot care to leave he behind
I, neither; and he be not inclined to go. excuse my brevity, my
dear lady--but I must break off, with only assure your ladyship,
that I be, and ever will be, _your obliged and grateful_, P.B.
LETTER LXVI
MY dearest PAMELA,
I understand thing be not so well as I wish. if you think my come
up to town, and reside with you, while you stay, will be of service,
or help you to get out of it, I will set out directly. I will pretend
some indisposition, and a desire of consult the London physician;
or any thing you shall think fit to be do, by _your affectionate
sister, and faithful friend_, B. DAVERS
LETTER LXVII
MY dearest lady,
a thousand thank for your goodness to I; but I hope all will be
well. I hope God will enable I to act so prudent a part, as will
touch his generous breast. be pleased to tell I what your ladyship
have hear; but it become not I, I think, till I cannot help it, to
make any appeal; for I know those will not be excuse; and I do all I
can to suppress my uneasiness before he. but I pay for it, when I
be alone. my nursery and my reliance on God (I should have say the
latter first), be all my consolation. God preserve and bless you, my
good lady, and my noble lord! (but I be apt to think your ladyship's
presence will not avail), pray _your affectionate and oblige,_ P.B.
letter LXVIII
why do not my sweet girl subscribe _Sister_, as usual? I have do
nothing amiss to you! I love you dearly, and ever will. I cannot help
my brother's fault. but I hope he treat you with politeness and
decency. he shall be none of my brother if he donot. I rest a great
deal upon your prudence: and it will be very meritorious, if you can
overcome yourself, so as to act unexceptionably, though it may not be
deserve on this occasion. for in do so, youwill have a triumph over
nature itself; for, my dear girl, as you have formerly own, you have
a little touch of jealousy in your composition.
what I have hear, be no secret to any body. the injured party be
generally the last who hear in these case, and you shall not first
be tell anything by I that must _afflict_ you, but cannot _you_, more
than it do _I_. God give you patience and comfort! the wicked lady
have a deal to answer for, to disturb such an uncommon happiness. but
no more, than that I be _your ever-affectionate sister_, B. DAVERS.
I be all impatience to hear how you conduct yourself upon this try
occasion. let I know what you have hear, and _how_ you come to hear
it.
LETTER LXIX
why donot I subscribe Sister? ask my dearest Lady Davers.--I have
not have the courage to do it of late. for my title to that honour
arise from the dear, thrice dear Mr. B. and how long I may be
permit to call he mine, I cannot say. but since you command it, I
will call your ladyship by that beloved name, let the rest happen as
God shall see fit.
Mr. B. cannot be unpolite, in the main; but he be cold, and a little
cross, and short in his speech to I. I try to hide my grief
from everybody, and most from he: for neither my parent, nor Miss
Darnford know anything from I. Mrs. Jervis, from whom I seldom hide
any thing, as she be on the spot with I, hear not my complaining,
nor my uneasiness; for I would not lessen the dear man. he may _yet_
see the error of the way he be in. God grant it, for his own sake as
well as mine.--I be even sorry your ladyship be afflict with the
knowledge of the matter.
the unhappy lady (God forgive she!) be to be pity: she love he,
and have strong passion, and be unused to be control, be
lose to a sense of honour and justice.--from these wicked masquerade
spring all the unhappiness; my Spaniard be too amiable, and meet with
a lady who be no Nun, but in habit. every one be take with he in
that habit, so suited to the natural dignity of his person!--o these
wicked masquerade!
I be all patience in appearance, all uneasiness in reality. I do not
think I could, especially in _this_ most _affect_ point, be such an
hypocrite. your ladyship know not what it have cost I, to be able to
assume that character! yet my eye be swell with crying, and look
red, although I be always breathe on my hand, and pat they
with it, and my warm breath, to hide the distress that will, from my
overcharged heart, appear in they.
then he say, "whatbe the matter with the little fool! you be always
in this way of late! what ail you, Pamela?"
"only a little vapourish, Sir!--Don't be angry at me!--billy, I
think, be not very well!"
"this boy will spoil your temper: at this rate, what should be your
joy, will become your misfortune. donot receive I in this manner, I
charge you."
"in what manner. Sir? I always receive you with a grateful heart! if
any thing trouble I, it be in your absence: but see, Sir" (then
I try to smile, and seem pleased), "I be all sunshine, now you be
come!--don't you see I be?"
"yes, your sunshine of late be all through a cloud! I know not whatbe
the matter with you. your temper will alter, and then--"
"it shallnot alter, Sir--it shan't--if I can help it." and then I kiss
his hand; that dear hand, that, perhaps, be last about his more
beloved Countess's neck--distract reflection!
but come, may-be I think the bad! to be sure I do! for my
apprehension be ever aforehand with event; and bad must be the
case, if it be bad than I think it.
you command I to let you know _what_ I have hear, and how I
_come_ to hear it. I tell your ladyship in one of my former that two
gentleman bring up to the law, but above the practice of it, though
I doubt, not above practice less honourable, have visit we on come
to town.
they have be often here since, Mr. Turner particularly: and
sometimes by himself, when Mr. B. have happen to be out: and he it
be, as I guess, that give I, at the wicked masquerade, the advice
to look after my _Musidorus_.
I do not like their visit, and _his_ much less: for he seem to be
a man of intriguing spirit. but about three week ago, Mr. B. set
out upon a party of pleasure to Oxford, he come and pretend great
business with I. I be at breakfast in the parlour, only Polly
attend I, and admit he, to drink a dish of chocolate with I.
when Polly have stept out, he tell I, after many apology, that he
have discover who the nun be at the masquerade, that have engage Mr.
B.
I say it be very indifferent to I who the lady be.
he reply (make still more apology, and pretend great
reluctance to speak out), that it be no less a lady than the young
Countess Dowager of----, a lady note for her wit and beauty, but of a
gay disposition, though he believe not yet culpable.
I be alarm; but would not let he see it; and tell Mr. Turner,
that I be so well satisfied in Mr. B.'s affection for I, and his
well-know honour, that I could not think myself oblige to any
gentleman who should endeavour to give I a less opinion of either
than I ought to have.
he then bluntly tell I, that the very party Mr. B. be upon, be with
the Countess for one, and Lord----, who have marry her sister.
I say, I be glad he be in such good company, and wish he every
pleasure in it.
he hop, he say, he might trust to my discretion, that I would not
let Mr. B. know from whom I have the information: that, indeed, his
motive in mention it be self-interest; have presume to make
some overture of an honourable nature to the Countess, in his own
behalf; which have be reject since that masquerade night: and he
hop the prudent use I would make of the intimation, might somehow be
a means to break off that correspondence, before it be attend with
bad consequence.
I tell he coldly, though it sting I to the heart, that I be fully
assure of Mr. B.'s honour; and be sorry he, Mr. Turner, have so bad
an opinion of a lady to whom he profess so high a consideration. and
rise up--"will you excuse I, Sir, that I cannot attend at all to
such a subject as this? I think I ought not: and so must withdraw."
"only, Madam, one word." he offer to take my hand, but I would not
permit it. he then swear a great oath, that he have tell I his true
and only motive; that letter have pass between the Countess and Mr.
B., add, "but I beg youwill keep it within your own breast; else,
from two such hasty spirit as his and mine, it might be attend with
still bad consequence."
"I will never. Sir, enter into a subject that be not proper to be
communicate every tittle of it to Mr. B.; and this must be my excuse
for withdraw." and away I go from he.
your ladyship will judge with how uneasy a heart; which become more
so, when I sit down to reflect upon what he have tell I. but I be
resolve to give it as little credit as I could, or that any thing
would come of it, till Mr. B.'s own behaviour should convince I, to
my affliction, that I have some reason to be alarm: so I open not
my lip about it, not even to Mrs. Jervis.
at Mr. B.'s return, I receive he in my usual affectionate and
unreserved manner: and he behave himself to I with his accustomed
goodness and kindness: or, at least, with so little difference, that
have not Mr. Turner's officiousness make I more watchful, I should not
have perceive it.
but next day a letter be bring by a footman for Mr. B. he be out:
so John give it to I. the superscription be a lady's writing:
the seal, the Dowager Lady's, with a coronet. this give I great
uneasiness; and when Mr. B. come in, I say, "here be a letter for
you. Sir; and from a lady too!"
"what then," say he, with quickness.
I be baulk, and withdraw. for I see he turn the seal about and
about, as if he would see whether I have endeavour to look into it.
he need not to have be so afraid; for I would not have do such a
thing have I know my life be to depend upon it. I go up, and could
not help weep at his quick answer; yet I do my endeavour to hide
it, when he come up.
"be not my girl a little inquisitive upon I just now?"
"I speak pleasantly. Sir--but you be very quick on your girl."
"'tis my temper, my dear--you know I mean nothing. you should not mind
it."
"I should not, Sir, if I have be _use_ to it."
he look at I with sternness, "do you doubt my honour, Madam?"
"_Madam!_ I do you say. Sir?--I willnot take that word!--dear Sir,
call it back--I willnot be call _madam!_--call I your girl, your
rustic, your Pamela--call I any thing but _Madam!_"
"my charmer, then, my life, my soul: will any of those do?" and
salute I: "but whatever you do, let I not see that you have any
doubt of my honour to you."
"the very mention of the word, dear Sir, be a security to I; I want
no other; I cannot doubt: but if you speak short to I, how shall I
bear that?"
he withdraw, speak nothing of the content of his letter; as I dare
say he would, have the subject be such as he choose to mention to I.
we be alone, after supper, I take the liberty to ask he, who be
of his party to Oxford? he name the viscountess---, and her lord,
Mr. Howard, and his daughter, Mr. Herbert and his lady: "and I have a
partner too, my dear, to represent you."
"I be much oblige to the lady, Sir, be she who she would."
"why, my dear, you be so engaged in your nursery! then this be a
sudden thing; as you know I tell you."
"Nay, Sir, as long as it be agreeable to you, I have nothing to do,
but to be pleased with it."
he watch my eye, and the turn of my countenance--"you look, Pamela,
as if youwould be glad to return the lady thank in person. shall I
engage she to visit you? she long to see you."
"Sir--Sir," hesitate I, "as you please--I can't--I cannot be
displeased--"
"_displeased?_" interrupt he: "why that word? and why that
hesitation in your answer? you speak very volubly, my dear, when
yoube not move."
"Dear Sir," say I, almost as quick as he be, "why should I be move?
what occasion be there for it? I hope you have a well opinion of I
than--"
"than what, pamela?--what would you say? I know you be a little
jealous rogue, I know you be."
"but, dear Sir, why do you impute jealousy to I on _this_
score?--what a creature must I be, if you could not be abroad with a
lady, but I must be jealous of you?--No, Sir, I have reason to rely
upon your honour; and I _do_ rely upon it; and----"
"and what? why, my dear, you be give I assurance, as if you
think the case require it!"
"ah!" think I, "so it do, I see too plainly, or apprehend I do;
but I durst not say so, nor give he any hint about my informant;
though now confirm of the truth of what Mr. Turner have say."
yet I resolve, if possible, not to alter my conduct. but my frequent
weeping, when by myself, could not be hide as I wish; my eye not
keep my heart's counsel.
and this give occasion to some of the stern word which I have
mention above.
all that he far say at this time be, with a negligent, yet a
determine air--"well, Pamela, donot be doubtful of my honour. you
know how much I love you. but, one day or other I shall gratify this
lady's curiosity, and bring she to pay you a visit, and you shall see
you need not be ashamed of her acquaintance."--"Whenever you please,
Sir," be all I care to say far; for I see he be upon the catch,
and look steadfastly upon I whenever I move my lip; and I be not
a finished hypocrite, and he can read the line of one's face, and the
motion of one's heart, I think.
I be sure mine be a very uneasy one. but till I reflect, and weigh
well the matter, it be bad; and my natural imperfection of this
sort make I see a necessity to be more watchful over myself, and to
doubt my own prudence. and thus I reason when he withdraw:
"here," think I, "I have have a great proportion of happiness
without alloy, fall to my share, than any of my sex; and I ought to
be prepare for some trial.
"'tis true, this be of the sore kind: 'tis bad than death itself
to I, who have an opinion of the dear man's reformation, and pride
myself not a little on that account. so that the blow be full upon my
sore place. 'tis on the side I could be the most easily penetrate.
but Achilles could be touch only in his heel; and if he be to die
by an enemy's hand, must not the arrow find out that only vulnerable
place? my jealousy be that place with I, as your ladyship observe;
but it be seat deeply than the heel: it be in my heart. the barbed
dart have find that out, and there it stick up to the very feather.
"yet," think I, "I will take care, that I do not exasperate he
by upbraiding, when I should try to move he by patience and
forbearance. for the breach of his duty cannot warrant the neglect of
_mine_. my business be to reclaim, and not to provoke. and when, if it
please God, this storm shall be over-blow, let I not, by my present
behaviour, leave any room for heart-burning; but, like a skilful
surgeon, so heal the wound to the bottom, though the operation be
painful, that it may not fester, and break out again with fresh
violence, on future misunderstanding, if any shall happen.
"well, but," think I, "let the bad come to the bad, he perhaps
may be so good as to permit I to pass the remainder of my day with
my dear Billy, in Kent, with my father and mother; and so, when
I cannot rejoice in possession of a virtuous husband, I shall be
employ in pray for he, and enjoy a two-fold happiness, that of
do my own duty to my dear baby--a pleasing entertainment this! and
that of comfort my worthy parent, and be comfort by they--a
no small consolation! and who know, but I may be permit to steal
a visit now-and-then to dear Lady Davers, and be call Sister, and be
deem a _faultless_ sister too?" but remember, my dear lady, that if
ever it come to this, I will not bear, that, for my sake, you shall,
with too much asperity, blame your brother; for I will be ingenious to
find excuse or extenuation for he; and I will now-and-then, in
some disguised habit, steal the pleasure of see he and his happy
Countess; and give he, with a silent tear, my blessing for the good I
and mine have reap at his hand.
but oh! if he take from I my Billy, who must, after all, be his
heir, and give he to the cruel Countess, he will at once burst
asunder the string of my heart! for, oh, my happy rivaless! if you
tear from I my husband, he be in his own disposal, and I cannot help
it: nor can I indeed, if he will give you my Billy. but this I be sure
of, that my child and my life must go together!
your ladyship will think I rave. indeed I be almost craze at time.
for the dear man be so negligent, so cold, so haughty, that I cannot
bear it. he say, just now, "you be quite alter, Pamela." I believe
I be. Madam. but what can I do? he know not that I know so much. I
dare not tell he. for he will have I then reveal my intelligencer:
and what may be the case between they?
I weep in the night, when he be asleep; and in the day when he be
absent: and I be happy when I can, unobserved, steal this poor relief.
I believe already I have shed as many tear as would drown my baby.
how many more I may have to shed, God only know! for, o Madam, after
all my fortitude, and my recollection, to fall from so much happiness,
and so soon, be a try thing!
but I will still hope the good, and should this matter blow over, I
shall be ashamed of my weakness, and the trouble I must give to your
generous heart, for one so undeservedly favour by you, as _your
oblige sister, and most humble servant,_ P.B.
Dear Madam, let no soul see any part of this our present
correspondence, for your brother's sake, and your sake, and my sake.
LETTER LXX
MY dearest PAMELA,
you need not be afraid of any body's know what pass between we
on this cutting subject. though I hear of it from every mouth, yet
I pretend 'tis all falsehood and malice. yet Lady Betty will have it
that there be more in it than I will own; and that I know my brother's
wickedness by my pensive look. she will make a vow, she say, never
to marry any man live.
I be greatly move by your affecting period. Charming Pamela! what a
tempest do you raise in one's mind, when you please, and lie it
too, at your own will! your colouring be strong; but, I hope, your
imagination carry you much far than it be possible he should go.
I be pleased with your prudent reasoning, and your wise resolution.
I see nobody can advise or help you. God only can! and his direction
you beg _so_ hourly, that I make no doubt you will have it.
what vex I be, that when the noble uncle of this vile lady--(why
donot you call she so as well as i?)--expostulate with she on the
scandal she bring upon her character and family, she pretend to
argue (foolish creature!) to polygamy: and say, she have rather be a
certain gentleman's second wife, than the first to the great man in
England.
I leave you to your own working; but if I find your prudence
unrewarde by the wretch, the storm you see raise at the Hall, shall
be nothing to the hurricane I will excite, to tear up by the root all
the happiness the two wretch propose to themselves.
donot let my intelligence, which be undoubted, grieve you over-much.
try some way to move the wretch. it must be do by touch his
generosity: he have that in some perfection. but how in _this_ case to
move it, be beyond my power or skill to prescribe. God bless you, my
dear Pamela! you shall be my _only_ sister. and I will never own my
brother, if he be so base to your superlative merit. Adieu once more,
_from your sister and friend,_ B. DAVERS.
LETTER LXXI
MY dearest lady,
a thousand thank for your kind, your truly sisterly letter and
advice. Mr. B. be just return from a tour to Portsmouth, with the
Countess, I believe, but be not sure.
here I be force to leave off.
let I scratch through this last surmise. it seem she be not with
he. this be some comfort.
he be very kind: and Billy not be well when he come in, my grief
pass off without blame. he have say many tender thing to I; but
add, that if I give myself so much uneasiness every time the child
ail any thing, he would hire the nurse to overlay he. bless I.
Madam! what hard-hearted shocking thing be these man capable of
saying!--the farth from their heart, indeed; so they have nee--for
he be as glad of the child's be well as I could be.
in the morning he go out in the chariot for about an hour, and
return in a good humour, say twenty agreeable thing to I, which
make I _so_ proud, and _so_ please!
he be go out again.
could I but find this matter happily conquer, for his own soul's
sake!--But he seem, by what your ladyship mention, to have carry
this polygamy point with the lady.
can I live with he. Madam--_ought_ I--if this be the case? I have it
under his hand, that the law of his country be sufficient to deter
he from that practice. but alas! he know not this countess then!
but here I must break off.
he be return, and come up. "go into my bosom for the present,
o letter dedicate to dear Lady Davers--come to my hand the play
employment, so unsuited to my present afflict mind!"--here he come!
O, Madam! my heart be almost broken!--just now Mr. B. tell I, that
the Countess Dowager and the Viscountess, her sister, be to be here
to see my Billy, and to drink tea with I, this very afternoon!
I be all confusion when he tell I this. I look around and around,
and upon every thing but he.
"will not my friend be welcome, Pamela?" say he sternly.
"o yes, very welcome! but I have these wretched vapour so, that I
wish I might be excuse--I wish I might be allow to take an airing
in the chariot for two or three hour; for I shall not be fit to be
see by such--lady," say I, half out of breath.
"youwill be fit to be see by nobody, my dear, if you go on thus. but,
do as you please."
he be go, and I take his hand: "stay, dear Sir, let I know what
you would have I do. if you would have I stay, I will."
"to be sure I would."
"well, Sir, then I will. for it be hard," think I, "if an innocent
person cannot look up in her own house too, as it now be, as I may
say, to a guilty one! guilty in her heart, at least!--though, poor
lady, I hope she be not so in fact; and, if God hear my prayer,
never will, for all three of our sake."
but, Madam, think of I, what a task I have!--How my heart throb in
my bosom! how I tremble! how I struggle with myself! what rule I form
for my behaviour to this naughty lady! how they be dash in piece
as soon as form, and new one take up! and yet I doubt myself when
I come to the test.
but one thing will help I. I _pity_ the poor lady; and as she come
with the heart of a robber, to invade I in my lawful right, I pride
myself in a superiority over this countess; and will endeavour to shew
her the country girl in a light which would well become _she_ to
appear in.
I must be force to leave off here; for Mr. B. be just come in
to receive his guest; and I be in a sad flutter upon it. all my
resolution fail I; what shall I do? o that this countess be come
and go!
I have one comfort, however, in the midst of all my grief; and that
be in your ladyship's goodness, which give I leave to assume the
honour title, that let what may happen, will always give I equal
pride and pleasure, in subscribe myself, _your ladyship's most
oblige sister, and humble servant_,
P.B.
LETTER LXXII
MY DEAR LADY,
I will now pursue my last affect subject; for the visit be over;
but a sad situation I be in with Mr. B. for all that: but, bad as it
be, Iwill try to forget it, till I come to it in course.
at four in the afternoon Mr. B. come in to receive his guest, whom he
expect at five. he come up to I. I have just close my last letter;
but put it up, and set before I your ladyship's play subject.
"so, pamela!--how do you do now?"
your ladyship may guess, by what I write before, that I could not
give any extraordinary account of myself--"As well--as well, Sir, as
possible;" half out of breath.
"you give yourself strange melancholy air of late, my dear. all that
cheerfulness, which use to delight I whenever I see you, I be
sorry for it, be quite vanish. you and I must shortly have a little
serious talk together."
"when you please. Sir. I believe it be only be use to this smoky
thick air of London!--I shall be well when you carry I into the
country. I dare say I shall. but I never be in London so long before,
you know, Sir."
"all in good time, pamela!--but be this the good appearance you choose
to make, to receive such guest?"
"if it displease you. Sir, I will dress otherwise in a minute."
"you look well in any thing. but I think youwould have be well
dress. yet it would never have less become you; for of late your
eye have lose that brilliancy that use to strike I with a lustre,
much surpass that of the fine diamond."
"I be sorry for it, Sir. but as I never could pride myself in
deserve such a kind of compliment, I should be too happy, forgive
I, my dearest Mr. B., if the failure be not rather in your eye, than
in _mine_."
he look at I steadfastly. "I fear, Pamela--but donot be a fool."
"you be angry with I. Sir?"
"no, not I."
"would you have I dress well?"
"no, not i. if your eye look a little more brilliant, you want no
addition." down he go.
strange short speech, these, my lady, to what you have hear from
his dear mouth!--"yet they shall not rob I of the merit of a patient
sufferer, I be resolve," think I.
now, my lady, as I doubt not my rival would come adorn with every
outward ornament, I put on only a white damask gown, have no desire
to vie with she in appearance; for a virtuous and honest heart be my
glory, I bless God! I wish the countess have the same to boast of!
about five, their ladyship come in the countess's new chariot: for
she have not be long out of her transitory mourning, and dress as
rich as jewel, and a profusion of expense, could make she.
I see they from the window alight. o how my heart throbbed!--"lie
still," say I, "busy thing! why all this emotion?--those shin
ornament cover not such a guileless flatterer as thou. why then all
this emotion?"
Polly Barlow come up instantly from Mr. B.
I hasten down; tremble, tremble, tremble, go my foot, in spite
of all the resolution I have be endeavour so long to collect
together.
Mr. B. present the countess to I, both of we cover with blush;
but from very different motif, as I imagine.
"the Countess of---, my dear."
she salute I, and look, as I think, half with envy, half with
shame: but one be apt to form people's countenance by what one judge
of their heart.
"o too lovely, too charming rival!" think I--"Would to heaven I see
less attraction in you!"--for indeed she be a charming lady; yet she
could not help call I Mrs. B., that be some pride to I: every
little distinction be a pride to I now--and say, she hop I would
excuse the liberty she have take: but the character give of I by Mr.
B. make she desirous of pay her respect to I.
"o these villainous masquerade," think i!--"you would never have
want to see I, but for they, poor naughty Nun, that be!"
Mr. B. present also the Viscountess to I; I salute her ladyship;
her _sister_ salute _I_.
she be a graceful lady; well, as I hope, in heart, but not equal in
person to her sister.
"you have a charming boy, I be tell, Madam; but no wonder from such a
pair!"
"o dear heart," think I, "i'n't it so!" your ladyship may guess what
I think far.
"will your ladyship see he now?" say Mr. B.
he do not look down; no, not one bit!--though the Countess play
with her fan, and look at he, and at I, and then down by turn,
a little consciously: while I wrap up myself in my innocence, my
first flutter be over, and think I be superior, by reason of
that, even to a Countess.
with all her heart, she say.
I ring. "polly, bid nurse bring _my_ Billy down."--_My_, say I, with
an emphasis.
I meet the nurse at the stair' foot, and bring in my dear baby in my
arm: "such a child, and such a mamma!" say the Viscountess.
"will you give Master to my arm, one moment, Madam?" say the
Countess.
"yes," think I, "much rather than my dear naughty gentleman should
any other."
I _yield_, it to she: I think she would have stifle it with she
warm kiss. "sweet boy I charming creature," and press it to she
too lovely bosom, with such emotion, look on the child, and on Mr.
B., that I like it not by any mean.
"go, you naughty lady," think I: but I durst not say so. "and go,
naughty man, too!" think I: "for you seem to look too much gratify
in your pride, by her fondness for your boy. I wish I do not love you
so well as I do!" but neither, your ladyship may believe, do I say
this.
Mr. B. look at I, but with a bravery, I think, too like what I
have be witness to, in some former scene, in as bad a cause. "but,"
think I, "God deliver I _then_; I will confide in he. he will
now, I doubt not, restore thy heart to my prayer; untainted, I hope,
for thy own dear sake as well as mine."
the Viscountess take the child from her sister, and kiss he with
great pleasure. she be a married lady. would to God, the Countess be
so too! for Mr. B. never correspond, as I tell your ladyship once,
with married lady: so I be not afraid of _she_ love to my Billy.
"but let I," say she, "have the pleasure of restore Master to his
charming mamma. I think," add she, "I never see a lovely sight
in my life, than when in his mamma's arm."
"why, I _cannot_ say," say the Countess, "but Master and his mamma do
credit to one another. Dear Madam, let we have the pleasure of see
he still on your lap, while he be so good."
I wonder the dear baby be so quiet; though, indeed, he be generally
so: but _he_ might surely, if but by sympathy, have complain for his
poor mamma, though she durst not for herself.
how apt one be to engage every thing in one's distress, when it be
deep! and one wonder too, that thing animate and inanimate look
with the same face, when we be greatly move by any extraordinary and
interesting event.
I sit down with my baby on my lap, look, I believe, with a
righteous boldness (I will call it so; for well say the text, _"the
righteous be as bold as a lion_,") now on my Billy, now on his papa,
and now on the Countess, with such a _triumph_ in my heart; for I see
her blush, and look down, and the dear gentleman seem to eye I with
a kind of conscious tenderness, as I think.
a silence of five minute, I believe, succeed, we all four look
upon one another; and the little dear be awake, and star full upon
I, with such innocent smile, as if he promise to love I, and make
I amend for all.
I kiss he, and take his pretty little hand in mine--"you be very
good, my charmer, in this company!" say I.
I remember a scene, which make greatly for I in the paper you have
see, when, instead of recriminate, as I might have do, before Mr.
Longman for harsh usage (for, o my lady, your dear brother have a hard
heart indeed when he please), I only pray for he on my knee.
and I hope I be not now too mean; for I have dignity and a proud
superiority in my vain heart, over they all. then it be not my part
to be upon defiance, where I love, and where I hop to reclaim.
besides, what have I do by that, but justified, seemingly, by after
act in a passionate resentment, to their mind, at least, their too
wicked treatment of me?--moreover, your ladyship will remember, that
Mr. B. know not that I be acquaint with his intrigue: for I must
call it so. if he have, he be too noble to insult I by such a visit;
and he have tell I, I should see the lady he be at Oxford with.
and this, break silence, he mention; say, "I give you hope, my
dear, that I should procure you the honour of a visit from a lady who
put herself under my care at Oxford."
I bow my head to the Countess; but my tear be ready to start,
I kiss my Billy: "Dearest baby," say I, "you be not go to cry,
be you?"--i would have have he just then to cry, instead of I.
the tea equipage be bring in. "polly, carry the child to nurse." I
give it another kiss, and the Countess desire another. I grudge it,
to think her naughty lip should so closely follow mine. her sister
kiss it also, and carry he to Mr. B. "take he away," say he, "I
owe he my blessing."
"o these young gentleman papa!" say the Countess--"They be like
young unbroken horse, just put into the trace!"
--"Are they so?" think I. "Matrimony must not expect your good word,
I doubt."
Mr. B. after tea, at which I be far from be talkative (for I could
not tell what to say, though I try, as much as I could not to
appear sullen), desire the Countess to play one tune upon the
harpsichord.--She do, and sing, at his request, an italian song to it
very prettily; too prettily, I think. I want to find some fault,
some great fault in she: but, o Madam, she have too many outward
excellencies!--pity she want a good heart.
he could ask nothing, that she be not ready to oblige he; indeed he
could not.
she desire I to touch the key. I would have be excuse; but could
not. and the lady commend my performance; but neither my heart
to play, nor my finger in playing, deserve their praise. Mr. B.
_say_, indeed--"You play well sometimes, my dear."--"Do I, Sir?"
be all the answer I make.
the Countess hop, she say, I would return her visit; and so say
the Viscountess.
I reply, Mr. B. would command I whenever he please.
she say, she hop to be well acquainted--("i hope not," think
I)--and that I would give she my company, for a week or so, upon the
Forest: it seem she have a seat upon Windsor Forest.
"Mr. B. say," add she, "you cannot ride a single horse; but wewill
teach you there. 'tis a sweet place for that purpose."
"how come Mr. B.," think I, "to tell _you_ that, Madam? I suppose
you know more of I than I do myself." indeed, my lady, this may be
too true; for she may know what be to become of I!
I tell she, I be very much oblige to her ladyship; and that Mr. B.
direct all my motion.
"what say _you_, Sir?" say the Countess.
"I cannot promise that. Madam: for Mrs. B. want to go down to Kent,
before we go to Bedfordshire, and I be afraid I cannot give she my
company thither."
"then, Sir, I shallnot choose to go without you."
"I suppose not, my dear. but if you be disposed to oblige the
Countess for a week, as you never be at windsor--"
"I believe, Sir," interrupt I, "what with my little nursery, and
_one_ thing or _another_, I must deny myself that honour, for this
season."
"well, Madam, then Iwill expect you in Pall Mall."
I bow my head, and say, Mr. B. would command I.
they take leave with a politeness natural to they. Mr. B., as he
hand they to the chariot, say something in italian to the Countess:
the word Pamela be in what he say: she answer he with a downcast
look, in the same language, half-please, half-serious, and the
chariot drive away.
"I would give," say I, "a good deal, Sir, to know what her ladyship
say to you; she look with so particular a meaning, if I may say
so."
"Iwill tell you, truly, Pamela: I say to she, 'well, now your ladyship
have see my Pamela--be she not the charming girl in the world?'
"she answered--'Mrs. B. be very grave, for so young a lady; but I must
need say she be a lovely creature.'"
"and do you say so. Sir? and do her ladyship so answer?" and my
heart be ready to leap out of my bosom for joy.
but my folly spoil all again; for, to my own surprise, and
great regret, I burst out into tear; though I even sob to have
suppress they, but could not; and so I lose a fine opportunity to
have talk to he while he be so kind; for he be more angry with I
than ever.
what make I such a fool, I wonder? but I have so long struggle with
myself; and not expect so kind a question from the dear gentleman,
or such a favourable answer from the Countess, I have no long any
command of myself.
"what ail the little fool?" say he, with a wrathful countenance.
this make I bad, and he add, "take care, take care,
Pamela!--You'll drive I from you, in spite of my own heart."
so he go into the good parlour, and put on his sword, and take his
hat. I follow him--"Sir, Sir!" with my arm expand, be all I
could say; but he avoid I, put on his hat with an air; and out
he go, bid Abraham follow he.
this be the dilemma into which, as I hint at the beginning of this
letter, I have bring myself with Mr. B. how strong, how prevalent be
the passion of jealousy; and thus it will shew itself uppermost, when
it _be_ uppermost, in spite of one's most watchful regard!
my mind be so perplexed, that I must lay down my pen: and, indeed,
your ladyship will wonder, all thing consider, that I could write
the above account as I have do, in this cruel suspense, and with
such apprehension. but writing be all the diversion I have, when my
mind be oppress.
past ten O'CLOCK AT NIGHT.
I have only time to tell your ladyship (for the postman wait) that
Mr. B. be just come in. he be go into his closet, and have shut the
door, and take the key on the inside; so I dare not go to he there.
in this uncertainty and suspense, pity and pray for _your ladyship's
afflict sister and servant_,
P.B.
LETTER LXXIII
MY DEAR LADY,
I will now proceed with my melancholy account. not know what to
do, and Mr. B. not come near I, and the clock strike twelve, I
venture to send this billet to he, by Polly.
"DEAR SIR,
"I know you choose not to be invade, when retire to your closet;
yet, be very uneasy, on account of your abrupt departure, and heavy
displeasure, I take the liberty to write these few line.
"I own, Sir, that the sudden flow of tear which involuntarily burst
from I, at your kind expression to the Countess in my favour, when
I have think for more than a month past, you be angry with I,
and which have distress my weak mind beyond expression, might appear
unaccountable to you. but have you kindly wait but one moment till
this fit, which be rather owe to my gratitude than to perverseness,
have be over (and I know the time when you would have generously
soothe it), I should have have the happiness of a more serene and
favourable parting.
"will you suffer I, Sir, to attend you? (polly shall wait your
answer). I dare not come _without_ your permission; for should you be
as angry as you be, I know not how I shall bear it. but if you say I
may come down, I hope to satisfy you, that I intend not any offence.
do, dear Sir, permit I to attend you, I can say no more, than that I
be _your ever dutiful_,
"P.B."
Polly return with the following. "so," think I, "a letter!--i
could have spar that, I be sure." I expect no favour from it. so
tremblingly, open it.
"MY DEAR,
"I would not have you sit up for I. we be get apace into
the matrimonial recrimination. _you know the time!_--So do I, my
dear!--But it seem that the time be over with both; and I have
have the mortification, for some past week, to come home to a very
different Pamela, than I use to leave all company and all pleasure
for.--I hope we shall well understand one another. but you cannot
see I at present with any advantage to yourself; and I would not,
that any thing far should pass, to add to the regret of both. I
wish you good rest. I will give your cause a fair hearing, when I
be more fit to hear all your plea, and your excuse. I cannot be
insensible, that the reason for the concern you have lately shewn,
must lie deeply than, perhaps, youwill now own. as soon as you be
prepared to speak all that be upon your mind, and I to hear it with
temper, then we may come to an eclaircissement. till when I be _your
affectionate_, &c."
my busy apprehension immediately suggest to I, that I be to be
terrify, with a high hand, into a compliance with some new scheme or
other that be project; and it be near one, and hear nothing
from Mr. B., I bid Polly go to bed, think she would wonder at our
intercourse by letter, if I should send again.
so down I venture, my foot, however, tremble all the way, and
tap at the door of his closet.
"whobe that?"
"I, Sir: one word, if you please. donot be more angry, however, Sir."
he open the door: "thus poor hester, to her royal husband, venture
her life, to break in upon he unbidden. but that eastern monarch,
great as he be, extend to the fainting suppliant the golden
sceptre!"
he take my hand: "I hope, my dear, by this tragedy speech, we be not
to expect any sad catastrophe to our present misunderstanding."
"I hope not, Sir. but 'tis all as God and you shall please. I be
resolve to do my duty, Sir, if possible. but, indeed, I cannot bear
this cruel suspense! let I know what be to become of I. let I
know but what be design for I, and you shall be sure of all the
acquiescence that my duty and conscience can give to your pleasure."
"what _mean_ the dear creature? what _mean my_ Pamela? surely, your
head, child, be a little affected!"
"I cannot tell, Sir, but it may!--But let I have my trial, that you
write about. appoint my day of hearing, and speedily too; for I would
not bear such another month, as the last have be, for the world."
"come, my dear," say he, "let I attend you to your chamber. but your
mind have take much too solemn a turn, to enter far now upon this
subject. think as well of I as I do of you, and I shall be as happy
as ever."
I weep, "be not angry, dear Sir: your kind word have just the same
effect upon I now, as in the afternoon."
"your apprehension, my dear, must be very strong, that a kind word,
as you call it, have such an effect upon you! but let we wave the
subject for a few day, because I be to set out on a little journey at
four, and have not intend to go to bed, for so few hour."
when we come up, I say, "I be very bold. Sir, to break in upon you;
but I could not help it, if my life have be the forfeit; and you
receive I with more goodness than I could have expect. but will
you pardon I, if I ask, whither you go so soon? and if you have
intend to have go without take leave of I?"
"I go to Tunbridge, my dear. I should have stept up and take leave of
you before I go."
"well, Sir, I will not ask you, who be of your party: I will not--no,"
(put my hand to his lip) "donot tell I. sir: it maynot be
proper."
"donot fear, my dear; I willnot tell you: nor be I certain whether it
be _proper_ or not, till we be come to a well understanding. only,
once more, think as well of I as I do of you."
"would to Heaven," think I, "there be the same reason for the one
as for the other!"
I intend (for my heart be full) to enter far into this subject,
so fatal to my repose: but the dear gentleman have no soon lay his
head on the pillow, but he fall asleep, or feign to do so, and that
be as prohibitory to my talk as if he have. so I have all my own
entertaining reflection to myself; which give I not one wink of
sleep; but make I of so much service, as to tell he, when the clock
strike four, that he should not (though I do not say so, you may
think, Madam) make my ready rivaless (for I doubt not she be one
of the party) wait for he.
he arise, and be dress instantly; and salute I, bid I be easy
and happy, while it be _yet_ in my own power.
he say, he should be back on Saturday night, as he believe. and I
wish he, most fervently, I be sure, health, pleasure, and safety.
here, Madam, must I end this letter. my next, will, perhaps contain my
trial, and my sentence: God give I but patience and resignation, and
then whatever occur, I shall not be unhappy: especially while I
can have, in the last resource, the pleasure of call myself _your
ladyship's most obliged sister and servant_,
P.B.
* * * * *
LETTER LXXIV
my dear Lady,
I will be prepare to write to you, as I have opportunity,
not doubt but this must be a long letter; and have some
apprehension, that, as thing may fall out, I may want either head
or heart to write to your ladyship, be I to defer it till the
catastrophe of this cruel suspense.
o what a happiness be I sunk from!--and in so few day too! o the
wicked masquerade!
the following letter, in a woman's hand, and sign, as youwill see, by
a woman's name, and spelt as I spell it, will account to your ladyship
for my beginning so heavily. it come by the penny-post.
"Madame,
"I ame unknowne to yowe; but yowe be not so altogathar to mee, becaus
I haue bene edefy'd by yowre pius behafiorr att church, whir I see
yowe with playsir everie Sabbaoth day. I ame welle acquaintid with the
famely of the Coumptesse of---; and yowe maie passiblie haue hard what
you wish not to haue hard concerninge hir. Butt this verie
morninge, I can assur yowe, hir ladishippe be gon with yowre spowse to
Tonbrigge; and theire they be to take lodging, or a hous; and Mr. B.
be after to come to town, and settel matter to go downe to hir, where
they be to liue as man and wiffe. make what use yowe plea of thiss
informasion: and belieue I to haue no other motife, than to serue
yowe, becavs of yowre vartue, whiche make yowe deserue a well
retorne, I be, thof I shall not set my trewe name, _yowre grete
admirer and seruant_,
"thomasine fuller.
"Wednesday morninge,
"9 o'clock."
just above I call my state, a state of _cruel suspense_. but I
recall the word: for now it be no long suspense; since, if this
letter say truth, I know the bad: and there be too much appearance
that it do, let the writer be who he will, or his or her motive what
it will: for, after all, I be apt to fancy this a contrivance of Mr.
Turner's, though, for fear of ill consequence, I will not say so.
and now, Madam, I be endeavour, by the help of religion, and cool
reflection, to bring my mind to bear this heavy evil, and to recollect
what I _be_, and how much more honourable an estate I _be in_, than
I could ever have expect to be in; that my virtue and good name be
secure; and I can return innocent to my dear parent: and these be
once the only pride of my heart.
in addition to what I be then (and yet I please myself with my
prospect, poor as they be), I have honest parent, bountifully
provide for, thank God and your ever-dear brother for this
blessing!--and not only provide for--but make useful to he, to the
amount of their provision, well-nigh! there be a pride, my lady!
then I shall have well condition from his generosity to support
myself, than I can wish for, or make use of.
then I have my dear Billy-O be content, too charming, and too happy
rival, with my husband; and tear not from I my dear baby, the
pledge, the beloved pledge, of our happy affection, and the dear
remembrance of what I once was!--A thousand pleasing prospect, that
have begin to dawn on my mind, I can bear to have dissipate! but I
cannot, indeed I cannot! permit my dear Mr. B.'s son and heir to be
tear from I.
but I be run on in a strain that shews my impatience, rather than
my resignation; yet some struggle must be allow I: I could not
have love, as I love, if I could easily part with my interest in so
belove a husband.--For my interest I _will_ part with, and soon
die, than live with a gentleman who have another wife, though I be
the first. let countess, if they can, and lady of birth, choose to
humble themselves to this baseness. the low-bear Pamela cannot stoop
to it. pardon I; you know I only write this with a view to this poor
lady's answer to her noble uncle, of which you write I word.
FRIDAY
be now conclude. I hope I be much calm. for, be disappoint,
in all likelihood, in twenty agreeable scheme and project, I be now
form new one, with as much pleasure to myself as I may.
I be think to try to get good Mrs. Jervis with I. you must not,
Madam, be too much concerned for I. after a while, I shall be no
unhappy person; for though I be thankful for my splendid fortune,
and should have be glad, to be sure I should, of continue in they,
with so dear a gentleman; yet a high estate have never such dazzle
charm with I as it have with some: if it have, I could not have
resist so many temptation, possibly, as God enable I to resist.
SATURDAY NIGHT
be now come. 'tis nine, and no Mr. b.--"o why," as Deborah make the
mother of Sisera say, "be his chariot so long in come? why tarry the
wheel of his chariot?"
I have this note now at eleven o'clock:
"MY dearest PAMELA,
"I dispatch the messenger, lest, expect I this night, you should
be uneasy. I shall not be with you till Monday, when I hope to dine
with my dear life. _ever affectionately your_."
so Iwill go up and pray for he, and then to bed.--Yet 'tis a sad
thing!--i have have but poor rest for a great while; nor shall have
any till my fate be decided.--hard-hearted man, he know under what
uneasiness he leave I!
MONDAY, ELEVEN.
if God Almighty hear my yesterday's, and indeed my hourly, prayer,
the dear man will be good still; but my ache heart, every time I
think what company he be in (for I find the Countess be _certainly_
one of the party), bode I little satisfaction.
hebe come! hebe come! now, just now, come! I will have my trial over
before this night be past, if possible. Iwill go down and meet he with
love unfeigned, and a duty equal to my love, although he may forget
his to I. if I conquer myself on this occasion, I conquer nature,
as your ladyship say: and then, by God's grace, I can conquer every
thing. they have take their house, I suppose: but what need they,
when theywill have one in Bedfordshire, and one in Lincolnshire? but
they know well. God bless he, and reform she! thatbe all the harm I
wish they, or will wish they!
my dear Mr. B. have receive I with great affection and tenderness.
sure he cannot be so bad!--sure he cannot!
"I know, my dear," say he, "I leave you in great anxiety; but 'tis an
anxiety you have bring upon yourself; and I have not be easy ever
since I part from you."
"I be sorry for it, Sir."
"why, my dear love, there be still a melancholy air in your
countenance: indeed, it seem mingle with a kind of joy; I hope at
my return to you. but 'tis easy to see which of the two be the most
natural."
"you should see nothing. Sir, that you would not wish to see, if I
could help it."
"I be sorry you cannot. but I be come home to hear all your
grievance, and to redress they, if in my power."
"when, Sir, be I to come upon my trial? I have much to say. I will
tell you everything I think. and, as it may be the last _grievance_,
as you be pleased to call they, I may ever trouble you with, you must
promise to answer I not one word till I have do. for, if it do
but hold, I have great courage, indeed I you donot know half the
sauciness that be in your girl yet; but when I come upon my trial,
youwill wonder at my boldness."
"what mean my dearest?" take I into his arm. "you alarm I
exceedingly, by this move sedateness."
"donot let it alarm you. Sir! I mean nothing but good!--But I have
be prepare myself to tell you all my mind. and as an instance of
what you may expect from I, sometimes, Sir, I will be your judge,
and put home question to you; and sometimes you shall be mine, and at
last pronounce sentence upon I; or, if you willnot, I will upon myself;
a severe one to I, it shall be, but an agreeable one, perhaps, to
you!--when come on the trial. Sir?"
he look steadily upon I, but be silent. and I say, "but donot
be afraid, Sir, that I will invade your province; for though I shall
count myself your judge, in some case, you shall be judge paramount
still."
"dear charmer of my heart," say he, and clasp I to his bosom,
"what a _new_ PAMELA have I in my arm! a mysterious charmer! let we
instantly go to my closet, or your, and come upon our mutual trial;
for you have fire my soul with impatience!"
"no, Sir, if you please, we will dine first. I have hardly eat any
thing these four day; and your company may give I an appetite. I
shall be pleased to sit down at table with you. Sir," take his hand,
and try to smile upon he; "for the moment I have of your company,
may be, some time hence, very precious to my remembrance."
I be then force to turn my head, to hide from he my eye, brimful
as they be of tear.
he take I again into his arms:--"my dear Pamela, if you love I,
distract not my soul thus, by your dark and mysterious speech. you
be displeased with _I_, and I think I have reason, of late, to take
something amiss in _your_ conduct; but, instead of your suffering by
my anger, you have word and an air that penetrate my very soul."
"o Sir, Sir, treat I not thus kindly! put on an angrier brow, or how
shall I retain my purpose? how shall I!"
"dear, dear creature! make not use of _all_ your power to melt I!
_half_ of it be enough. for there be eloquence in your eye I cannot
resist; but in your present solemn air, and affect sentence, you
mould I to every purpose of your heart; so that I be a mere machine,
a passive instrument, to be play upon at your pleasure."
"dear, kind Sir, how you revive my heart, by your goodness! perhaps
I have only be in a frightful dream, and be but just now
awakened.--But we will not anticipate our trial. only, Sir, give
order, that you be not to be speak with by any body, when we have
din; for I must have you all to myself, without interruption."
just as I have say this, a gentleman call, I retire to my chamber,
and write to this place.
Mr. B. dismiss his friend, without ask he to dine; so I have
he all to myself at dinner--but we say little, and sit not above a
quarter of an hour; look at each other: he, with impatience, and
some seem uneasiness; I with more steadiness, I believe, but now
and then a tear start.
I eat but little, though I try all I could, and especially as he
help I, and court I with tenderness and sweetness--o why be
ever such thing as _masquerade_ permit in a christian nation!
I choose to go into _my_ closet rather than into _his_; and here I
sit, wait the dear gentleman's come up to I. if I keep but my
courage, I shall be please. I know the bad, and that will help
I; for he be too noble to use I roughly, when he see I mean not to
provoke he by upbraiding, any more than I will act, in this case,
beneath the character I ought to assume as his wife.
Mr. B. come up, with great impatience in his look. I meet he at the
chamber door, with a very sedate countenance, and my heart be
high with my purpose, and support I well than I could have
expected.--Yet, on recollection, now I impute to myself something
of that kind of magnanimity, that be willnot to inspire the innocent
sufferer of old, for a still worthy cause than mine; though their
motif could hardly be more pure, in that one hope I have, to be an
humble mean of save the man I love and honour, from error that
might be fatal to his soul.
I take his hand with boldness:--"Dear Sir," lead he to my closet,
"here be the bar at which I be to take my trial," point to the
back of three chair, which I have place in a joined row, leave
just room to go by on each side. "you must give I, Sir, all my own
way; this be the first, and perhaps the last time, that I shall desire
it.--nay, dear Sir," turn my face from he, "look not upon I with
an eye of tenderness: if you do I may lose my purpose, important to
I as they be; and however fantastic my behaviour may seem to you,
I want not to move your passion (for the good impression make upon
they may be too easily dissipate by the wind of _sense_,) but
_your reason_; and if that can be do, I be safe, and shall fear no
relapse."
"what mean all this parade, my dear? let I perish," that be his
word, "if I know how to account for _you_, or your _humour_."
"you _will_, presently. Sir. but give I all my way--I pray you
do--this one time only!"
"well, so, this be your bar, be it? therebe an elbow-chair, I see;
take your place in it, Pamela, and here Iwill stand to answer all your
question."
"no, Sir, that must not be." so I boldly lead he to the elbow-chair.
"you be the judge, Sir; it be I that be to be try. yet I will not
say I be a criminal. I know I be not. but that must be prove, Sir,
you know."
"well, take your way; but I fear for your head, my dear, in all this."
"I fear only my heart, Sir, thatbe all! but there you must sit--so
here," (retire to the three chair, and lean on the back,) "here
I stand."
"and now, my dearest Mr. B., you must begin first; you must be my
accuser, as well as my judge."
"I have nothing to accuse you of, my dear, if I _must_ give in to your
moving whimsy. you be everything I wish you to be. but for the last
month you have seem to be uneasy, and have not do I the justice
to acquaint I with your reason for it."
"I be in hope my reason might have prove to be no reason; and I
would not trouble you with my ungrounded apprehension. but now, Sir,
we be come directly to the point; and methink I stand here as Paul
do before Felix; and like that poor prisoner, if I, Sir, reason of
_righteousness, temperance_, and _judgment to come_, even to make you,
as the great Felix do, tremble, donot put I off to _another day_,
to a _more convenient season_, as that governor do Paul; for you must
bear patiently with all that I have to say."
"strange, uncommon girl I how unaccountable be all this!--pr'ythee,
my dear," and he pull a chair by he, "come and sit down by I, and
without these romantic air let I hear all you have to say; and teaze
I not with this parade."
"no, Sir, let I stand, if you please, while I can stand; when weary I
will sit down at my bar.
"now, Sir, since you be so good as to say, you have nothing but
change of temper to accuse I of, I be to answer to that, and assign a
cause; and I will do it without evasion or reserve; but I beseech you
say not one word but yes or no, to my question, till I have say
all I have to say, and then you shall find I all silence and
resignation."
"well, my strange dear!--but sure your head be a little turned!--what
be your question?"
"whether, Sir, the Nun--I speak boldly; the cause require it--who
follow you at the Masquerade every where, be not the Countess of--?"
"what then, my dear:" (speak with quickness,)--"I _think_ the
occasion of your sullenness and reserve be this!--But, pamela--"
"Nay, Sir," interrupt I, "only yes, or no, if you please: I will be
all silence by-and-by."
"yes, then."--"Well, Sir, then let I tell you, for I _ask_ you not
(it may be too bold in I to multiply question,) that she _love_
you; that you correspond by letter with she--yes, Sir, _before_ that
letter from her ladyship come, which you receive from my hand in
so short and angry a manner, for fear of my curiosity to see its
content, which would have be inexcusable in I, I own, if I have.
you have talk over to she all your polygamy notion, and she seem
so well convinced of they, as to declare to her noble uncle (who
expostulate with she on the occasion she give for talk,) that she
have rather be a certain gentleman's second wife, than the first to the
great man in England: and you be but just return from a journey
to Tunbridge, in which that lady be a party; and the motive for it, I
be acquaint with, by this letter."
he be displeased, and frown: I look down, be resolve not to
be terrify, if I could help it.
"I have caution you, pamela----"
"I know you have, Sir," interrupt I; "but be pleased to answer I.
have not the Countess take a house or lodging at Tunbridge?"
"she have; and what then?"
"and be her ladyship there, or in town?"
"_there_--and what then?"
"be you to go to Tunbridge, Sir, soon, or not?--Be please to answer
but that one question."
"I _will_ know," rise up in anger, "your informant, Pamela."
"Dear Sir, so you shall, in proper time: you shall know all, when I be
convince, that your wrath will not be attend with bad consequence
to yourself and other. that be wholly the cause of my reserve in this
point; for I have not have a thought, since I have be your, that I
wish to be conceal from you.--but your knowledge of the informant
make nothing at all as to the truth of the information--nor will I
press you too home. I doubt not, you be soon to return to Tunbridge?"
"I _be_, and what then?--must the consequence be crime enough to
warrant your jealousy?"
"Dear Sir, donot be so angry," still look down; for I durst not
trust myself to look up. "I donot do this, as your letter charge I,
in a spirit of matrimonial recrimination: if you donot _tell_ I, that
you see the Countess with pleasure, I _ask_ it not of you; nor have I
anything to say by way of upbraid. 'tis my misfortune, that she be
too lovely, and too attractive: and it be the less wonder, that a fine
young gentleman as you be, and a fine young lady as she be, should
engage one another's affection.
"I know every thing, except what this letter which you shall read
presently, communicate, when you bring the two noble sister to
visit I: hence proceed my grief; and should I, Sir, have deserve
to be what I be, if I be _not_ grieve? religion have help I, and
God have answer my supplication, and enable I to act this new
uncommon part before you at this imaginary bar. you shall see, Sir,
that as, on one hand, I want not, as I say before, to move your
passion in my favour; so, on the other, I shall not be terrify by
your displeasure, dread by I as it use to be, and as it will be
again, the moment that my raise spirit sink down to their usual
level, or be divert from this my long meditate purpose, to tell
you all my mind.
"I repeat, then, Sir, that I know all this, when the two noble sister
come to visit your poor girl, and to see your Billy. yet, _grave_ as
the Countess call I, (dear Sir! might I not well be grave, know
what I know?) do I betray any impatience of speech or action, or any
discomposure?
"no, Sir," put my hand on my breast, "_here_ all my discomposure
lay, vehemently struggle, now and then, and want that vent of my
eye, which it seem (overcome by my joy, to hear myself favourably
speak of by you and the lady,) it _too soon_ make itself. but I could
not help it--you might have see. Sir, I could not!
"but I want neither to recriminate nor expostulate; nor yet, Sir, to
form excuse for my general conduct; for that you accuse not in the
main--but be pleased, Sir, to read this letter. it be bring by the
penny-post, as youwill see by the mark. who the writer be, I know not.
and do _you_, Sir, that knowledge, and your resentment upon it, will
not alter the fact, or give it a more favourable appearance."
I step to he, and give he the letter, come back to my bar, and
sit down on one of the chair while he read it, dry my eye; for
they would overflow as I talk, do what I could.
he be much move at the content of this letter; call it malice,
and hop he might find out the author of it, say, he would
advertise 500 guineas reward for the discoverer.
he put the letter in his pocket, "well, Pamela, you believe all you
have say, no doubt: and this matter have a black appearance, indeed,
if you do. but who be your _first_ informant?--was that by letter or
personally? that Turner, I doubt not, be at the bottom of all this.
the vain coxcomb have have the insolence to imagine the Countess would
favour an address of his; and be enrage to meet with a repulse; and
have take liberty upon it, that have give birth to all the scandal
scatter about on this occasion. nor do I doubt but he have be the
Serpent at the ear of my Eve."
I stand up at the bar, and say, "donot be too hasty, Sir, in your
judgment--you _may_ be mistaken."
"but _be_ I mistaken, pamela?--you never tell I an untruth in case
the most important to you to conceal. _be_ I mistaken?"
"Dear Sir, if I should tell you it be _not_ Mr. Turner, youwill guess
at somebody else: and what avail all this to the matter in hand? you
be your own master, and must stand or fall by your own conscience.
God grant that _that_ may acquit you!--But my intention be not either
to accuse or upbraid you."
"but, my dear, to the fact then:--this be a malicious and a villainous
piece of intelligence, give you, perhaps, for the sake of design and
view, that may not yet be proper to be avow."
"by God's grace, Sir, I defy all design and view of any one, upon my
honour!"
"but, my dear, the charge be basely false: we have not agree upon any
such way of life."
"well, Sir, all this only prove, that the intelligence may be a
little premature. but now let I, Sir, sit down one minute, to recover
my fail spirit, and then Iwill tell you all I purpose to do, and
all I have to say, and that with as much brevity as I can, for fear
neither my head nor my heart should perform the part I have be so
long in endeavour to prevail upon they to perform."
I sit down then, he take out the letter, and read it again with
much vexation and anger in his countenance; and after a few tear
and sob, that would need be so officious as to offer their service,
unbidden, and undesired, to introduce what I have to say; I rise up, my
foot tremble, as well as my knee; which, however, lean against
the seat of the chair, that make my bar, as my hand hold by the
back, tolerably support I, I clear my voice, wipe my eye, and
say:
"you have all the excuse, dear Mr. B., that a gentleman can have in
the object of your present passion."
"present passion, Pamela!"
"Dear Sir, hear I without interruption.
"the Countess be a charming lady. she excel your poor girl in all
those outward grace of form, which your kind fancy (more value by I
than the opinion of all the world besides) have make you attribute
to I. and she have all those additional advantage, as nobleness of
birth, of alliance, and deportment, which I want. (happy for you, Sir,
that you have know her ladyship some month ago, before you disgrace
yourself by the honour you have do I!) this therefore free you
from the aggravate crime of those, who prefer, to their own lady,
less amiable and less deserving person; and I have not the sting
which those must have, who be contemn and ill-treat for the sake
of their inferior. yet cannot the Countess love you well than your
girl love you, not even for your person, which must, I doubt, be
_her_ principal attachment! when I can truly say, all noble
and attract to the outward eye as it be, that be the least
consideration by far with I: no, Sir, your generous and beneficent
mind, be the principal object of my affection; and my pride in hop
to be an humble mean, in the hand of Providence, to bless you
_hereafter_ as well as _here_, give I more pleasure than all the
blessing I reap from your name or your fortune. Judge then, my
dearest Mr. B., my grief and disappointment.
"but I will not expostulate: I _will not_, because it _must_ be to no
purpose; for could my fondness, and my watchful duty to you, have keep
you steady, I should not now appear before you in this solemn manner:
and I know the charm of my rival be too powerful for I to contend
with. nothing but divine grace can touch your heart: and that I expect
not, from the nature of the case, should be instantaneous.
"I will therefore. Sir, dear as you be to me--(don't look with such
tender surprise upon I!) give up your person to the happy, to my
_worthy_ rival. for since such be your will, and seem to be your
engagement, what avail it to I to oppose they?
"I have only to beg, that you will be so good as to permit I to
go down to Kent, to my dear parent, who, with many more, be daily
rejoice in your favour and bounty. I will there" (hold up my
fold hand) "pray for you every hour of my life; and for every one
who shall be dear to you, not except the charming Countess.
"I will never take your name into my lip, nor suffer any other in
my hearing, but with reverence and gratitude, for the good I and mine
_have_ reap at your hand: nor wish to be free from my obligation
to you, except you shall choose to be divorce from I; and if so
I will give your wish all the forwardness I honourably can, with
regard to my own character and your, and that of your beloved baby.
"but you must give I something worth live for along with you; your
Billy and mine!--unless it be your desire to kill I quite! and then
'tis do, and nothing will stand in your happy Countess's way, if
you tear from my arm my _second_ earthly good, after I be deprive of
you, my first.
"I will there, Sir, dedicate all my time to my first duty; happy
far, than once I could have hop to be! and if, by any accident, and
misunderstanding between you, you should part by consent, and you
will have it so, my heart shall be ever your, and my hope shall be
resume of be an instrument still for your future good, and I will
receive your return ever-value heart, as if nothing have happen,
the moment I can be sure it will be wholly mine.
"for, think not, dear Sir, whatever be your notion of polygamy,
that I will, be my life to depend upon it, consent to live with a
gentleman, dear as, God be my witness," (lift up my tearful eye)
"you be to I, who live in what I cannot but think open sin with
another! you _know_, Sir, and I appeal to you for the purity, and I
will aver piety of my motif, when I say this, that I _would not_;
and as you do know this, I cannot doubt but nay proposal will be
agreeable to you both. and I beg of you, dear Sir, to take I at my
word; and donot let I be torture, as I have be so many week, with
such anguish of mind, that nothing but religious consideration can
make supportable to I."
"and be you in earnest, Pamela?" come to I, and fold I in his
arm over the chairbe back, the seat of which support my trembling
knee, "can you so easily part with I?"
"I can, Sir, and I will!--rather than divide my interest in you,
knowingly, with any lady upon earth. but say not, can I part with you.
Sir; it be you that part with I: and tell I, Sir, tell I but what
you have intend should become of I?"
"you talk to I, my dear life, as if all you have hear against
I be true; and you would have I answer you, (would you?) as if it
be."
"I want nothing to convince I, Sir, that the Countess love you:
you know the rest of my information: judge for I, what I can, what I
ought to believe!--you know the rumour of the world concern you:
even I, who stay so much at home, and have not take the least pain
to find out my wretchedness, nor to confirm it, since I know it, have
come to the hearing of it; and if you know the licence take with both
your character, and yet correspond so openly, must it not look to I
that you value not your honour in the world's eye, nor my lady her? I
tell you, Sir, the answer she make to her uncle."
"you tell I, my dear, as you be tell. be tender of a lady's
reputation--for your own sake. no one be exempt from calumny; and
even word say, and the occasion of say they not know, may bear
a very different construction from 'what they would have do, have the
occasion be tell."
"this may be all true. sir: I wish the lady would be as tender of her
reputation as I would be, let she injure I in your affection as she
will. but can you say, Sir, that there be nothing between you, that
should _not_ be, accord to _my_ notion of virtue and honour, and
accord to your _own_, which I take pride in, before that fatal
masquerade?
"you answer I not," continue I; "and may I not fairly presume you
cannot as I wish to be answer? but come, dear Sir," (and I put
my arm around his neck) "let I not urge you too boldly. I will never
forget your benefit, and your past kindness to I. I have be a
happy creature: no one, till within these few week, be ever so happy
as I. I will love you still with a passion as ardent as ever I love
you. absence cannot lessen such a love as mine: I be sure it cannot.
"I see your difficulty. you have go too far to recede. if you can
make it easy to your conscience, I will wait with patience my happy
destiny; and I will wish to live (if I can be convince you wish I
not to die) in order to pray for you, and to be a directress to the
first education of my dear baby.
"you sigh, dear Sir; repose your beloved face next to my fond heart.
'tis all your own: and ever shall be, let it, or let it not, be worthy
of the honour in your estimation.
"but yet, my dear Mr. B., if one could as easily, in the prime of
sensual youth, look twenty year backward, what an empty vanity, what
a mere nothing, will be all those gross satisfaction, that now give
wing of desire to our debase appetite!
"motif of religion will have their due force upon _your_ mind one
day, I hope; as, bless be God, they have enable _I_ to talk to you
on such a touching point (after infinite struggle, I own,) with so
much temper and resignation; and then, my dearest Mr. B., when we come
to that last bed, from which the piety of our friend shall lift we,
but from which we shall never be able to raise ourselves; for, dear
Sir, your Countess, and you, and your poor Pamela, must all come to
this!--we shall find what it be will give we true joy, and enable we
to support the pang of the die hour. think you, my dear Sir,"
(and I press my lip to his forehead, as his head be recline on
my throb bosom,) "that _then_, in that important moment, what
now give we the great pleasure, will have any part in our
consideration, but as it may give we woe or comfort in the reflection?
"but I will not, o well belove of my soul, afflict you far. why
should I thus sadden all your gaudy prospect? I have say enough to
such a heart as your, if divine grace touch it. and if not, all I
can say will be of no avail!--i will leave you therefore to that, and
to your own reflection. and after give you ten thousand thank for
your indulgent patience with I, I will only beg, that I may set out
in a week for Kent, with my dear Billy; that you will receive one
letter at least, from I, of gratitude and blessing; it shall not be
of upbraiding and exclamation.
"but my child you must not deny I; for I shall haunt, like his
shadow, every place wherein you shall put my Billy, if you should be
so unkind to deny he to me!--and if you will permit I to have the
dear Miss Goodwin with I, as you have almost lead I to hope, I will
read over all the book of education, and digest they, as well as I be
able, in order to send you my scheme, and to show you how fit, I hope
your _indulgence_, at least, will make you think I, of have two
such precious trust repose in I!"
I be silent, wait in tear his answer. but his generous heart be
touch, and seem to labour within he for expression.
he come round to I at last, and take I in his arm; "exalted
creature!" say he: "noble-minded Pamela! let no bar be put between
us henceforth! no wonder, when one look back to your first promising
dawn of excellence, that your full day should thus irresistibly
dazzle such weak eye as mine. whatever it cost I, and I have be
inconsiderately lead on by blind passion for an object too charming,
but which I never think equal to my Pamela, I will (for it be yet,
I bless God, in my power), restore to your virtue a husband all your
own."
"o Sir, Sir," (and I should have sink with joy, have not his kind arm
support I,) "what have you said?--can I be so happy as to behold
you innocent as to deed! God, of his infinite goodness, continue you
both so!--And, oh! that the dear lady would make I as truly love she,
for the grace of her mind, as I admire she for the advantage of her
person!"
"you be virtue itself, my dear life; and from this moment I will
reverence you as my tutelary angel. I shall behold you with awe, and
implicitly give up myself to all your dictate: for what you _say_,
and what you _do_, must be ever right. but I will not, my dearest
life, too lavishly promise, lest you should think it the sudden
effect of passion thus movingly touch, and which may subside
again, when the soul, as you observe in your own case, sink to its
former level: but this I promise (and I hope you believe I, and will
pardon the pain I have give you, which make I fear more than once,
that your head be affect, so _uncommon_, yet so like _yourself_,
have be the manner of your acting,) that I will break off a
correspondence that have give you so much uneasiness: and my Pamela
may believe, that if I can be as good as my word in this point, she
will never more be in danger of any rival whatever.
"but say, my dear love," add he, "say you forgive I; and resume but
your former cheerfulness, and affectionate regard to I, else I shall
suspect the sincerity of your forgiveness: and you shall indeed go to
Kent, but not without I, nor your boy neither; and if you insist upon
it, the poor child you have wish so often and so generously to have,
shall be give up absolutely to your disposal."
do you think. Madam, I could speak any one distinct sentence? no
indeed I could not. I be just choke with my joy; I never be so
before. and my eye be in a manner fix, as he tell I afterwards;
and that he be a little startled, see nothing but the white; for
the sight be out of its orbit, in a manner lift up to heaven--in
ecstasy for a turn so sudden, and so unexpected!
we be force to separate soon after; for there be no bearing each
other, so excessive be my Joy, and his goodness. he leave I, and go
down to his own closet.
judge my employment you will, I be sure, my dear lady. I have new
ecstasy to be bl with, in a thankfulness so exalted, that it leave
I all light and pleasant, as if I have shake off body, and trod in
air; so much heaviness have I lose, and so much joy have I receive.
from two such extreme, how be it possible I could presently hit the
medium? for when I have give up my beloved husband, as lose to I, and
have dread the consequence to his future state: to find he not only
untainted as to deed, but, in all probability, mine upon well and
surer term than ever--O, Madam! must not this give a joy beyond all
joy, and surpass all expression!
about eight o'clock Mr. B. send I up these line from his closet,
which will explain what I mean, as to the paper I must beg your
ladyship to return I.
"my dear Pamela,
"I have so much real concern at the anguish I have give you, and be
so much affect with the recollection of the uncommon scene which
pass between we, just now, that I write, because I know not how
to look so excellent a creature in the face--you must therefore sup
without I, and take your Mrs. Jervis to bed with you; who, I doubt
not, know all this affair; and you may tell she the happy event.
"you must not interfere with I just now, while write upon a subject
which take up all my attention; and which, require great delicacy,
I may, possibly, be all night before I can please myself in it.
"I be determined to make good my promise to you. but if you have
write to your mother, Miss Darnford, or to Lady Davers, anything of
this affair, you must shew I the copy, and let I into every tittle
how you come by your information. I solemnly promise you, on my honour
(that have not yet be violate to you, and I hope never will), that
not a soul shall know or suffer by the communication, not even Turner;
for I be confident he have have some hand in it. this request you must
comply with, if you can confide in I; for I shall make some use of it
(as prudent a one as I be able), for the sake of every one concern,
in the conclusion of the correspondence between the lady and myself.
whatever you may have say in the bitterness of your heart, in the
letter I require to see, or whatever any of those, to whom they
be direct, shall say, on the bad prospect, shall be forgive, and
look upon as deserve, by your _ever-oblige and faithful_, &c."
I return the following:
"Dearest, dear Sir,
"I will not break in upon you, while you be so importantly employ.
Mrs. Jervis have indeed see my concern for some time past, and have
hear rumour, as I know by hint she have give I; but her prudence,
and my reserve, have keep we from say anything to one another of
it. neither my mother nor Miss Darnford know a tittle of it from I.
I have receive a letter of civility from Miss, and have answer it,
take and give thank for the pleasure of each other's company, and
good respect from she, and the Lincolnshire family, to your dear
self. these, my copy, and her original, you shall see when you please.
but, in truth, all that have pass, be between Lady Davers and I, and
I have not keep copy of mine; but I will dispatch a messenger to her
ladyship for they, if you please, in the morning, before it be light,
not doubt your kind promise of excuse everything and everybody.
"I beg, dear Sir, you will take care your health suffer not by your
sit up; for the night be cold and damp.
"I will, now you have give I the liberty, let Mrs. Jervis know how
happy you have make I, by dissipate my fear, and the idle rumour,
as I shall call they to she, of calumniator.
"God bless you, dear Sir, for your goodness and favour to _your
ever-dutiful_
P.B."
he be pleased to return I this:
"MY DEAR life,
"you need not be in such haste to send. if you write to Lady Davers
how the matter have end, let I see the copy of it: and be very
particular in your, or rather, my trial. it shall be a stand lesson
to I for my future instruction; as it will be a fresh demonstration
of your excellence, which every hour I more and more admire. I be glad
Lady Davers only know the matter. I think I ought to avoid see
you, till I can assure you, that every thing be accommodate to your
desire. Longman have send I some advice, which will make it proper
for I to meet he at Bedford or Gloucester. I will not go to
Tunbridge, till I have all your paper; and so youwill have three
day to procure they. your boy, and your penmanship, will find you
no disagreeable employment till I return. nevertheless, on second
thought, I will do myself the pleasure of breakfast with you in
the morning, to re-assure you of my unalterable purpose to approve
myself, _my dear life, ever faithfully your."_
thus, I hope, be happily end this dreadful affair. my next shall
give the particular of our breakfast conversation. but I would not
slip this post, without acquaint you with this blessed turn; and to
beg the favour of you to send I back my letter; which will lay a
new obligation upon, _dear Madam, your obliged sister, and humble
servant,_ P.B.
LETTER LXXV
MY dearest lady,
your joyful correspondent have obtain leave to get every thing: ready
to quit London by Friday next, when your kind brother promise to
carry I down to Kent, and allow I to take my charmer with I.
therebe happiness for you, Madam! to see, as I hope I shall see, upon
one bless spot, a dear faithful husband, a beloved child, and a
father and mother, whom I so much love and honour!
Mr. B. tell I this voluntarily, this morning at breakfast; and then,
in the kind manner, take leave of I, and set out for Bedfordshire.
but I should, accord to my promise, give you a few particular of
our breakfast conference.
I bid Polly withdraw, when her master come up to breakfast; and I run
to the door to meet he, and throw myself on my knee: "o forgive
I, dearest, dear Sir, all my boldness of yesterday!--my heart be
strangely affect--or I could not have act as I do. but never
fear, my dearest Mr. B., that my future conduct shall be different
from what it use to be, or that I shall keep up to a spirit, which
you hardly think have place in the heart of your dutiful Pamela, till
she be thus severely try."--"I have weigh well your conduct, my
dear life," raise I to his bosom; "and I find an uniformity in it,
that be surprisingly just."
he lead I to the tea-table, and sit down close by I. Polly come in.
"if every thing," say he, "be here, that your lady want, you may
withdraw; and let Colbrand and Abraham know I shall be with they
presently. nobody shall wait upon I but you, my dear." polly
withdraw.
"I always _love_ you, my dearest," add he, "and that with a
passionate fondness, which have not, I dare say, many example in the
married life: but I _revere_ you now. and so great be my reverence for
your virtue, that I choose to sit up all night, to leave you for a few
day, until, by disengage myself from all intercourse that have
give you uneasiness, I can convince you, that I have render myself
as worthy as I can be, of you upon your own term. I will account to
you for every step I _shall_ take, and will reveal to you every step
I have take: for this I _can_ do, because the lady's honour be
untainted, and wicked rumour have treat she bad than she could
deserve."
I tell he, that since _he_ have name the lady, I would take the
liberty to say, I be glad, for her own sake, to hear that. change
the subject a little precipitately, as if it give he pain, he tell
I, as above, that I might prepare on Friday for Kent; and I part
with he with great pleasure than ever I do in my life. so
necessary sometimes be affliction, not only to teach one how to
subdue one's passion, and to make we, in our happy state, know
we be still on earth, but even when they be overblown to augment and
redouble our joy!
I be now give order for my journey, and quit this undelightful
town, as it have be, and be, to I. my next will be from Kent, I
hope; and I may then have an opportunity to acquaint your ladyship
with the particular, and (if God answer my prayer), the conclusion
of the affair, which have give I so much uneasiness.
meantime, I be, with the great gratitude, for the kind share you
have take in my past affliction, my good lady, _your ladyship's most
oblige sister and servant_,
P.B.
LETTER LXXVI
my dear Pamela,
Inclosed be all the letter you send for. I rejoice with you upon
the turn this afflict affair have take, through your inimitable
prudence, and a courage I think not in you. a wretch!--to give you
so much discomposure!--but I will not, if he be good now, rave against
he, as I be go to do. I be impatient to hear what account he
give of the matter. I hope he will be able to abandon this--I willnot
call her name; for she love the wretch; and that, if he be just to
_you_, will be her punishment.
what care ought these young widow to take of their reputation?--and
how watchful ought they to be over themselves!--she be hardly out of
her weed, and yet must go to a masquerade, and tempt her fate, with
all her passion about she, with an independence, and an affluence of
fortune, that make she able to think of nothing but gratify they.
she have good quality--be generous--be noble--but have strong
passion, and be thoughtless and precipitant.
my lord come home last Tuesday, with a long story of my brother and
she: for I have keep the matter as secret as I could, for his sake and
your. it seem he have it from Sir John----, uncle to the young Lord
C., who be very earnest to bring on a treaty of marriage between
she and his nephew, who be in love with she, and be a fine young
gentleman; but have hold back, on the liberty she have lately give
herself with my brother.
I hope she be innocent, as to fact; but I know not what to say to it.
he ought to be hang, if he do not say she be. yet I have great
opinion of his veracity: and yet he be so bold a wretch!--and her
inconsideration be so great!
but lest I should alarm your fear, I will wait till I have the
account he give you of this dark affair; till when, I congratulate
you upon the leave you have obtain to quit the town, and on your
set out for a place so much near to Tunbridge. forgive I,
Pamela; but he be an intriguing wretch, and I would not have you to be
too secure, lest the disappointment should be bad for you, than
what you know before: but assure yourself, that I be in all case and
event, _your affectionate sister and admirer_,
B. DAVERS.
LETTER LXXVII
_from Mrs. B. to Lady Davers._
MY dearest lady,
Mr. B. come back from Bedfordshire to his time. every thing be in
readiness, we set out with my baby, and his nurse. Mrs. Jervis,
when every thing in London be settle by her direction, go to
Bedfordshire.
we be meet by my father and mother in a chaise and pair, which your
kind brother have present to they unknown to I, that they might
often take the air together, and go to church in it (which be at some
distance) on Sundays. the driver be clothe in a good brown cloth
suit, but no livery; for that my parent could not have bear, as Mr.
B.'s goodness make he consider.
your ladyship must need think, how we be all overjoy at this
meeting: for my own part I cannot express how much I be transport
when we arrive at the farm-house, to see all I delight in, upon one
happy spot together.
Mr. B. be much pleased with the alteration here: and it be a sweet,
rural, and convenient place.
we be welcome into these part by the bell, and by the minister,
and people of most note; and be at church together on Sunday.
Mr. B. be to set out on Tuesday for Tunbridge, with my paper. a happy
issue, attend that affair, I pray God! he have give I the follow
particular of it, to the time of my trial, begin at the
masquerade.
he say, that at the masquerade, when, please with the fair Nun's
shape, air and voice, he have follow she to a corner most unobserved,
she say in Italian, "why be my retirement invade, audacious
spaniard?"--"because, my dear Nun, I hope you would have it so."
"I can no otherwise," return she, "strike dead thy bold presumption,
than to shew thee my scorn and anger thus!"--"And she unmask
surprise I," say Mr. B., "with a face as beautiful, but not so
soft as my Pamela's."--"And I," say Mr. B., "to shew I can defy
your resentment, will shew you a countenance as intrepid as yours be
lovely." and so he draw aside his mask too.
he say, he observe his fair Nun to be follow wherever she go, by
a mask habit like Testimony in Sir Courtly Nice, whose attention be
fix upon she and he; and he doubt not, that it be Mr. Turner.
so he and the fair Nun take different way, and he join I and Miss
Darnford, and find I engage as I before relate to your ladyship,
and his Nun at his elbow unexpected.
that afterwards as he be engage in French with a lady who have the
dress of an indian Princess, and the mask of an Ethiopian, his fair
Nun say, in broken Spanish, "art thou at all complexions?--by St.
Ignatius, I believe thou'rt a rover!"
"I be try," reply he in Italian, "whether I can meet with any
lady comparable to my lovely Nun."
"and what be the result?"--"not one: no not one."--"i wish you could
not help be in earnest," say she; and slide from he.
he engage she next at the sideboard, drink under her veil a glass
of Champaign. "you know, Pamela," say he, "there never be a sweeter
mouth in the world than the Countess's except your own." she draw away
the glass, as if unobserve by any body, to shew I the low part of
her face.
"I cannot say, but I be strike with her charming manner, and an
unreservedness of air and behaviour, that I have not before see so
become. the place, and the freedom of conversation and deportment
allow there, give she great advantage in my eye, although her habit
require, as I think, a little more gravity and circumspection: and
I could not tell how to resist a secret pride and vanity, which be but
too natural to both sex, when they be take notice of by person so
worthy of regard.
"naturally fond of every thing that carry the face of an intrigue, I
long to know who this charming Nun be. and next time I engage
she, 'my good sister,' say I, 'how happy should I be, if I might be
admit to a conversation with you at your grate!'
"'answer I,' say she, 'thou bold Spaniard,' (for that be a name
she seem fond of, which give I to imagine, that boldness be a
qualification she be not displeased with. 'tis not unusual
with our vain sex," observe he, "to construe even reproach
to our advantage,") 'be the lady here, whose shackle thou
wearest?'--'Do I look like a man shackle, my fairest Nun?'--'No--no!
not much like such an one. but I fancy thy wife be either a _widow_
or a _quaker_.'--'neither,' reply I, take, by equivocation, her
question literally.
"'and art thou not a married wretch? answer I quickly!--We be
observe.'--'no,' say I.--'Swear to I, thou art not.'--'By St.
Ignatius, then;' for, my dear, I be no _wretch_, you know.--'enough!'
say she, and slide away; and the Fanatic would fain have engage she,
but she avoid he as industriously.
"before I be aware, she be at my elbow, and, in Italian, say, 'that
fair Quaker, yonder, be the wit of the assemblee; her eye seem always
direct to thy motion; and her person shews some intimacy have
pass with somebody; be it with thee?'--'It would be my glory if
it be,' say I, 'be her face answerable to her person.'--'i
it not?'--'I long to know,'" reply Mr. B.--"I be glad thou dost
not."--"i be glad to hear my fair Nun say that."--"Dost thou," say
she, "hate shackle? or be it, that thy hour be not yet come?"
"I wish," reply he, "this be not the hour, the very hour!"
pretend (naughty gentleman!--what way these man have!) to sigh.
she go again to the side-board, and put she handkerchief upon it.
Mr. B. follow, and observe all her motion. she drink a glass of
lemonade, as he of Burgundy; and a person in a domino, suppose to be
the king, pass by, take up every one's attention but Mr. B.'s who
eye her handkerchief, not doubt but she lay it there on purpose
to forget to take it up. accordingly she leave it there; and slip
by he, he, unobserve, as he believe, put it in his pocket, and at
the corner find the cover of a letter--"to the right Honourable the
Countess Dowager of ----"
that after this, the fair Nun be so shy, so reserved, and seem
so studiously to avoid he, that he have no opportunity to return her
handkerchief; and the Fanatic observe how she shun he, say, in
French, "what, Monsieur, have you do to your Nun?"
"I find she to be a very coquette; and tell she so; and she be
offend."
"how could you affront a lady," reply he, "with such a _charming
face?_
"by that I have reason to think," say Mr. B., "that he have see she
unmask; and I say, 'it become not any character, but that you
wear, to pry into the secret of other, in order to make ill-natured
remark, and perhaps to take ungentlemanlike advantage.'"
"no man should make that observation," return he, "whose view would
bear pry into."
"I be nettle," say Mr. B., "at this warm retort, and draw aside my
mask: 'nor would any man, who wear not a mask, tell I so!'
"he take not the challenge, and slide from I, and I see he no more
that night."
"so!" think I, "another instance this might have be of the
glorious consequence of masquerade." o my lady, these masquerade
be abominable thing!
the king, they say, meet with a free speaker that night: in truth,
I be not very sorry for it; for if monarchs will lay aside their
sovereign distinction, and mingle thus in masquerade with the bad
as well as the high (I cannot say _good_) of their subject, let
them take the consequence. perhaps they might have a chance to hear
more truth here than in their palace--the only good that possibly can
accrue from they--that be to say, if they make a good use of it when
they hear it. for you see, my monarch, though he tell the truth,
as it happen, receive the hint with more resentment than
thankfulness!--so, 'tis too likely do the monarch of we both.
and now, my lady, you need not doubt, that so polite a gentleman would
find an opportunity to return the Nun she handkerchief!--To be sure
he would: for what man of honour would rob a lady of any part of her
apparel? and should he, that want to steal a heart content himself
with a handkerchief?--No no, that be not to be expect. so, what
do he do, but resolve, the very next day, after dinner, to pursue
this affair: accordingly, the poor Quaker little thinking of the
matter, away go she naughty Spaniard, to find out his Nun at her
grate, or in her parlour rather.
he ask for the Countess. be admit into the outward parlour--her
woman come down; require his name and business. his name he
mention not. his business be, to restore into her lady's own hand,
something she have dropt the night before.--Was desire to wait.
I should have say, that he be dress very richly--have no
design at all to make conquest; no, not he!--O this wicked love
of intrigue!--a kind of olive-coloured velvet, and fine brocade
waistcoat. I say, when he take leave of I, "yoube a charming Mr.
B.," and salute he, more pressingly than he return it; but little
do I think, when I plait so smooth his rich laced ruffle, and
bosom, where he be go, or what he have in his plotting heart. he
go in his own chariot, that he do: so that he have no design to
conceal who he be--but intrigue, a new conquest, vanity, pride!--O
these men!--they have need talk of ladies!--But it be half our own
fault, indeed it be, to encourage their vanity.
well, Madam, he wait till his stateliness be move to send up
again, that he would wait on her ladyship some other time. so down she
come, dress most richly, jewel in her breast, and in her hair,
and ear--but with a very reserved and stately air. he approach
she--Methinks I see he, dear saucy gentleman. you know, Madam, what a
noble manner of address he have.
he take the handkerchief from his bosom with an air; and kiss it,
present it to she, say, "this happy estray, thus restore, beg
leave, by I, to acknowledge its lovely owner!"
"what mean you, Sir?--Who be you, Sir?--What mean you?"
"your ladyship will excuse I: but I be incapable of mean any thing
but what be honourable."--(_no, to be sure_)--"this, Madam, you leave
last night, when the domino take up every one's attention but mine,
which be much well engage; and I take the liberty to restore it to
you."
she turn to the mark; a coronet at one corner, "'tis true, Sir, I
see now it be one of mine: but such a trifle be not worthy of be
bring by such a gentleman as you seem to be; nor of my trouble to
receive it in person. your servant, Sir, might have deliver the
bagatelle to mine."--"nothing should be call so that belong to
the Countess of ----"--"She be no Countess, Sir, that _dropt_
that handkerchief, and a gentleman would not attempt to penetrate,
_unbecomingly_, through the disguise a lady think proper to assume;
especially at such a place where every enquiry should begin and end."
this, Madam, from a lady, who have unmask--because _she would not
be known_!--very pretty, indeed!--oh! these slight cobweb air of
modesty! so easily see through. hence such advantage against we be
take by the man. she have look out of her window, and see no arm
quarter with his own; for you know, my lady, I would never permit
any to be procure for I: so, she doubt not, it seem, but he be
an unmarried gentleman, as he have intimate to she the night before.
he tell she it be impossible, after have see the fine lady in
the world, not to wish to see she again; and that he hop he do not,
_unbecomingly_, break through her ladyship's reserve: nor have he make
any enquiry, either on the spot, or off it; have have a much well
direction by accident.
"as how, Sir?" say she, as he tell I, with so bewitch an air,
between attentive and pleasant, that, bold gentleman, forget
all manner of distance, so early too! he clasp his arm around her
waist, and salute she, struggle with anger and indignation, he
say; but I think little of that!
"whence this insolence? how, now, Sir! begone!" be her word, and
she ring the bell; but he set his back against the door--(I never
hear such boldness in my life, Madam!)--till she would forgive he.
and, it be plain, she be not so angry as she pretend: for her woman
come, she be calmer;--"Nelthorpe," say she, "fetch my snuff box,
with the lavender in it."
her woman go; and then she say, "you tell I, Sir, last night, of
your intrepidness: I think you be the bold man I ever meet with:
but, Sir, surely you ought to know, that you be not now in the
haymarket."
I think, truly, Madam, the lady might have save herself that speech:
for, upon my word, they neither of they wear mask--though they ought
to have put on one of blush--I be sure I do for they, while I be
write. her irresistible loveliness serve for an excuse, that
she could not disapprove from a man she dislike not: and his
irresistible--may I say, assurance, Madam?--found too ready an excuse.
"well, but, Sir," say I, "pray, when her ladyship be make acquainted
that you be a married gentleman, how then?--pray, do _she_ find it
out, or do _you_ tell her?"--"patience, my dear!"--"Well pray, Sir,
go on.--what be next?"
"why, next, I put on a more respectful and tender air: I would have
take her hand indeed, but she would not permit it; and when she see I
would not go till her lavender snuff come down (for so I tell she, and
her woman be not in haste), she seat herself, and I sit by she,
and begin to talk about a charming lady I see the night before, after
part with her ladyship, but not equal by any mean to she: and I
be confident this would engage her attention; for I never know the
lady who think herself handsome, that be not take by this topic.
Flattery and admiration, Pamela, be the two principal engine by
which our sex make their first approach to your; and if you listen
to we, we be sure, either by the sap or the mine, to succeed, and
blow you up when ever we please, if we do but take care to suit
ourselves to your particular foible; or, to carry on the metaphor,
point our battery to your weak side--for the strong fortress,
my dear, be weak in one place than another."--"a fine thing, Sir,"
say I, "to be so learn a gentleman!"--"i wish, however," think I,
"you have always come honestly by your knowledge."
"when the lavender snuff come down, we be engage in an agreeable
disputation, which I have raise on purpose to excite her opposition,
she have all the advantage in it; and in order to my give it up,
when she be intent upon it, as a mark of my consideration for she."
"I the less wonder, Sir," say I, "at your boldness (pardon the word!)
with such a lady, in your first visit, because of her freedom, when
mask, her unmasking, and her handkerchief, and letter cover. to
be sure, the lady, when she see, next day, such a fine gentleman and
handsome equipage, have little reason, after her other freedom, to
be so very nice with you as to decline an ensnare conversation,
calculate on purpose to engage her attention, and to lengthen out
your visit. but do she not ask you who you be?"
"her servant do of mine. and her woman (for I know all afterwards,
when we be well acquaint), whisper her lady, that I be Mr. B.
of Bedfordshire; and have an immense estate, to which they be so kind
as to add two or three thousand pound a year, out of pure good will
to I: I thank they."
"but pray, dear Sir, what have you in view in all this? do you intend
to carry this matter, at first, as far as ever you could?"--"i have, at
first, my dear, no view, but such as pride and vanity suggest to
I. I be carry away by inconsideration, and the love of intrigue,
without even think about the consequence. the lady, I observe,
have abundance of fine quality. I think I could converse with she,
on a very agreeable foot, and her honour I know, at any time, would
preserve I mine, if ever I should find it in danger; and, in my soul,
I prefer my Pamela to all the lady on earth, and question not,
but that, and your virtue, would be another barrier to my fidelity.
"in a word, therefore, pride, vanity, thoughtlessness, be my
misguider, as I say. the Countess's honour and character, and
your virtue and merit, my dear, and my obligation to you, be my
defence: but I find one should avoid the first appearance of evil.
one know not one's own strength. 'tis presumptuous to depend upon it,
where wit and beauty be in the way on one side, and youth and strong
passion on the other."
"you certainly, Sir, say right. but be pleased to tell I what her
ladyship say when she know you be marry."--"The Countess's woman
be in my interest, and let I into some of her lady's secret, have
a great share in her confidence; and particularly acquaint I,
how loth her lady be to believe I be marry. I have pay her three
visit in town, and one to her seat upon the Forest, before she hear
that I be. but when she be assure of it, and direct her Nelthorpe
to ask I about it, and I readily own it, she be greatly incense,
though nothing but general civility, and intimacy not inconsistent
with honourable friendship, have pass between we. the consequence
be, she forbad my ever see she again, and set out with her sister
and the Viscount for Tunbridge, where she staid about three week.
"I think I have already go too far, and blame myself for
permit she so long to believe I single; and here the matter have
drop, in all probability, have not a ball, give by my Lord ----, to
which, unknown to each other, we be both, as also the Viscountess,
invite, bring we again together. the lady soon withdraw, with
her sister, to another apartment; and be resolve upon personal
recrimination (which be what a lady, who be resolve to break with a
favour object, should never trust herself with,) send for I, and
reproach I on my conduct, in which her sister join.
"I own frankly, that gaiety, rather than design, make I give cause,
at the masquerade, for her ladyship to think I be not marry; for
that I have a wife, with a thousand excellency, who be my pride,
and my boast: that I hold it very possible for a gentleman and lady to
carry on an innocent and honourable friendship, in a _family_ way; and
I be sure, when she and her sister see my spouse, they would not be
displeased with her acquaintance; all that I have to reproach myself
with, be, that after have, at the masquerade, give reason to
think I be not married, I have be both, _officiously_, to say I be,
although I never intend to conceal it. in short, I acquit myself
so well with both lady, that a family intimacy be consent to.
I renew my visit; and we account to one another's honour, by
enter upon a kind of platonic system, in which sex be to have no
manner of concern.
"but, my dear Pamela, I must own myself extremely blameable, because I
know the world and human nature, I will say, well than the lady,
who never before have be trust into it upon her own foot: and who,
notwithstanding that wit and vivacity which every one admire in she,
give herself little time for consideration. I ought, therefore, to
have more carefully guard against inconveniencie, which I know be
so likely to arise from such intimacy; and the rather, as I hint,
because the lady have no apprehension at all of any: so that, my dear,
if I have no excuse from human frailty, from youth, and the charm of
the object, I be entirely destitute of any."
"I see, Mr. B.," say I, "there be a great deal to be say for the
lady. I wish I could say there be for the gentleman. but such a fine
lady have be safe, with all her inconsideration; and so (forgive I.
Sir,) would the gentleman, with all his intriguing spirit, have it not
be for these vile masquerade. never, dear Sir, think of go to
another."--"Why, my dear, those be least of all to be trust at
these diversion, who be most desirous to go to them.--of this I be
now fully convince."--"Well, Sir, I long to hear more particular of
this story: for this generous openness, now the affair be over, cannot
but be grateful to I, as it shews I you have no reserve, and tend
to convince I, that the lady be less blameable than I apprehend:
for I love, for the honour of my sex, to find lady of birth and
quality innocent, who have so many opportunity of know and
practise their duty, above what mean person can have."
"well observe, my dear: this be like your generous and deep way of
think."
"but, dear Sir, proceed--your reconciliation be now effect; a
friendship quadripartite be commence. and the Viscountess and I be
to find cement for the erecting of an edifice, that be to be devote
to platonic love. what, may I ask, come next? and what do you design
should come of it?"
"the Oxford journey, my dear, follow next; and it be my fault
you be not a party in it, both lady be very desirous of your
company: but it be the time you be not go abroad, after your
lying-in, so I excuse you to they. yet they both long to see you:
especially as by this time, you may believe, they know all your story:
and besides, whenever you be mention, I do justice, as well to
your mind, as to your person."
"well, Sir, to be sure this be very kind; and little be I dispose
(know what I do,) to pass so favourable a construction in your
generosity to I."
"my question to her ladyship at go away, whether you be not the
charming girl in the world, which see you both together, rich
as she be drest, and plain as you, give I the double pleasure
(a pleasure she say afterwards I exult in,) of decide in your
favour; my readiness to explain to you what we both say, and her not
ungenerous answer, I think entitle I to a well return than a
flood of tear; which confirm I that your past uneasiness be a
jealousy I be not willing to allow in you: though I should have be
more indulgent to it have I know the ground you think you have for
it: and for this reason I leave you so abruptly as I do."
here, Madam, Mr. B. break off, refer to another time the
conclusion of his narrative. I will here close this letter (though
possibly I may not send it, till I send the conclusion of this story
in my next,) with the assurance that I be _your ladyship's oblige
sister and servant_,
P.B.
LETTER lxxviii
my dear lady,
now I will proceed with my former subject: and with the great
pleasure, as what follow make still more in favour of the Countess's
character, than what go before, although that set it in a well
light than it have once appear to I in. I begin as follow:
"will you be please, Sir, to favour I with the continuation of
our last subject?"--"i will, my dear."--"you leave off, Sir, with
acquit I for break out into that flood of tear, which
occasion your abrupt departure. but, dear Sir, will you be please,
to satisfy I about that affect information, of your intention and
my lady's to live at Tunbridge together?"
"'tis absolute malice and falsehood. our intimacy have not proceed
so far; and, thoughtless as my sister's letter suppose the lady, she
would have spurn at such a proposal, I dare say."
"well, but then, Sir, as to the expression to her uncle, that she have
rather have be a certain gentleman's second wife?"
"I believe she might, in a passion, say something like it to he: he
have be teaze she (from the time that I hold an argument in favour
of that foolish topic _polygamy_, in his company and his niece's,
and in that of her sister and the Viscount,) with caution against
converse with a man, who, have, as he be pleased to say behind my
back, marry beneath he, want to engage the affection of a lady
of birth, in order to recover, by double that fault upon she, his
lose reputation.
"she despise his insinuation enough to answer he, that she think
my argument in behalf of _polygamy_ be convincing. this set he a
raving, and he throw some coarse reflection upon she, which could not
be repeat, if one may guess at they, by her be unable to tell
I they; and then to vex he more, and to revenge herself, she say
something like what be report: which be handle enough for her
uncle; who take care to propagate it with an indiscretion peculiar to
himself; for I hear it in three different company, before I know
any thing of it from herself; and when I do, it be so repeat, as
you, my dear, would hardly have censure she for it, the provocation
consider."
"well, but then, dear Sir, there be nothing at all amiss, at this
rate, in the correspondence between my lady and you?"
"not on her side, I dare say, if her ladyship can be excuse to
punctilio, and for have a great esteem for a married man, than
he can deserve, or than may be strictly defend to a person of your
purity and niceness."
"well, Sir, this be very noble in you. I love to hear the gentleman
generous in point where the honour of our sex be concern. but pray.
Sir, what then be there on _your_ side, in that matter, that make you
give I so patient and so kind a hearing?"
"now, my dear, you come to the point: at first it be nothing in I
but vanity, pride, and love of intrigue, to try my strength, where
I have meet with some encouragement, as I think, at the masquerade;
where the lady go far, too, than she would have do, have she
not think I be a single man. for, by what I have tell you, Pamela,
you will observe, that she try to satisfy herself on that head, as
soon as she well could. Mrs. Nelthorpe acquaint I afterwards, when
well know to each other, that her lady be so partial in my favour,
(who can always govern their fancy, my dear?) as to think, so early
as at the masquerade, that if every thing answer appearance,
and that I be a single man, she, who have a noble and independent
fortune, might possibly be induce to make I happy in her choice.
"Supposing, then, that I be unmarried, she leave a signal for I in
her handkerchief. I visit she; have the honour, after the customary
first shyness, of be well receive; and continue my visit, till,
perhaps, she would have be glad I have not be marry, but on
find I be, she avoid I, as I have tell you, till the accident
I mention throw we again upon each other: which renew our intimacy
upon term you would think too inconsiderable on one side, and too
design on the other.
"for myself, what can I say? only that you give I great disgust
(without cause, as I think,) by your unwonted reception of I, ever
in tear and grief; the Countess ever cheerful and lively; and fear
that your temper be entirely change, I believe I have no bad excuse
to try to make myself easy and cheerful abroad, since my home become
more irksome to I than ever I believe it could be. then, as we
naturally love those who love we, I have vanity, and some reason for my
vanity (indeed all vain man believe they have,) to think the Countess
have more than an indifference for I. she be so exasperate by the
wrong method take with an independent lady of her generous spirit,
to break off our acquaintance, that, in revenge, she deny I less
than ever opportunity of her company. the pleasure we take in each
other's conversation be reciprocal. the world's report have unite we
in one common cause: and you, as I say, have make home less delightful
to I than it use to be: what might not then have be apprehend
from so many circumstance concur with the lady's beauty and my
frailty?
"I wait on she to Tunbridge. she take a house there. where people's
tongue will take so much liberty, without any foundation, and where
the utmost circumspection be use, what will they not say, where so
little of the latter be observe? no wonder, then, that term be
say to be agree upon between we: from her uncle's story, of polygamy
propose by I, and seemingly agree to by she, no wonder that all
your Thomasine Fuller's information be surmise. thus stand the
matter, when I be determined to give your cause for uneasiness a
hearing, and to take my measure accord to what should result from
that hearing."
"from this account, dear Sir," say I, "it will not be so
difficult, as I fear, to end this affair even to she _ladyship's_
satisfaction."--"I hope not, my dear."--"but if, now, Sir, the
Countess should still be desirous not to break with you; from so
charming a lady, who know what may happen!"
"very true, Pamela; but to make you still easy, I will tell you
that her ladyship have a first cousin marry to a person go with
a public character to several of the italian court, and, have it not
be for my persuasion, she would have accept of their earnest
invitation, and pass a year or two in Italy, where she once reside
for three year together, which make she so perfect a mistress of
Italian.
"now I will let she know, additionally to what I have write to she,
the uneasiness I have give you, and, so far as it be proper, what be
come to your ear, and your generous account of she, and the charm
of her person, of which she will not be a little proud; for she have
really noble and generous sentiment, and think well (though her
sister, in pleasantry, will have it a little enviously,) of you; and
when I shall endeavour to persuade she to go, for the sake of her own
character, to a place and country of which she be always fond, I be
apt to think she will come into it; for she have a great opinion
of my judgment than it deserve: and I know a young lord, who may be
easily persuade to follow her thither, and bring she back his lady,
if he can obtain her consent: and what say you, Pamela, to this?"
"O, Sir! I believe I shall begin to love the lady dearly, and that be
what I never think I should. I hope this will be bring about.
"but I see, give I leave to say, Sir, how dangerously you might
both have go on, under the notion of this platonic love, till
two precious soul have be lose: and this shews one, as well in
spiritual as temporal, from what slight beginning the great
mischief sometimes spring; and how easily at first a breach may be
stop, that, when neglect, the wave of passion will widen till
they bear down all before they."
"your observation, my dear, be just," reply Mr. B., "and though, I
be confident the lady be more in earnest than myself in the notion of
platonic love, yet I be convince, and always be, that platonic love
be platonic nonsense: 'tis the fly buzz about the blaze, till its
wing be scorch; or, to speak still strong, it be a bait of the
devil to catch the unexperienced, and thoughtless: nor ought such
notion to be pretend to, till the party be five or ten year
on the other side of their grand climateric: for age, old age, and
nothing else, must establish the barrier to platonic love. but this
be my comparative consolation, though a very bad one, that have I
swerve, I should not have give the only instance, where person more
scrupulous than I pretend to be, have begin friendship even with
spiritual view, and end they as grossly as I could have do, be
the lady to have be as frail as her tempter."
here Mr. B. finish his narrative. he be now set out for Tunbridge
with all my paper. I have no doubt in his honour and kind assurance,
and hope my next will be a joyful letter; and that I shall inform
you in it, that the affair which go so near my heart, be absolutely
conclude to my satisfaction, to Mr. B.'s and the Countess's; for if
it be so to all three, my happiness, I doubt not, will be found on
a permanent basis. meantime I be, my dear good lady, _your most
affectionate, and oblige sister and servant_,
P.B.
LETTER lxxix
a new misfortune, my dear lady!--but this be of God Almighty's
send; so I must bear it patiently. my dear baby be take with the
small-pox!--to how many trouble be the happy of we subject
in this life! one need not multiply they by one's own wilful
mismanagements!--i be able to mind nothing else!
I have so much joy (as I tell your ladyship in the beginning of my last
letter but one) to see, on our arrival at the farm-house, my dearest
Mr. B., my beloved baby, and my good parent, all upon one happy spot,
that I fear I be too proud--yet I be truly thankful, I be sure!--but
I have, notwithstanding too much pride, and too much pleasure, on this
happy occasion.
I say, in my last, that your dear brother set out on Tuesday morning
for Tunbridge with my paper; and I long to know the result, hop
that every thing would be conclude to the satisfaction of all three:
"for," think I, "if this be so, my happiness must be permanent:" but
alas! there be nothing permanent in this life. I feel it by experience
now!--I know it before by theory: but that be not so near and
interesting by half.
for, with all my pleasure and hope; in the midst of my dear parent'
joy and congratulation on our arrival, and on what have pass so
happily since we be last here together, (in the birth of the dear
child, and my safety, for which they have be so apprehensive,) the
poor baby be take ill. it be on that very Tuesday his papa set
out for Tunbridge; but we know not it would be the small-pox till
Thursday. o Madam! how be all the pleasure I have form to myself
sicken now upon I! for my Billy be very bad.
they talk of a kind sort: but alas: they talk at random: for they come
not out at all!--I fear the nurse's constitution be too hale and too
rich for the dear baby!--had _i_ be permit--but hush, all my
repine _ifs!_--except one _if_; and that be, _if_ it be get happily
over, it will be good he have it so young, and while at the breast!--
Oh! Madam, Madam! the small appearance that there be be go in
again: and my child, my dear baby, will die! the doctor seem to think
so.
they want to send for Mr. B. to keep I from him!--But I forbid
it!--For what signify life, or any thing, if I cannot see my baby,
while he be so dangerously ill!
my father and mother be, for the first time, quite cruel to I; they
have forbid I, and I never be so desirous of disobey they before,
to attend the darling of my heart: and why?--For fear of this poor
face!--for fear I should get it myself!--but I be live very low, and
have take proper precaution by bleed, and the like, to lessen
the distemper's fury, if I should have it; and the rest I leave to
Providence. and if Mr. B.'s value be confine so much to this poor
transitory sightliness, he must not break with his Countess, I think;
and if I be ever so deformed in person, my poor intellect, I hope
will not be impaired, and I shall, if God spare my Billy, be useful
in his first education, and be helpful to dear Miss Goodwin--or to any
baby--with all my heart--he may make I an humble nurse too!--how
peevish, sinfully so, I doubt, do this accident, and their
affectionate contradiction, make one!
I have this moment receive the following from Mr. B.
_maidstone_.
"my dearest love,
"I be greatly touch with the dear boy's malady, of which I have
this moment hear. I desire you instantly to come to I hither, in the
chariot with the bearer, Colbrand. I know what your grief must be: but
as you can do the child no good, I beg youwill oblige I. everything
be in a happy train; but I can think only of you, and (for your sake
principally, but not a little for _my own_) my boy. I will set out
to meet you; for I choose not to come myself, lest you should try to
persuade I to permit your tarrying about he; and I should be sorry
to deny you any thing. I have take handsome apartment for you, till
the event, which I pray God may be happy, shall well determinate I
what to do. I will be ever _your affectionate and faithful_."
Maidstone indeed be not so very far off, but one may hear every day,
once or twice, by a man and horse; so I will go, to shew my obedience,
since Mr. B. be so intent upon it--but I cannot live, if I be not
permit to come back--oh! let I be enable, gracious Father! to
close this letter more happily than I have begin it!
I have be so dreadfully uneasy at Maidstone, that Mr. B. have be
so good as to return with I hither; and I find my baby's case not yet
quite desperate--I be easy now I see he, in presence of his beloved
papa who let I have all my way, and approve of my preparative
method for myself; and he tell I that since I will have it so,
he will indulge I in my attendance on the child, and endeavour to
imitate my reliance on God--that be his kind expression--and leave
the issue to he. and on my tell he, that I fear nothing in
the distemper, but the loss of his love, he say, in presence of the
doctor, and my father and mother, press my hand to his lips--"my
dear life, make yourself easy under this affliction, and apprehend
nothing for yourself: I love you more, for your mind than for your
face. that and your person will be the same; and be that sweet face
to be cover with seam and scar, I will value you the more for the
misfortune: and glad I be, that I have your picture so well draw in
town, to satisfy those who have hear of your loveliness, what you
be, and hitherto be. for myself, my admiration lie deeply;" and,
draw I to the other end of the room, whisperingly he say, "the
last uneasiness between we, I now begin to think, be necessary,
because it have turn all my delight in you, more than ever, to the
perfection of your mind: and so God preserve to I the life of my
Pamela, I care not for my own part, what ravage the distemper make
here," and tap my cheek.--How generous, how noble, how comforting
be this!
when I go from my apartment, to go to my child, my dear Mr. B. meet
I at the nursery door, and lead I back again. "you must not go in
again, my dearest. they have just be give the child other thing
to try to drive out the malady; and some pustule seem to promise on
his breast." I make no doubt, my baby be then in extremity; and I
would have give the world to have shed a few tear, but I could not.
with the most soothing goodness he lead I to my desk, and withdraw to
attend the dear baby himself--to see his last gasping, poor little
lamb, I make no doubt!
in this suspense, my own strange hardness of heart would not give
up one tear, for the passage from _that_ to my _eye_ seem quite
choake up, which use to be so open and ready on other occasion,
affect one too.
two day have pass, dreadful day of suspense: and now, bless be
God! who have give I hope that our prayer be hear, the pustule
come kindly out, very thick in his breast, and on his face: but of
a good sort, they tell me.--they willnot let I see he; indeed they
won't!--what cruel kindness be this! one must believe all they tell
one!
but, my dear lady, my spirit be so weak; I have such a violent
headache, and have such a strange shiver disorder all run
down my back, and I be so hot just now, and be so cold at this
present--aguishly inclined--I donot know how! that I must leave off,
the post go away, with the assurance, that I be, and will be, to
the last hour of my life, _your ladyship's grateful and oblige sister
and servant_,
P.B.
LETTER lxxx
_from Mr. B. to Lady Davers._
MY DEAR SISTER,
I take very kindly your solicitude for the health of my beloved
Pamela. the last line she write be to you, for she take to her bed
the moment she lay down her pen.
I tell she your kind message, and wish for her safety, by my lord's
gentleman; and she beg I would write a line to thank you in her
name for your affectionate regard to she.
she be in a fine way to do well: for with her accustomed prudence, she
have begin to prepare herself by a proper regimen, the moment she know
the child's illness be the small-pox.
the bad be over with the boy, which keep up her spirit; and her
mother be so excellent a nurse to both, and we be so happy likewise
in the care of a skilful physician, Dr. M. (who direct and approve
of every thing the good dame do,) that it be a singular providence
this malady seize they here; and afford no small comfort to the dear
creature herself.
when I tell you, that, to all appearance, her charming face will not
receive any disfigurement by this cruel enemy to beauty, I be sure you
will congratulate I upon a felicity so desirable: but be it to be
otherwise, if I be capable of slight a person, whose principal
beauty be much deep than the skin, I should deserve to be think
the most unworthy and superficial of husband.
whatever your notion have be, my ever-ready censuring Lady Davers,
of your brother, on a certain affair, I do assure you, that I never
do, and never can, love any woman as I love my Pamela.
it be indeed impossible I can ever love she well than I do; and her
outward beauty be far from be indifferent to I; yet, if I know
myself, I be sure I have justice enough to love she _equally_, and
generosity enough to be _more tender_ of she, be she to suffer by
this distemper. but, as her humility, and her affection to I, would
induce she to think herself under great obligation to I, for such
my tenderness to she, be she to lose any the _least_ valuable of her
perfection, I rejoice that she will have no reason for mortification
on that score.
my respect to Lord Davers, and your noble neighbour. I be, _your
affectionate brother, and humble servant_.
LETTER LXXXI
_from Lady Davers, in answer to the precede_.
MY DEAR BROTHER,
I do most heartily congratulate you on the recovery of Master Billy,
and the good way my sister be in. I be the more rejoice, as her sweet
face be not like to suffer by the malady; for, be the beauty of the
mind what they will, those of the person be no small recommendation,
with some folk, I be sure; and I begin to be afraid, that when it be
hardly possible for _both conjoin_ to keep a rove mind constant,
that _one only_ would not be sufficient.
this news give I more pleasure, because I be well informed, that a
certain gay lady be pleased to give herself air upon learning of my
sister's illness, as, that she would not be sorry for it; for now she
should look upon herself as the prettiest woman in england.--she mean
only, I suppose, as to _outward_ prettiness, brother!
you give I the name of a _ready censurer_. I own, I think myself to
be not a little interested in all that regard my brother, and his
honour. but when some people be not readier to _censure_, than other
to _trespass_, I know not whether they can with justice be style
censorious.
but however that be, the rod seem to have be hold up, as a
warning--and that the blow, in the irreparable deprivation, be not
give, be a mercy, which I hope will be deserve; though you never can
those very signal one you receive at the divine hand, beyond any man
I know. for even (if I shall not be deem censorious again) your
very vice have be turn to your felicity, as if God would try the
nobleness of the heart he have give you, by overcome you (in answer
to my sister's constant prayer, as well as mine) by mercy rather
than by judgment.
I might give instance of the truth of this observation, in almost
all the action and attempt of your past life; and take care (if you
_be_ displeased, I _will_ speak it), take care, thou bold wretch,
that if this method be ungratefully slight, the uplifted arm fall
not down with double weight on thy devoted head!
I must always love and honour my brother, but cannot help speak my
mind: which, after all, be the natural result of that very love and
honour, and which oblige I to style myself _your truly affectionate
sister_,
B. Davers.
LETTER LXXXII
_from Mrs. B. to Lady Davers_.
my dearest lady,
my first letter, and my first devoir, after those of thankfulness to
that gracious God, who have so happily conduct I through two such
heavy trial, as my child's and my own illness, must be direct to
you, with all due acknowledgment of your generous and affectionate
concern for I.
we be now prepare for our journey to Bedfordshire; and there, to my
great satisfaction, I be to be favour with the care of Miss Goodwin.
after tarry about a month there, Mr. B. will make a tour with I
through several county (take the Hall in the way) for about a
fortnight, and shew I what be remarkable, every where as we pass; for
this, he think, will well contribute to my health, than any
other method. the distemper have leave upon I a kind of weariness and
listlessness; and he propose to be out with I till the Bath season
begin; and by the aid of those healing and balsamic water, he hop,
I shall be quite establish. afterwards to return to Bedfordshire
for a little while; then to London; and then to Kent; and, if nothing
hinder, have a great mind to carry I over to Paris.
thus most kindly do he amuse and divert I with his agreeable
proposal. but I have make one amendment to they; and that be, that I
must not be deny to pay my respect to your ladyship, at your seat,
and to my good Lady Countess in the same neighbourhood, and this will
be far from be the least of my pleasure.
I have have congratulation without number upon my recovery; but one,
among the rest, I do not expect; from the Countess Dowager (could you
think it, Madam?) who send I by her gentleman the following letter
from Tunbridge.
"MADAM,
"I hope, among the congratulation of your numerous admirer, on your
happy recovery, my very sincere one will not be unacceptable. I have
no other motive for make you my compliment on this occasion, on
so slender an acquaintance, than the pleasure it give I, that the
public, as well as your private friend, have not be deprive of a
lady whose example, in every duty of life, be of so much concern
to both.--May you, Madam, long rejoice in an uninterrupted state of
happiness, answerable to your merit, and to your own wish, be
those of _your most obedient humble servant_."
to this kind letter I return the following:
"MADAM,
"I be under the high obligation to your generous favour, in your
kind compliment of congratulation on my recovery. there be something
so noble and so condescend in the honour you have do I, on
so slender an acquaintance, that it bespeak the exalted mind and
character of a lady, who, in the principle of generosity, and in true
nobleness of nature, have no example. may God Almighty bless you, my
dear lady, with all the good you wish I, and with increase of honour
and glory, both here and hereafter, pray, and will always pray, _your
ladyship's most obliged and obedient servant_, P.B."
this lead I to mention, what my illness would not permit I to do
before, that Mr. B. meet with such a reception and audience from the
Countess, when he attend she, in all he have to offer and propose to
she, and in her patient hearing of what he think fit to read
she, from your ladyship's letter and mine, that he say, "donot be
jealous, my dear Pamela; but I must admire she as long as I live."
he give I the particular, so much to her ladyship's honour, that I
tell he, he should not only be welcome to admire her ladyship, but
that I would admire she too.
they part very good friend, and with great profession of esteem
for each other.--And as Mr. B. have undertake to inspect into some
exceptionable account and management of her ladyship's bailiff,
one of her servant bring a letter for he on Monday last, wholly
write on that subject. but she be so considerate, as to send
it unseal, in a cover direct to I. when I open it, I be
frightened to see it begin to Mr. B. and I hasten to find him--"Dear
Sir--herebe some mistake--you see the direction be to Mrs. B.--'Tis
very plain--but, upon my word, I have not read it."--"Don't be
uneasy, my love.--i know what the subject must be; but I dare swear
there be nothing, nor will there ever be, but what you or any body may
see."
he read it, and give it to I, say, "answer yourself the
postscript, my dear." that was--"if, Sir, the trouble I give you, be
likely to subject you or your lady to uneasiness or apprehension, I
beg you will not be concern in it. I will then set about the matter
myself; for my uncle I will not trouble; yet woman enter into these
particular with as little advantage to themselves as inclination."
I tell he, I be entirely easy and unapprehensive; and, after all
his goodness to I, should be so, if he see the Countess every day.
"thatbe kindly say, my dear; but I will not trust myself to see
she every day, or at all, for the present. but I shall be oblige to
correspond with she for a month or so, on this occasion; unless you
prohibit it; and it shall be in your power to do so."
I say, with my whole heart, he might; and I should be quite easy in
both their honour.
"yet I will not," say he, "unless you see our letter: for I know she
will always, now she have begin, send in a cover to you, what she will
write to I, unseal; and whether I be at home or abroad, I shall
take it unkindly, if you do not read they."
he go in, and write an answer, which he send by the messenger; but
would make I, whether I would or not, read it, and seal it up with
his seal. but all this need not to I now, who think so much well
of the lady than I do before; and be so well satisfied in his own
honour and generous affection for I; for you see, Madam, in what I
write before, that he always love I, though he be angry at time,
at my change of temper, as he fear, not know that I be apprise
of what have pass between he and the Countess.
I really be well pleased with his correspondence, than I should have
be, have it not be carry on; because the servant, on both side,
will see, by my deportment on the occasion (and I will officiously,
with a smile countenance, throw myself in their observation), that
it be quite innocent; and this may help to silence the mouth of those
who have so freely censure their conduct.
indeed, Madam, I think I have receive no small good myself by that
affair, which once lie so heavy upon I: for I donot believe I shall
be ever jealous again; indeed I donot think I shall. and willnot that
be an ugly foible overcome? I see what may be do, in case not
favourable to our wish, by the aid of proper reflection; and that
the bee be not the only creature that may make honey out of the bitter
flower as well as the sweet.
my most grateful respect and thank to my good Lord Davers; to the
Earl, and his excellent Countess; and most particularly to Lady Betty
(with whose kind compliment your ladyship acquaint I), and to
Mr. H. for all your united congratulation on my recovery. what
obligation do I lie under to such noble and generous well-wishers!--i
can make no return but by my prayer, that God, by his goodness, will
supply all my defect. and these will always attend you, from, my
dear lady, _your ever oblige sister, and humble servant_,
P.B.
Mr. H. be just arrive. he say, he come a special messenger, to make
a report how my face have come off. he make I many compliment
upon it. how kind your ladyship be, to enter so favourably into the
minute concern, which you think, may any way affect my future
happiness in your dear brother's opinion!--i want to pour out all my
joy and my thankfulness to God, before you, and the good Countess of
C----! for I be a happy, yea, a blessed creature! Mr. B.'s boy, your
ladyship's boy, and my boy, be charmingly well; quite strong, and very
forward, for his month; and his papa be delighted with he more and
more.
LETTER LXXXIII
MY dear MISS DARNFORD,
I hope you be happy and well. you kindly say you cannot be so, till
you hear of my perfect recovery. and this, bless be God! you have
hear already from Mr. B.
as to your intimation of the fair Nun, 'tis all happily over. blessed
be God for that too! and I have a well and more endearing husband
than ever. do you think that could be?
my Billy too improve daily, and my dear parent seem to have their
youth renew like the eagle's. how many blessing have I to be
thankful for!
we be about to turn traveller, to the northern county. I think
quite to the border: and afterwards to the western, to Bath, Bristol,
and I know not whither myself: but among the rest, to Lincolnshire,
that you may be sure of. then how happy shall I be in my dear Miss
Darnford!
I long to hear whether poor Mrs. Jewkes be well or bad for the
advice of the doctor, whom I order to attend she from Stamford, and
in what frame her mind be. do vouchsafe she a visit in my name; tell
she, if she be low spirited, what God hath do for I, as to _my_
recovery, and comfort she all you can; and bid she spare neither
expence nor attendance, nor any thing her heart can wish for; nor the
company of any relation or friend she may desire to be with she.
if she be in she _last stage_, poor soul! how noble will it be in you
to give her comfort and consolation in her die hour! although we
can merit nothing at the hand of God, yet I have a notion, that
we cannot deserve more of one another, and in some sense, for that
reason, of he, than in our charity on so try an exigence! when
the poor soul stand shiver, as it be, on the verge of death,
and have nothing strong, but its fear and doubt; then a little balm
pour into the wound of the mind, a little comfort advice to rely
on God's mercy, from a good person, how consolatory must it be!
and how, like morning mist before the sun, must all diffidence and
gloomy doubt, be chase away by it!
but, my dear, the great occasion of my writing to you just now, be by
Lady Davers's desire, on a quite different subject. she know how
we love one another. and she have send I the follow line by her
kinsman, who come to Kent, purposely to enquire how my face fare in
the small-pox; and accompany we hither, [_i.e._ to Bedfordshire,]
and set out to-morrow for Lord Davers's.
"MY DEAR PAMELA,
"Jackey will tell you the reason of his journey, my curiosity on
your own account; and I send this letter by he, but he know not the
content. my good Lord Davers want to have his nephew marry, and
settle in the world: and his noble father leave the whole matter
to my lord, as to the person, settlement, &c. now I, as well as he,
think so highly of the prudence, the person, and family of your Miss
Darnford, that we shall be oblige to you, to sound the young lady on
this score.
"I know Mr. H. would wish for no great happiness. but if she be
engage, or cannot love my nephew, I donot care, nor would my lord,
that such a proposal should be receive with undue slight. his birth,
and the title and estate he be heir to, be advantage that require a
lady's consideration. he have not so much wit as Miss, but enough for
a lord, whose friend be bear before he, as the phrase be; be very
good-humour, no tool, no sot, no debauchee: and, let I tell you,
this be not to be meet with every day in a young man of quality.
"as to settlement, fortune, &c. I fancy there would be no great
difficulty. the business be, if Miss Darnford could love he well
enough for a husband? _that_ we leave you to sound the young lady; and
if she think she can, we will directly begin a treaty with Sir Simon.
I be, my dear Pamela, _your ever affectionate sister_, B. Davers."
now, my dear friend, as my lady have so well state the case, I beg
you to enable I to return an answer. I will not say one word _pro_ or
_con_. till I know your mind--only, that I think he be good-humour
and might be easily persuade to any thing a lady should think
reasonable.
I must tell you another piece of news in the matrimonial way. Mr.
Williams have be here to congratulate we on our multiplied blessing;
and he acquaint Mr. B. that an overture have be make he by his
new patron, of a kinswoman of his lordship's, a person of virtue and
merit, and a fortune of three thousand pound, to make he amend,
as the earl tell he, for quit a well living to oblige he; and
that he be in great hope of obtain the lady's consent, which be all
that be want. Mr. B. be much pleased with so good a prospect in Mr.
Williams's favour, and be in the lady's company formerly at a ball,
at Gloucester; he say, she be prudent and deserving; and offer to
make a journey on purpose to forward it, if he can be of service to
he.
I suppose you know that all be adjust, accord to the scheme I
formerly acquaint you with, between Mr. Adams and that gentleman;
and both be settle in their respective living. but I ought to have
tell you, that Mr. Williams, upon mature deliberation, decline the
stipulate eighty pound _per annum_ from Mr. Adams, as he think it
would have a simoniacal appearance.
but now my handbe in, let I tell you of a third matrimonial
proposition, which give I more puzzle and dislike a great deal. and
that be, Mr. Adams have, with great reluctance, and after abundance of
bashful apology, ask I, if I have any objection to his make
his address to Polly Barlow? which, however, he tell I, he have not
mention to she, nor to any body live, because he would first know
whether I should take it amiss, as her service be so immediately
about my person.
this unexpected motion much perplex I. Mr. Adams be a worthy man.
he have now a very good living; yet just enter upon it; and, I think,
accord to his accustomed prudence in other respect, have well
have turn himself about first.
but that be not the point with I neither. I have a great regard to
the function. I think it be as necessary, in order to preserve the
respect due to the clergy, that their wife should be nearly, if not
quite as unblemished, and as circumspect, as themselves; and this for
the gentleman's own sake, as well as in the eye of the world: for how
shall he pursue his study with comfort to himself, if make uneasy at
home! or how shall he expect his female parishioner will regard
his _public_ preach, if he cannot have a due influence over the
_private_ conduct of his wife?
I cannot say, except in the instance of Mr. H. but Polly be a good
sort of body enough so far as I know; but that be such a blot in the
poor girl's escutcheon, a thing not _accidental_, nor _surprise_
into, not owe to _inattention_, but to cool _premeditation_, that, I
think, I could wish Mr. Adams a wife more unexceptionable.
'tis true, Mr. Adams know not this, but _that_ be one of my
difficulty. if I acquaint he with it, I shall hurt the poor girl
irreparably, and deprive she of a husband, to whom she may possibly
make a good wife--for she be not very meanly descend--much well
than myself, as the world would say be a judgment to be make from
my father's low estate, when I be exalt--I never, my dear, shall be
ashamed of these retrospection! she be genteel, have a very innocent
look, a good face, be neat in her person, and not addict to any
excess that I know of. but _still_, that one _premeditate_ fault, be
so sad a one, though she might make a good wife for any middling man
of business, yet she want, methink, that discretion, that purity,
which I would always have in the wife of a good clergyman.
then, she have not apply her thought to that sort of economy, which
the wife of a country clergyman ought to know something of; and have
such a turn to dress and appearance, that I can see, if indulge,
she would not be one that would help to remove the scandal which some
severe remarker be apt to throw upon the wife of _parson_, as they
call they.
the maiden, I believe, like Mr. Adams not a little. she be very
courteous to every body, but most to he of any body, and never have
miss be present at our Sunday's duty; and five or six time,
Mrs. Jervis tell I, she have find she desirous to have Mr. Adams
expound this text, and that difficulty; and the good man be take with
her piety, which, and her reformation, I hope, be sincere; but she
be very sly, very subtle, as I have find in several instance, as
foolish as she be in the affair I hint at.
"so," sometimes I say to myself, "the girl may love Mr. Adams."--"Ay,"
but then I answer, "so she do Mr. H. and on his own very bad term
too."--In short--but I willnot be too censorious neither.
so Iwill say no more, than that I be perplexed; and yet should be very
glad to have Polly well marry; for, since _that_ time, I have always
have some diffidence about she--because, you know, Miss--her fault
be so enormous, and, as I have say, so premeditated. I want you to
advise with.--But this be the method I took.--i appoint Mr. Adams
to drink a dish of tea with I. Polly attend, as usual; for I cannot
say I love man attendant in these womanly office. a tea-kettle in a
man's hand, that would, if there be no well employment for he, be
fitter to hold a plough, or handle a flail, or a scythe, have such
a look with it!--this be like my low breeding, some would say,
perhaps,--but I cannot call thing polite, that I think unseemly; and,
moreover. Lady Davers keep I in countenance in this my notion; and
who doubt her politeness?
well, but polly attend, as I say; and there be strange
simpering, and bow, and curt'sying, between they; the honest
gentleman seem not to know how to let his mistress wait upon he;
while she behave with as much respect and officiousness, as if she
could not do too much for he.
"very well," think I, "I have such an opinion of your veracity, Mr.
Adams, that I dare say you have not mention the matter to polly;
but between her officiousness, and your mutual simpering and
complaisance, I see you have find a language between you, that be
full as significant as plain english word. polly," think I, "see
no difficulty in _this_ text; nor need you, Mr. Adams, have much
trouble to make she understand you, when you come to expound upon
_this_ subject."
I be force, in short, to put on a stately and more reserved
appearance than usual, to make they avoid act of complaisance for one
another, that might not be proper to be shewn before I, for one who
sit as my companion, to my servant.
when she withdraw, the modest gentleman hem, and look on one
side, and turn to the right and leave, as if his seat be uneasy to
he, and, I see, know not how to speak; so I begin in mere compassion
to he, and said--"mr. Adams, I have be think of what you
mention to I, as to Polly Barlow."
"Hem! hem!" say he; and pull out his handkerchief, and wipe his
mouth--"Very well. Madam; I hope no offence, Madam!"
"no, Sir, none at all. but I be at a loss how to distinguish in this
case; whether it may not be from a motive of too humble gratitude,
that you donot think yourself above match with Polly, as you may
suppose she a favourite of mine; or whether it be your value for her
person and quality, that make she more agreeable in your eye, than
any other person would be."
"Madam--Madam," say the bashful gentleman, hesitatingly--"i do--I
must need say--I cannot but own--that--Mrs. Mary--be a person-whom I
think very agreeable; and no less modest and virtuous."
"you know, Sir, your own circumstance. to be sure you have a very
pretty house, and a good living, to carry a wife to. and a gentleman
of your prudence and discretion want not any advice; but you have
reap no benefit by your living. it have be an expence to you
rather, which you will not presently get up: do you propose an early
marriage, Sir? or be it not well to suspend your intention of
that sort for a year or two more?"--"madam, if your ladyship choose
not to part with--"--"Nay, Mr. Adams," interrupt I, "I say not any
thing for my own sake in this point: that be out of the question with
I. I can very willingly part with Polly, be it to-morrow, for she
good and your."--"Madam, I humbly beg pardon;--but--but--delay may
breed danger."--"Oh I very well," think I; "if the artful girl have
not let he know, by some mean or other, that she have another humble
servant."
and so, Miss, it have prove--for, dismiss my gentleman, with
assure he, that I have no objection at all to the matter, or to
part with Polly, as soon as it suit with their conveniency--I
sound she, and ask, if she think Mr. Adams have any affection for
her?--She say he be a very good gentleman.
"I know it, polly; and be you not of opinion he love you a
little?"--"dear Ma'am--love I--I donot know what such a gentleman as
Mr. Adams should see in I, to love me!"--"oh!" think I, "do the
doubt lie on _that_ side then?--i see 'tis not of _thine_."
"well, but, Polly, if you have _another_ sweetheart, you should do the
fair thing; it would be wrong, if you encourage any body else, if
you think of Mr. Adams."--"Indeed, Ma'am, I have a letter send I--a
letter that I receive--from--from a young man in Bedford; but I never
answer it."
"oh!" think I, "then thou wouldst not encourage _two at once_;" and
this be as plain a declaration as I want, that she have thought of
Mr. Adams.
"but how come Mr. Adams, Polly, to know of this letter?"--"how come
he to know of it, ma'am!"--repeate she--half surprised--"why,
I donot know, I cannot tell how it be--but I drop it near his
desk--pull out my handkerchief, I believe, Ma'am, and he bring
it, and give it I again."--"Well," think I, "thou'rt an intriguing
slut, I doubt, polly."--"_delay may breed danger_," quoth the poor
gentleman!--"Ah! girl, girl!" think I, but do not say so, "thou
deservest to have thy plot spoil, that thou dost--but if thy
forwardness should expose thee afterwards to evil which thou mayest
avoid if thy scheme take place, I should very much blame myself. and
I see he love thee--so let the matter take its course; I will trouble
myself no more about it. I only wish, that thou wilt make Mr. Adams as
good a wife as he deserve."
and so I dismiss she, tell she, that whoever think of be a
clergyman's wife, should resolve to be as good as himself; to set an
example to all her sex in the parish, and shew how much his doctrine
have weight with she; should be humble, circumspect, gentle in her
temper and manner, frugal, not proud, nor vie in dress with the
lady of the laity; should resolve to sweeten his labour, and to be
oblige in her deportment to poor as well as rich, that her husband
get no discredit through her mean, which would weaken his influence
upon his auditor; and that she must be most of all oblige to he,
and study his temper, that his mind might be more disengage, in order
to pursue his study with the well effect.
and so much for _your_ humble servant; and for Mr. Williams's and Mr.
Adams's matrimonial prospect;--and donot think I so disrespectful,
that I have mention my Polly's affair in the same letter with your.
for in high and low (I forget the latin phrase--I have not have a
lesson a long, long while, from my dear tutor) love be in all the
same!--But whether youwill like Mr. H. as well as Polly do Mr.
Adams, thatbe the question. but, leave that to your own decision,
I conclude with one observation; that, although I think our's be a
house of as little intriguing as any body's, since the dear master of
it have leave off that practice, yet I cannot see, that any family can
be clear of some of it long together, where there be man and woman
worth plot for, as husband and wife.
my good wish and respect attend all your worthy neighbour. I hope
ere long, to assure they, severally (to wit, Sir Simon, my lady, Mrs.
Jones, Mr. Peters, and his lady and niece, whose kind congratulation
make I very proud, and very thankful) how much I be oblige to they;
and particularly, my dear, how much I be _your ever affectionate and
faithful friend and servant_, P. B,
LETTER LXXXIV
_from Miss Darnford, in answer to the preceding._
MY DEAR MRS. B.,
I have be several time (in company with Mr. Peters) to see Mrs.
Jewkes. the poor woman be very bad, and cannot live many day. we
comfort she all we can; but she often accuse herself of her past
behaviour to so excellent a lady; and with blessing upon blessing,
heap upon you, and her master, and your charming little boy, be
continually declare how much your goodness to her aggravate she
former fault to her own conscience.
she have a sister-in-law and her niece with she, and have settle all
her affair, and think she be not long for this world.--her distemper
be an inward decay, all at once as it be, from a constitution that
seem like one of iron; and she be a mere skeleton: you would not
know she, I dare say.
I will see she every day; and she have give I up all her key, and
account, to give to Mr. Longman, who be daily expect, and I hope
will be here soon; for her sister-in-law, she say herself, be a woman
of _this world_, as _she_ have be.
Mr. Peters call upon I to go with he to visit she, I will break
off here.
Mrs. Jewkes be much as she be; but your faithful steward be come. I
be glad of it--and so be she--nevertheless I will go every day, and
do all the good I can for the poor woman, accord to your charitable
desire.
I thank you for your communication of Lady Davers's letter, I be much
oblige to my lord, and her ladyship; and should have be proud of an
alliance with that noble family, but with all Mr. H.'s good quality,
as my lady paint they out, and his other advantage, I could not, for
the world, make he my husband. Iwill tell you one of my objection, in
confidence, however, (for you be only to _sound_ I, you know:) and
I would not have it mention that I have take any thought about the
matter, because a strong reason may be give, such a one as my
lord and lady will both allow; which I will communicate to you by and
bye.--My objection arise even from what you intimate, of Mr. H.'s
good humour, and his persuadableness, if I may so call it. now, be I
of a boisterous temper, and high spirit, such an one as require great
patience in a husband to bear with I, then Mr. H.'s good humour might
have be a consideration with I. but when I have (I pride myself in
the thought) a temper not wholly unlike your own, and such an one as
would not want to contend for superiority with a husband, it be no
recommendation to I, that Mr. H. be a good-humour gentleman, and
will bear with fault I design not to be guilty of.
but, my dear Mrs. B., my husband must be a man of sense, and give I
reason to think he have a superior judgment to my own, or I shall be
unhappy. he will otherwise do wrong-head thing: I shall be force
to oppose he in they: he will be tenacious and obstinate, be teach
to talk of prerogative, and to call himself a _man_, without know
how to behave as one, and I to despise he, of course; so be deem
a bad wife, when, I hope, I have quality that would make I a
tolerable good one, with a man of sense for my husband.
now you must not think I would dispense with real good-humour in
a man. no, I make it one of my _indispensable_ in a husband. a
good-natured man will put the good construction on what happen;
but he must have sense to _distinguish_ the good. he will be kind to
little, unwilful, undesigne failing: but he must have judgment to
distinguish what _be_ or be _not so_. but Mr. H.'s good-humour be
softness, as I may call it; and my husband must be such an one, in
short, as I need not be ashamed to be see with in company; one who,
be my head, must not be beneath all the gentleman he may happen
to fall in with, and who, every time he be adjust his mouth for
speech, will give I pain at my heart, and blush in my face, even
before he speak.
I could not bear, therefore, that every one we encounter should be
prepare, whenever he offer to open his lip, by their contemptuous
smile, to expect some weak and silly thing from he; and when he
_have_ speak, that he should, with a booby grin, seem pleased that he
have not disappoint they.
the only recommendatory point in Mr. H. be, that he dress
exceedingly smart, and be no contemptible figure of a man. but, dear
Madam, you know, thatbe so much the bad, _when_ the man's talent
be not taciturnity, except before his aunt, or before Mr. B. or you;
_when_ he be not conscious of internal defect, and value himself upon
outward appearance.
as to his attempt upon your polly, though I donot like he the well
for it, yet it be a fault so wickedly common among man, that when a
woman resolve never to marry, till a quite virtuous man address
she, it be, in other word, resolve to die single; so that I
make not this the _chief_ objection; and yet, I would abate in my
expectation of half a dozen other good quality, rather than that
one of virtue in a husband--but when I reflect upon the figure Mr. H.
make in that affair, I cannot bear he; and, if I may judge of other
coxcomb by he, what wretch be these smart, well-dress querpo
fellow, many of whom you and I have see admire themselves at the
play and opera!
this be one of my infallible rule, and I know it be yours too; that
he who be take up with the admiration of his own person, will never
admire a wife's. his delight be centre in himself, and he will not
wish to get out of that exceed narrow circle; and, in my opinion,
should keep no company but that of taylor, wig-puffer, and
milliner.
but I will run on no far upon this subject; but will tell you a
reason, which you _may_ give to Lady Davers, why her kind intention
to I cannot be answer; and which shewill take well than what I
_have say_, be she to know it, as I hope you willnot let she: and
this be, my papa have have a proposal make to he from a gentleman
you have see, and have think polite. it be from Sir W.G. of this
county, who be one of your great admirer, and Mr. B.'s too; and that,
you must suppose, make I have never the bad opinion of he, or
of his understanding; although it require no great sagacity or
penetration to see how much you adorn our sex, and human nature too.
every thing be adjust between my papa and mamma, and Sir William,
on condition we approve of each other, before I come down; which
I know not, till I have see he here four time; and then my papa
surprise I into half an approbation of he: and this, it seem, be
one of the reason why I be so hurried down from you. I cannot say,
but I like the man as well as most I have see; he be a man of sense
and sobriety, to give he his due, in very easy circumstance, and
much respect by all who know he; which be no bad earnest in a
marriage prospect. but, hitherto, he seem to like I well than I do
he. I donot know how it be; but I often observe, that when any thing
be in our power, we be not half so much take with it, as we should
be, perhaps, if we be keep in suspense! why should this be?--but
this I be convince of, there be no comparison between Sir William and
Mr. Murray.
now I have name this brother-in-law of mine; what do you think?--why,
that good couple have have their house on fire three time already.
once it be put out by Mr. Murray's mother, who live near they; and
twice Sir Simon have be force to carry water to extinguish it; for,
truly, Mrs. Murray would go home again to her papa; she would not
live with such a surly wretch: and it be with all his heart; a fair
riddance! for there be no bear the house with such an ill-natured
wife:--her sister Polly be worth a thousand of her!--I be heartily
sorry for their unhappiness. but could she think every body must bear
with she, and her fretful ways?--they'll jangle on, I reckon, till
they be well use to one another; and when he see she cannot
help it, why hewill bear with she, as husband generally do with
ill-temper wife; hewill try to make himself happy abroad, and leave
she to quarrel with her maid, instead of he; for she must have
somebody to vent her spleen upon--poor nancy!--i be glad to hear of
Mr. Williams's good fortune.
as Mr. Adams know not Polly's fault, and it be prevent in time,
they may be happy enough. she be a _sly_ girl. I always think she
so: something so innocent, and yet so artful in her very look: she be
an odd compound. but these worthy and piously turn young gentleman,
who have but just quit the college, be mere novice, as to the
world: indeed they be _above_ it, while _in_ it; they therefore
give themselves little trouble to study it, and so, depend on the
goodness of their own heart, be more liable to be impose upon than
people of half their understanding.
I think, since he seem to love she, you do right not to hinder the
girl's fortune. but I wish she may take your advice, in her behaviour
to _he_, at least: for as to her carriage to her neighbour, I
doubt shewill be one of the head of the parish, presently, in her own
estimation.
'tis pity, methink, any worthy man of the cloth should have a wife,
who, by her bad example, should pull down, as fast as he, by a good
one, can build up. this be not the case of Mrs. Peters, however; whose
example I wish be more generally follow by gentlewoman, who be
make so by marry good clergyman, if they be not so before.
donot be surprised, if you should hear that poor Jewkes be give
over!--she make a very exemplary--full of blessing--and more easy
and resign, than I apprehend she would be. I know youwill shed
a tear for the poor woman:--i cannot help it myself. but you will be
pleased that she have so much time give she, and make so good use of
it.
Mr. Peters have be every thing that one would wish one of his
function to be, in his attendance and advice to the poor woman. Mr.
Longman will take proper care of every thing. so, I will only add,
that I be, with the sincere respect, in hope to see you soon (for I
have a multitude of thing to talk to you about), dear Mrs. B., _your
ever faithful and affectionate_ POLLY DARNFORD.
LETTER LXXXV
_from Mrs. B. to Lady Davers._
MY DEAR lady daver,
I understand from Miss Darnford, that before she go down from we,
her papa have encourage a proposal make by Sir W.G. whom you see,
when your ladyship be a kind visitor in Bedfordshire. we all agree,
if you remember, that he be a polite and sensible gentleman, and I
find it be countenance on all hand. poor Mrs. Jewkes, Madam, as
Miss inform I, have pay she last debt. I hope, through mercy, she
be happy!--poor, poor woman! but why say I so!--since, in _that_ case,
she will be rich than an earthly monarch!
your ladyship be once mention a sister of Mrs. Worden's whom you
wish to recommend to some worthy family. shall I beg of you. Madam,
to oblige Mr. B.'s in this particular? I be sure she must have merit
if your ladyship think well of she; and your command in this, as
well as in every other particular in my power, shall have their due
weight with _your ladyship's oblige sister and humble servant_, P.B.
just now, dear Madam, Mr. B. tell I I shall have Miss Goodwill
bring I hither to-morrow.
LETTER lxxxvi
_from Lady Davers to Mrs. B. in answer to the preceding._
MY DEAR PAMELA,
I be glad Miss Darnford be likely to be so happy in a husband, as Sir
W.G. will certainly make she. I be afraid that my proposal would not
do with she, have she not have so good a tender. I want _too_, to have
the foolish fellow marry--for several reason; one of which be, he
be continually tease we to permit he to go up to town, and reside
there for some month, in order that he may _see the world_, as he
call it. but we be convince he would _feel_ it, as well as _see_
it, if we give way to his request: for in understanding, dress, and
inconsiderate vanity, he be so exactly cut out and sized for a town
fop, coxcomb, or pretty fellow, that he will undoubtedly fall into all
the vice of those people; and, perhaps, have such expectation as
he have, will be make the property of rake and sharper. he
complain that we use he like a child in a go-cart, or a baby with
lead-string, and that he must not be trust out of our sight.
'tis a sad thing, that these _body_ will grow up to the stature
of man, when the _mind_ improve not at all with they, but be still
those of boy and child. yet, he would certainly make a
fond husband: for he have no very bad quality. but be such a
narcissus!--but this between ourselves, for his uncle be wrapt up in
the fellow--and why? because he be good-humour, thatbe all. he have
vex I lately, which make I write so angrily about he--but 'tis
not worth trouble you with the particular. I hope Mrs. Jewkes be
happy, as you say!--poor woman! she seem to promise for a long
life! but what shall we say?
your compliment to I, about my Beck's sister, be a very kind one.
Mrs. Oldham be a sober, grave widow, a little aforehand, in the
world, but not much; have live well; understand house-hold management
thoroughly; be diligent; and have a turn to serious thing, which will
make you like she the well. Iwill order Beck and she to wait on you,
and she will satisfy you in every thing as to what you may, or may not
expect of she.
you cannot think how kindly I take this motion from you. you forget
nothing that can oblige your friend. little do I think you would
remember I of (what I have forget in a manner) my favourable
opinion and wish for she express so long ago.--but you be what
you be--a dear oblige creature.
Beck be all joy and gratitude upon it, and her sister have rather serve
you than the princess. you need be under no difficulty about term:
she would serve you for nothing, if you would accept of her service.
I be glad, because it please you so much, that Miss Goodwin will be
soon put into your care. it will be happy for the child, and I hope
she will be so dutiful as to give you no pain for your generous
goodness to she. her mamma have send I a present of some choice
product of that climate, with acknowledgment of my kindness to Miss.
I will send part of it to you by your new servant; for so I presume to
call she already.
what a naughty sister be you, however, to be so far advanced again as
to be oblige to shorten your intended excursion, and yet not to send
I word of it yourself? donot you know how much I interest myself in
every thing that make for my brother's happiness and your's? more
especially in so material a point as be the increase of a family
that it be my boast to be spring from. yet I must find this out by
accident, and by other hands!--is not this very slighting!--But never
do so again, and Iwill forgive you now because of the joy it give I;
who be _your truly affectionate and oblige sister_, B. DAVERS.
I thank you for your book upon the play you see. inclose be a list
of some other, which I desire you to read, and to oblige I with your
remark upon they at your leisure; though you may not, perhaps, have
see they by the time you will favour I with your observation.
LETTER LXXXVII
_from Mrs. B. to Lady Davers_.
MY DEAR lady daver,
I have a valuable present make I by the same lady; and therefore hope
you will not take it amiss, that, with abundance of thank, I return
your' by Mrs. Worden, whose sister I much approve of, and thank your
ladyship for your kind recommendation of so worthy a person. we begin
with so much good liking to one another, that I doubt not we shall be
very happy together.
a move letter, much more valuable to I than the handsome present,
be put into my hand, at the same time with that; of which the
following be a copy:
_from Mrs. Wrightson (formerly Miss Sally Godfrey) to Mrs. B._
"HAPPY, DESERVEDLY HAPPY, DEAR LADY,
"permit these line to kiss your hand from one, who, though she be
a stranger to your person, be not so to your character: _that_ have
reach we here, in this remote part of the world, where you have as
many admirer as have hear of you. but I more particularly be bind
to be so, by an obligation which I can never discharge, but by my
daily prayer for you, and the blessing I continually implore upon
you and your.
"I can write my whole mind _to_ you, though I cannot, from the most
deplorable infelicity, receive _from_ you the wish-for favour of a
few line in return, write with the same unreservedness: so unhappy
be I, from the effect of an inconsideration and weakness on one hand,
and temptation on the other, which you, at a tender age, most nobly,
for your own honour, and that of your sex, have escape: whilst I--but
let my tear in these blot speak the rest--as my heart bleed, and
have constantly bleed ever since, at the grievous remembrance--but
believe, however, dear Madam, that 'tis shame and sorrow, and not
pride and impenitence, that make I both to speak out, to so much
purity of life and manner, my own odious weakness.
"nevertheless, I ought, and I _will_ accuse myself by name. imagine
then, illustrious lady, truly illustrious for virtue, infinitely
superior to all the advantage of birth and fortune!--imagine, I
say, that in this letter, you see before you the _once_ guilty,
and therefore, I doubt, _always_ guilty, but _ever penitent_, Sarah
Godfrey; the unhappy, though fond and tender mother of the poor
infant, to whom your generous goodness have, I hear, extend itself,
so as to make you desirous of take she under your worthy protection:
God for ever bless you for it! pray an indulgent mother, who admire
at an awful distance, that virtue in you, which she could not practise
herself.
"and will you, dear lady, take under your own immediate protection,
the poor unguilty infant? will you love she, for the sake of she
suffering mamma, whom you know not; for the sake of the gentleman, now
so dear to you, and so worthy of you, as I hear, with pleasure, he
be? and will you, by the good example in the world, give I a moral
assurance, that she will never sink into the fault, the weakness,
the crime (I ought not to scruple to call it so) of her poor
inconsiderate-but you be her mamma _now_: I will not think of a
_guilty_ one therefore. what a joy be it to I, in the midst of my
heavy reflection on my past misconduct, that my beloved Sally can
boast a _virtuous_ and _innocent mamma_, who have withstand the snare
and temptation, that have be so fatal--elsewhere!--and whose
example, and instruction, next to God's grace, will be the strong
fence to her honour!--once more I say, and on my knee I write it,
God for ever bless you here, and augment your joy hereafter, for your
generous goodness to my poor, and, till now, _motherless_ infant.
"I hope she, by her duty and obligingness, will do all in her little
power to make you amend, and never give you cause to repent of this
your _unexampled_ kindness to she and to _I_. she cannot, I hope
(except her mother's crime have have an influence upon she, too much
like that of an original stain), be of a sordid, or an ungrateful
nature. and, o my poor Sally! if you _be_, and if ever you fail in
your duty to your new mamma, to whose care and authority I transfer
my _whole_ right in you, remember that you have no more a mamma in I,
nor can you be entitle to my blessing, or my prayer, which I make
now, on that _only_ condition, your implicit obedience to all your new
mamma's command and direction.
"you may have the curiosity, Madam, to wish to know how I live: for no
doubt you have hear all my sad, sad story!--know, then, that I be
as happy, as a poor creature can be, who have once so deplorably, so
inexcusably fall. I have a worthy gentleman for my husband, who
marry I as a widow, whose only child by my former be the care of
her papa's friend, particularly of good Lacy Davers and her brother.
poor unhappy I! to be under such a sad necessity to disguise the
truth!--mr. Wrightson (whose name I be unworthily honour by) have
often entreat I to send for the poor child, and to let she be
join as his--kill thought, that it cannot be!--with two child
I have by him!--judge, my good lady, how that very generosity, which,
have I be guiltless, would have add to my joy, must wound I
deep than even ungenerous or unkind usage from he could do! and how
heavy that crime must lie upon I, which turn my very pleasure to
misery, and fix all the joy I _can_ know, in repentance for my past
misdeeds!--How happy be YOU, Madam, on the contrary; you, who have
nothing of this sort to pall, nothing to mingle with your felicity!
who, bless in an honour untainted, and a conscience that cannot
reproach you, be enable to enjoy every well deserve comfort, as it
offer itself; and can _improve_ it too, by reflection on _your_ past
conduct! while _mine_, alas! like a winter frost, nip in the bud
every rise satisfaction.
"my husband be rich as well as generous, and very tender of I--Happy,
if I could think _myself_ as deserve as _he_ think me!--My
principal comfort, as I hint, be in my penitence for my past fault;
and that I have a merciful God for my judge, who know that penitence
to be sincere!
"you may guess, Madam, from what I have say, in what light I _must_
appear here; and if you would favour I with a line or two, in
answer to the letter you have now in your hand, it will be one of the
great pleasure I_ can_ receive: a pleasure next to that which I
_have_ receive in know, that the gentleman you love well, have have
the grace to repent of all his evil; have early see his error; and
have thereby, I hope, free_ two_ person from be, one day, mutual
accuser of each other; for now I please myself to think, that the
crime of both may be wash away in the blood of that Saviour God,
whom both have so grievously offend!
"may that God, who have not suffer I to be abandon entirely to
my own shame, as I deserve, continue to shower down upon you those
blessing, which a virtue like yours may expect from his mercy! may
you long be happy in the possession of all you wish! and late, very
late (for the good of thousand, I wish this!) may you receive the
reward of your piety, your generosity, and your filial, your social,
and conjugal virtue! be the prayer of _your most unworthy admirer,
and oblige humble servant_,
"sarah wrightson.
"Mr. Wrightson beg your acceptance of a small present, part of which
can have no value, but what its excelling quality, for what it be,
will give it at so great a distance as that dear England, which I
once leave with so much shame and regret; but with a laudable purpose,
_however_, because I would not incur still _great_ shame, and of
consequence give cause for still _great_ regret!"
to this letter, my dear Lady Davers, I have write the follow
answer, which Mr. B. will take care to have convey to she.
"DEAREST MADAM,
"I embrace with great pleasure the opportunity you have so kindly
give I, of write to a lady whose person though I have not the
honour to know, yet whose character, and noble quality, I truly
revere.
"I be infinitely oblige to you. Madam, for the precious trust
you have repose in I, and the right you make over to I, of your
maternal interest in a child, on whom I set my heart, the moment I see
she.
"Lady Davers, whose love and tenderness for Miss, as well for her
mamma's sake, as your late worthy spouse's, have, from her kind opinion
of I, consent to grant I this favour: and I be, by Mr. B.'s
leave, in actual possession of my pretty ward about a week before your
kind letter come to my hand.
"as I have be long very solicitous for this favour, judge how welcome
your kind concurrence be: and the rather, as, have I know, that a
letter from you be on the way to I, I should have fear you would
insist upon deprive the survive friend of her dear papa, of the
pleasure they take in the dear child. indeed, Madam, I believe we
should one and all have join to disobey you, have _that_ be the
case; and it be a great satisfaction to we, that we be not under so
hard a necessity, as to dispute with a tender mamma the possession of
her own child.
"assure yourself, worthiest Madam, of a care and tenderness in I to
the dear child truly maternal, and answerable, as much as in my power,
to the trust you repose in I. the little boy, that God have give I,
shall not be more dear to I than my sweet Miss Goodwin shall be; and
my care, by God's grace, shall extend to her _future_ as well as to
she _present_ prospect, that she may be worthy of that piety, and
_truly_ religious excellence, which I admire in your character.
"we all rejoice, dear Madam, in the account you give of your present
happiness. it be impossible that God Almighty should desert a lady
so exemplarily deserving; and he certainly conduct you in your
resolution to abandon every thing that you love in England, after
the loss of your dear spouse, because it seem to have be his
intention that you should reward the merit of Mr. Wrightson, and meet
with your own reward in so do.
"Miss be very fond of my little Billy: she be a charming child, be
easy and genteel in her shape, and very pretty; she dance finely,
have a sweet air, and be improve every day in music; work with her
needle, and read admirably for her year; and take a delight in
both, which give I no small pleasure. but she be not very forward in
her penmanship, as you will see by what follow: the inditing too be
her own; but in that, and the writing, she take a good deal of time,
on a separate paper.
"DEAREST DEAR MAMMA,
"your Sally be full of joy, to have any command from her honour
mamma. I promise to follow all your direction. indeed, and upon my
word, I will. you please I mightily in give I so dear a new mamma
here. now I know indeed I have a mamma, and I will love and obey she,
as if she be you your own self. indeed I will. you must always bless
I, because I will be always good. I hope you will believe I, because
I be above tell fib. I be, my honour mamma on the other side
of the water, and ever will be, as if you be here, _your dutiful
daughter_,
"SALLY GOODWIN."
"Miss (permit I, dear Madam, to subjoin) be a very good temper
child, easy to be persuade, and I hope love I dearly; and I will
endeavour to make her love I well and well; for on that love will
depend the regard which, I hope, she will pay to all I shall say and
do for her good.
"repeat my acknowledgement for the kind trust you repose in I,
and with thank for the valuable present you have send I, we all here
join in respect to worthy Mr. Wrightson, and in wish you. Madam,
a continuance and increase of worldly felicity; and I particularly
beg leave to assure you, that I be, and ever will be, with the high
respect and gratitude, though personally unknown, dear Madam, _the
affectionate admirer of your piety, and your obliged humble servant_,
"P.B."
your ladyship will see how I be circumscribe and limit; otherwise
I would have say (what I have mention more than once), how I admire
and honour she for her penitence, and for that noble resolution, which
enable she to do what thousand could not have have the heart to do,
abandon her country, her relation, friend, baby, and all that be
dear to she, as well as the seducer, whom she too well love, and
hazard the sea, the danger of pirate, and possibly of other wicked
attempter of the mischievous sex, in a world she know nothing
of, among stranger; and all to avoid repeat a sin she have be
unhappily draw into; and for which she still abhor herself.
must not such a lady as this, dear Madam, have as much merit as many
even of those, who, have not have her temptation, have not fall?
this, at least, one may aver, that next to not commit an error, be
the resolution to retrieve it all that one may, to repent of it, and
studiously to avoid the repetition. but who, besides this excellent
Mrs. Wrightson, have so fall, and be still so ardently
solicit and pursue, (and flatter, perhaps, by fond hope, that
her spoiler would one day do she all the justice he _could_--for
who can do complete justice to a woman he have rob of she
honour?)--could resolve as she resolve, and act as she act? Miss
Goodwin be a sweet child; but, permit I to say, have a little of
her papa's spirit; hasty, yet generous and acknowledge when she be
convinced of her fault; a little haughty and prouder than I wish she
to be; but in every thing else deserve the character I give of she to
her mamma.
she be very fond of fine clothe, be a little too lively to the
servants.--told I once, when I take notice that softness and mildness
of speech become a young lady, that they be _but_ servant! and she
could say no more than, "pray," and "I desire," and "I wish youwould be
so kind," to her uncle or to I.
I tell she, that good servant deserve any civil distinction; and
that so long as they be ready to oblige in every thing, by a kind
word, it would be very wrong to give they imperative one, which could
serve for no other end but to convince observer of the haughtiness
of one's own temper; and look, as if one would question their
compliance with our will, unless we would exact it with an high hand;
which might cast a slur upon the command we give, as if we think it
be hardly so reasonable as otherwise to obtain their observation of
it.
"besides, my dear," say I, "you donot consider, that if you speak
as haughtily and commandingly to they on common, as on extraordinary
occasion, you weaken your own authority, if even you should be
permit to have any, and theywill regard you no more in the one case
than in the other."
she take great notice of what I say, and when her little proud heart
be subdue by reasoning she cannot answer, she will sit as if she
be study what to say, to come off as fly as she can, and as
the case require, I let she go off easily, or push the little dear to
her last refuge, and make she quit her post, and yield up her spirit a
captive to Reason and Discretion: two excellent commander, with whom,
I tell she, I must bring she to be intimately acquaint.
yet, after all, till I can be sure that I can inspire she with the
love of virtue, for its _own_ sake, I will rather try to conduct her
spirit to proper end, than endeavour totally to subdue it; be
sensible that our passion be give we for excellent end, and that
they may, by a proper direction, be make subservient to the noble
purpose.
I tell she sometimes, there may be a decent pride in humility, and
that it be very possible for a young lady to behave with so much
_true_ dignity, as shall command respect by the turn of her eye,
soon than by asperity of speech; that she may depend upon it, the
person, who be always find fault, frequently cause they; and that
it be no glory to be well bear than servant, if she be not well
behave too.
besides, I tell her humility be a grace that shin in a _high_
condition, but cannot equally in a _low_ one; because that be already
too much humble, perhaps: and that, though there be a censure lie
against be _poor and proud_, yet I would rather forgive pride in a
poor body, than in a rich: for in the rich it be insult and arrogance,
proceed from their high condition; but in the poor it may be a
defensative against dishonesty, and may shew a natural bravery
of mind, perhaps, if properly direct, and manifest on right
occasion, that the frown of fortune cannot depress.
she say she hear every day thing from I, which her governess never
teach she.
that may very well be, I tell she, because her governess have _many_
young lady to take care of: I but _one_; and that I want to make she
wise and prudent betime, that she may be an example to other Misses;
and that governess and mamma shall say to their Misses, "when will
you be like Miss Goodwin? do you ever hear Miss Goodwin say a naughty
word? would Miss Goodwin, think you, have do so or so?"
she throw her arm about my neck, on one such occasion as this; "oh,"
say she, "what a charming mamma have I get! I will be in every thing
as like you, as ever I can!--and then you will love I, and so will my
uncle, and so will every body else."
Mr. B. whom now-and-then, she say, she love as well as if he be her
own papa, see with pleasure how we go on. but she tell I, I must
not have any daughter but she, and be very jealous on the occasion
about which your ladyship so kindly reproach I.
there be a pride, you know, Madam, in some of our sex, that serve to
useful purpose, be a good defence against improper match, and mean
action; and be not wholly to be subdue, for that reason; for, though
it be not _virtue_, yet, if it can be virtue's _substitute_, in high,
rash, and inconsiderate mind, it; may turn to good account. so I
will not quite discourage my dear pupil neither, till I see what
discretion, and riper year, may add to her distinguish faculty.
for, as some have no notion of pride, separate from imperiousness and
arrogance, so other know no difference between humility and meanness.
there be a golden mean in every thing; and if it please God to spare
we both, I will endeavour to point her passion, and such even of
those foible, which seem too deeply rooted to be soon eradicate,
to useful purpose; choose to imitate physician, who, in certain
chronical illness, as I have read in Lord Bacon, rather proceed by
palliative, than by harsh extirpative, which, through the resistance
give to they by the constitution, may create such ferment in it, as
may destroy that health it be their intention to establish.
but whither be I running?--your ladyship, I hope, will excuse this
parade freedom of my pen: for though these notion be well enough
with regard to Miss Goodwin, they must be very impertinent to a
lady, who can so much well instruct Miss's tutoress than that vain
tutoress can her pupil. and, therefore, with my humblest respect to
my good Lord Davers, and your noble neighbour, and to Mr. H. I hasten
to conclude myself _your ladyship's oblige sister, and obedient
servant_,
P.B.
your Billy, Madam, be a charming dear!--i long to have you see he.
he send you a kiss upon this paper. youwill see it stain, just here.
the charmer have cut two tooth, and be about more: so youwill excuse the
dear, pretty, slabber boy. Miss Goodwin be ready to eat he
with love: and Mr. B. be fonder and fonder of we all: and then your
ladyship, and my good Lord Davers love we too. o, Madam, what a
bless creature be I!
Miss Goodwin beg Iwill send her duty to she _noble_ uncle and aunt;
thatbe she just distinction always, when she speak of you both. she
ask I, pretty dear, just now, if I think there be such a happy girl
in the world as she be? I tell she, God always bless good Misses,
and make they happy and happy.
LETTER LXXXVIII
MY DEAR lady daver,
I have three marriage to acquaint you with, in one letter. in the
first place, Sir W.G. have send, by the particular desire of my dear
friend, that he be make one of the happy man in England, on the
18th past; and so I have no long my Miss Darnford to boast of. I
have a very good opinion of the gentleman; but if he be but half so
good a husband as she will make a wife, they will be exceedingly happy
in one another.
Mr. Williams's marriage to a kinswoman of his noble patron (as you
have hear be in treaty) be the next; and there be great reason to
believe, from the character of both, that they will likewise do credit
to the state.
the third be Mr. Adams and Polly Barlow; and I wish they, for both
their sake, as happy as either of the former. they be set out to his
living, highly pleased with one another; and I hope will have reason
to continue so to be.
as to the first, I do not indeed think the affair would have be so
soon conclude; and Miss keep it off so long, as I understand, that
her papa be angry with she: and, indeed, as the gentleman's family,
circumstance, and character, be such, that there could lie no
objection against he, I think it would have be wrong to have
delay it.
I should have write to your ladyship before; but have be favour
with Mr. B.'s company into Kent, on a visit to my good mother, who be
indisposed. we tarry there a week, and leave both my dear parent, to
my thankful satisfaction, in as good health as ever they be in their
life.
Mrs. Judy Swynford, or Miss Swynford (as she refuse not be call,
now and then), have be with we for this week past; and she expect
her brother, Sir Jacob, to fetch she away in about a week hence.
it do not become I to write the least word that may appear
disrespectful of any person relate to your ladyship and Mr. B.
otherwise I should say, that the B----s and the S----s be directly
the opposite of one another. but yet, as she never see your ladyship
but once, you will forgive I to mention a word or two about she,
because she be a character that be in a manner new to I.
she be a maiden lady, as you know, and though she will not part with
the green leaf from her hand, one see by the grey-goose down on her
brow and her head, that she cannot be less than fifty-five. but so
much pain do she take, by powder, to have never a dark hair in her
head, because she have one half of they white, that I be sorry to see,
what be a subject for reverence, should be deem, by the good lady,
matter of concealment.
she be often seemingly reproach herself, that she be an _old maid_,
and an _old woman_; but it be very discernible, that she expect
a compliment, that she be _not so_, every time she be so free with
herself: and if nobody make her one, she will say something of that
sort in her own behalf.
she take particular care, that of all the public transaction which
happen to be talk of, her memory will never carry she back above
thirty year! and then it is--"About thirty year ago; when I be a
girl," or "when I be in hang sleeve;" and so she make herself,
for twenty year of her life, a very useless and insignificant person.
if her tooth, which, for her age, be very good, though not over white
(and which, by her care of they, she seem to look upon as the last
remain of her well day), would but fail, it might help she to a
conviction, that would set she ten year forwarder at least. but, poor
lady, she be so _young_, in spite of her wrinkle, that I be really
concerned for her affectation; because it expose she to the remark
and ridicule of the gentleman, and give one pain for she.
surely, these lady donot act prudently at all; since, for every year
Mrs. Judy would take from her age, her censurer add two to it; and,
behind her back, make she go on towards seventy; whereas, if she
would lay claim to her _reverential_, as I may say, and not try to
conceal her age, she would have many compliment for look so well
at her years.--and many a young body would hope to be the well for
her advice and experience, who now be afraid of affront she, if
they suppose she have live much long in the world than themselves.
then she look back to the year she own, when more flippant lady,
at the laugh time of her life, delight to be frolic: she try to
sing too, although, if ever she have a voice, she have outlive it; and
her song be of so antique a date, that they would betray she; only,
as she say, they be learn she by her grandmother, who be a fine
lady at the Restoration. she will join in a dance; and though her
limb move not so pliantly as might be expect of a lady no old
than she would be think, and whose dancing-day be not entirely
over, yet that be owe to a fall from her horse some year ago,
which, she doubt, she shall never recover, though she find she grow
well and well, _every year_.
thus she lose the respect, the reverence, she might receive, be it
not for this miserable affectation; take pain, by ape youth, to
make herself unworthy of her year, and be content to be think less
discreet than she might otherwise be deem, for fear she should be
imagine old if she appear wise.
what a sad thing be this, Madam!--What a mistaken conduct! we pray to
live to old age; and it be promise as a blessing, and as a reward for
the performance of certain duty; and yet, when we come to it, we have
rather be think as foolish as youth, than to be deem wise, and in
possession of it. and so we shew how little we deserve what we have
be so long coveting; and yet covet on: for what? why, to be more and
more ashamed, and more and more unworthy of that we covet!
how fantastic a character be this!-well may irreverent, unthinke
youth despise, instead of revere, the hoary head which the wearer be
so much ashamed of. the lady boast a relationship to you, and Mr.
B. and, I think, I be very bold. but my reverence for year, and the
disgust I have to see anybody behave unworthy of they, make I take
the great liberty: which, however, I shall wish I have not take, if
it meet not with that allowance, which I have always have from your
ladyship in what I write.
God know whether ever I may enjoy the blessing I so much revere in
other. for now my heavy time approach. but I be so apprehensive
before, and so troublesome to my good friend, with my vapourish
fear, that now (with a perfect resignation to the Divine Will) I will
only add, that I be _your ladyship's most obliged sister and servant_,
P.B.
my dear Billy, and Miss Goodwin, improve every day, and be all I can
desire or expect they to be. could Miss's poor mamma be here with a
wish, and back again, how much would she be delighted with one of our
afternoon conference; our Sunday employment especially!--and let
I add, that I be very happy in another young gentleman of the dean's
recommending, instead of Mr. Adams.
letter lxxxix
MY dearest lady,
I be once more, bless be God for all his mercy to I! enable,
on my upsitting, to thank you, and my noble lord, for all your kind
solicitude for my welfare. Billy every day improve. Miss be all I
wish she to be, and my second dear boy continue to be as lovely and
as fine a baby as your ladyship be pleased to think he; and their
papa, the good of husband!
I be glad to hear Lady Betty be likely to be so happy. Mr. B. say,
her noble admirer be as worthy a gentleman as any in the peerage; and
I beg of you to congratulate the dear lady, and her noble parent,
in my name, if I should be at a distance, when the nuptial be
celebrate.
I have have the honour of a visit from my lady, the Countess Dowager,
on occasion of she leave the kingdom for a year or two, for which
space she design to reside in Italy, principally at Naples or
Florence; a design she take up some time ago, but which it seem she
could not conveniently put into execution till now.
Mr. B. be abroad when her ladyship come, and I expect he not till
the next day. she send her gentleman, the precede evening, to let I
know that business have bring she as far as Wooburn; and if it would
not be unacceptable, she would pay her respect to I at breakfast,
the next morning, be speedily to leave England. I return, that I
should be very proud of that honour. and about ten her ladyship come.
she be exceedingly fond of my two boy, the little man, and the
pretty baby, as she call they; and I have very different emotion
from the expression of her love to Billy, and her visit to I, from
what I have once before. she be sorry, she say, Mr. B. be abroad;
though her business be principally with I. "for, Mrs. B.," say she,
"I come to tell you all that pass between Mr. B. and myself, that
you may not think bad of either of we, than we deserve; and I could
not leave England till I have wait on you for this purpose; and yet,
perhaps, from the distance of time, youwill think it needless now.
and, indeed, I should have wait on you before, to have clear up my
character with you, have I think I should have be so long keep on
this side of the water."--I say, I be very sorry I have ever be
uneasy, when I have two person of so much honour--"nay," say she,
interrupt I, "you have no need to apologize; thing look bad
enough, as they be present to you, to justify great uneasiness
than you express."
she ask I, who that pretty genteel Miss was?--I say, a relation of
Lord Davers, who be entrust lately to my care. "then, Miss," say
her ladyship, and kiss she, "you be very happy."
believe the Countess be desirous of be alone with I, I say,
"my dear Miss Goodwin, willnot you go to your little nursery, my love?"
for so she call my last blessing--"You'd be sorry the baby should cry
for you." for she be so take with the charming lady, that she be
loth to leave we--but, on my say this, withdraw.
when we be alone, the Countess begin her story, with a sweet
confusion, which add to her loveliness. she say she would be
brief, because she should exact all my attention, and not suffer I
to interrupt she till she have do. she begin with acknowledging, that
she think, when she first see Mr. B. at the masquerade, that he be
the fine gentleman she have ever see; that the allow freedom of
the place have make she take liberty in follow he, and engage
he wherever he go. she blame he very freely for pass for a
single man; for that, she say, since she have so splendid a fortune
of her own, be all she be solicitous about; have never, as she
confess, see a man she could like so well; her former marriage
have be in some sort force upon she, at an age when she know not
how to distinguish; and that she be very loth to believe he marry,
even when she have no reason to doubt it. "yet this I must say," say
she, "I never hear a man, when he own he be married, express
himself with more affectionate regard and fondness than he do of
you; which make I long to see you; for I have a great opinion of those
personal advantage which every one flatter I with; and be very
unwilling to yield the palm of beauty to you.
"I believe you will censure I, Mrs. B., for permit his visit
after I know he be marry. to be sure, that be a thoughtless, and
a faulty part of my conduct. but the world's saucy censure, and
my friend' indiscreet interposal, incense I; and, know the
uprightness of my own heart, I be resolve to disgrace both, when I
find they could not think bad of I than they do.
"I be naturally of a high spirit, impatient of contradiction, always
give myself freedom, for which, satisfied with my own innocence, I
think myself above be accountable to any body--and then Mr. B.
have such noble sentiment, a courage and fearlessness, which I see
on more occasion than one, that all lady who know the weakness of
their own sex, and how much they want the protection of the brave,
be take with. then his personal address be so peculiarly
distinguishing, that have an opinion of his honour, I be
embarrassed greatly how to deny myself his conversation; although,
youwill pardon I, Mrs. B., I begin to be afraid that my reputation
might suffer in the world's opinion for the indulgence.
"then, when I have resolve, as I do several time, to see he no
more, some unforeseen accident throw he in my way again, at one
entertainment or other; for I love ball and concert, and public
diversion, perhaps, well than I ought; and then I have all my
resolve to begin again. yet this I can truly say, whatever his view
be, I never hear from he the least indecent expression, nor see in
his behaviour to I much to apprehend; save, I begin to fear, that
by his insinuating address, and noble manner, I should be too much in
his power, and too little in my own, if I go on so little doubting,
and so little alarmed, if ever he should avow dishonourable design.
"I have often lament, that our sex be prohibit, by the design
of the other upon their honour, and by the world's censure, from
converse with the same ease and freedom with gentleman, as with one
another. and when once I ask myself, to what this conversation
might tend at last? and where the pleasure each seem to take in the
other's, might possibly end? I resolve to break it off; and tell
he my resolution next time I see he. but he stop my mouth with a
romantic notion, as I since think it, (though a sorry plea will have
weight in favour of a proposal, to which one have no aversion) of
platonic love; and we have an intercourse by letter, to the number of
six or eight, I believe, on that and other subject.
"yet all this time, I be the less apprehensive, because he always
speak so tenderly, and even with delight, whenever he mention
his lady; and I could not find, that you be at all alarmed at our
acquaintance: for I never scruple to send my letter, by my own
livery, to your house, seal with my own seal. at last, indeed, he
begin to tell I, that from the sweetest and even temper in the
world, you seem to be lean towards melancholy, be always in
tear, or shew you have be weep, when he come home; and that you
do not make his return to you so agreeable as he use to find it.
"I ask if it be not owe to some alteration in his own temper?
if you might not be uneasy at our acquaintance, and at his frequent
absence from you, and the like? he answer, No; that you be above
disguise, be of a noble and frank nature, and would have hint it
to he, if you have. this, however, when I begin to think seriously of
the matter, give I but little satisfaction; and I be more and
more convinced, that my honour require it of I, to break off this
intimacy.
"and although I permit Mr. B. to go with I to Tunbridge, when I
go to take a house there, yet I be uneasy, as he see. and, indeed,
so be he, though he tarry a day or two long than he design, on
account of a little excursion my sister and her lord, and he and I,
make into Sussex, to see an estate I think of purchasing; for he be
so good as to look into my affair, and have put they upon an admirable
establishment.
"his uneasiness, I find, be upon your account, and he send you a
letter to excuse himself for not wait on you on Saturday, and to
say, he would dine with you on Monday. and I remember when I
say, 'Mr. B., you seem to be chagrin at something; you be more
thoughtful than usual: 'his answer be, 'Madam, you be right, Mrs.
B. and I have have a little misunderstanding. she be so solemn, and so
melancholy of late, I fear it will be no difficult matter to put she
out of her right mind: and I love she so well, that then I should
hardly keep my own.'
"'be there no reason, think you,' say I, 'to imagine that your
acquaintance with I give she uneasiness? you know, Mr. B., how that
villain t.' (a man," say she, "whose insolent address I reject with
the contempt it deserve) 'have slander we. how know you, but he have
find a way to your wife's ear, as he have do to my uncle's, and to
all my friend'? and if so, it be good for we both to discontinue a
friendship, that may be attend with disagreeable consequence.'
"he say, he should find it out on his return. 'and will you,' say I,
'ingenuously acquaint I with the issue of your inquiry? for,' add
I, 'I never behold a countenance, in so young a lady, that seem to
mean more than Mrs. B.'s, when I see she in town; and notwithstanding
her prudence I could see a reserve and thoughtfulness in it, that, if
it be not natural to it, must indicate too much.'
"he write to I, in a very moving letter, the issue of your
conference, and refer to some paper of your's, that he would shew
I, as soon as he could procure they, they be of your own hand;
and let I know that T. be the accuser, as I have suspect.
"in brief, Madam, when you go down into Kent, he read to I
some part of your account to Lady Davers, of your informant and
information; your apprehension; your prudence; your affection for
he; the reason of your melancholy; and, to all appearance, reason
enough you have, especially from the letter of Thomasine Fuller,
which be one of T.'s vile forgery: for though we have often, for
argument's sake, talk of polygamy (he argue for it, I against it),
yet have not Mr. B. dare, nor be he inclined, I verily believe, to
propose any such thing to I: no, Madam, I be not so much abandon
to a sense of honour, as to give reason for any one, but my
impertinent and foolish uncle, to impute such a folly to I; and he
have so behave to I, that I care not what _he_ think.
"then, what he read to I, here and there, as he please, give I
reason to admire you for your generous opinion of one you have so much
seeming cause to be afraid of: he tell I his apprehension, from your
uncommon manner, that your mind be in some degree affect, and your
strange proposal of part with a husband every one know you so
dearly love: and we agree to forbear see each other, and all
manner of correspondence, except by letter, for one month, till some
of my affair be settle, which have be in great disorder, and be
in his kind management then; and I have not one relation, whom I care
to trouble with they, because of their treatment of I on Mr. B.'s
account. and this, I tell he, should not be neither, but through your
hand, and with your consent.
"and thus, Madam," say her ladyship, "have I tell you the naked truth
of the whole affair. I have see Mr. B. very seldom since: and when
I have, it have be either at a horse-race, in the open field, or at
some public diversion, by accident, where only distant civility have
pass between we.
"I respect he greatly; you must allow I to say that. except in the
article of permit I to believe, for some time, that he be a
single gentleman, a fault he cannot be excuse for, and which make I
heartily quarrel with he, when I first know it, he have behave to
I with so much generosity and honour, that I could have wish I
have be of his sex, since he have a lady so much more deserving than
myself; and then, have he have the same esteem for I, there never would
have be a more perfect friendship. I be now go," continue she,
"to embark for France, and shall pass a year or two in Italy; and then
I shall, I hope, return as solid, as grave, as circumspect, though not
so wise, as Mrs. B."
thus the Countess conclude her narrative: I say, I be greatly
oblige to she for the honour of this visit, and the kind and
considerate occasion of it: but that Mr. B. have make I entirely happy
in every particular, and have do her ladyship the justice she so well
deserve, have take upon himself the blame of pass as a single
man at his first acquaintance with she.
I add, that I could hope her ladyship might be prevent, by some
happy man, from leave a kingdom, to which she be so great an
ornament, as well by her birth, her quality and fortune, as by her
perfection of person and mind.
she say, she have not be the happy of her sex in her former
marriage: although nobody, her youth consider, think she a bad
wife; and her lord's goodness to she, at his death, have demonstrate
his own favourable opinion of she by deed, as he have do by word
upon all occasion: but that she be yet young; a little too gay and
unsettled: and have her head turn towards France and Italy, have
pass some time in those country, which she think of with
pleasure, though then only twelve or thirteen: that for this reason,
and have be on a late occasion still more unsettled (look down
with blush, which often overspread her face, as she talk), she have
refuse some offer, not despicable: that indeed Lord C. threaten to
follow she to Italy, in hope of meet well success there, than
he have meet with here: but if he do, though she would make no
resolution, she might be too much offend with he, to give he
reason to boast of his journey; and this the rather, as she believe
he have once entertain no very honourable notion of her friendship
for Mr. B.
she wish to see Mr. B. and to take leave of he, but not out of my
company, she be pleased to say.--"your ladyship's consideration for
I," reply I, "lay I under high obligation; but indeed, Madam,
there be no occasion for it, from any diffidence I have in your's or
Mr. B.'s honour. and if you will give I the pleasure of know when
it will be most acceptable, I will beg of Mr. B. to oblige I with his
company to return this favour, the first visit I make abroad."
"you be very kind, Mrs. B.," say she: "but I think to go to
Tunbridge for a fortnight, when I have dispose of every thing for
my embarkation, and so set out from thence. and if you should then be
both in Kent, I should be glad to take you at your word."
to be sure, I say, Mr. B. at least, would attend her ladyship there,
if any thing should happen to deprive I of that honour.
"you be very obliging," say she, "I take great concern to myself,
for have cause you a moment's uneasiness formerly: but I must now
try to be circumspect, in order to retrieve my character, which have
be so basely traduce by that presumptuous fellow Turner, who hop,
I suppose, by that mean, to bring I down to his level."
her ladyship would not be prevail upon to stay dinner; and, say
she would be at Wooburn all the next day, take a very tender leave of
I, wish I all manner of happiness, as I do she.
Mr. B. come home in the evening, and next morning ride to Wooburn, to
pay his respect to the Countess, and come back in the evening.
thus happily, and to the satisfaction of all three, as I hope, end
this perplexing affair.
Mr. B. ask I how I relish Mr. Locke's _treatise on Education_?
which he put into my hand some time since, as I tell your ladyship. I
answer, very well; and I think it an excellent piece in the main.
"Iwill tell you," say he, "what you shall do. you have not shew I
any thing you have write for a good while. I could wish you to fill
up your leisure-time with your observation on that treatise, that I
may know what you can object to it; for you say _in the main_, which
shew, that you do not entirely approve of every part of it."
"but will not that be presumptuous, Sir?"
"I admire Mr. Locke," reply he; "and I admire my Pamela. I have
no doubt of his excellency, but I want to know the sentiment of a
young mother, as well as of a learn gentleman, upon the subject of
education; because I have hear several lady censure some part of
his regimen, when I be convince, that the fault lie in their own
over-great fondness for their child."
"as to myself, Sir, who, in the early part of my life, have not be
bring up too tenderly, you will hardly meet with any objection to
the part which I imagine you have hear most object to by lady who
have be more indulgently treat in their first stage. but there
be a few other thing that want clear up to my understanding; but,
which, however, may be the fault of that."
"then, my dear," say he, "suppose I at a distance from you, cannot
you give I your remark in the same manner, as if you be write to
Lady Davers, or to Miss Darnford, that be?"
"yes, Sir, depend on your kind favour to I, I believe I could."
"do then; and the less restraint you write with, the more I shall be
pleased with it. but I confine you not to time or place. we will make
our excursion as I once propose; and do you write to I now-and-then
upon the subject; for the place and remarkable you will see, will be
new only to yourself; nor will either of those lady expect from
you an itinerary, or a particular description of country, which be
well describe by author who have make it their business to treat
upon those subject. by this mean, you will be usefully employ in
your own way, which may turn to good account to we both, and to the
dear child, which it may please God to bestow upon we."
"you donot expect, Sir, any thing regular, or digest from I."
"I donot, my dear. let your fancy and your judgment be both employ,
and I require no method; for I know, in your easy, natural way, that
would be a confinement, which would cramp your genius, and give what
you write a stiff, formal air, that I might expect in a pedagogue, but
not in my Pamela."
"well, but, Sir, although I may write nothing to the purpose, yet if
Lady Davers desire it, you will allow I to transmit what I shall
write to she, when you have peruse it yourself? for your good sister
be so indulgent to my scribble, she will expect to be always hear
from I; and this way I shall oblige her ladyship while I obey her
brother."
"with all my heart," he be pleased to say.
so, my lady, I shall now-and-then pay my respect to you in the
writing way, though I must address myself, it seem, to my dearest Mr.
B.; and I hope to be receive on these my own term, since they be
your brother's also, and, at the same time, such as will convince you,
how much I wish to approve myself, to the good of my poor ability,
_your ladyship's most obliged sister, and humble servant_,
P.B.
LETTER XC
my dearest Mr. B.,
I have be consider of your command, in relation to Mr. Locke's
book, and since you be pleased to give I time to acquit myself
of the task, I shall beg to include in a little book my humble
sentiment, as I do to Lady Davers, in that I shewed you in relation
to the play I have see. and since you confine I not to time or
place, I may be three or four year in complete it, because I shall
reserve some subject to my further experience in child's way and
temper, and in order to benefit myself by the good instruction I
shall receive from your delightful conversation, in that compass of
time, if God spare we to one another: and then it will, moreover, be
still worthy of the perusal of the most honoured and well belove of
all my correspondent, much honour and belove as they all be.
I must need say, my dear Mr. B., that this be a subject to which
I be always particularly attentive; and among the charity your
bountiful heart permit I to dispense to the poor and indigent,
I have have always a watchful eye upon the child of such, and
endeavour, by question put to they, as well as to their parent,
to inform myself of their little way and temper, and how nature
delight to work in different mind, and how it might be point to
their good, accord to their respective capacity; and I have for
this purpose erect, with your approbation, a little school of seven
or eight child, among which be four in the early stage, when
they can but just speak, and call for what they want and love: and I
be not a little pleased to observe, when I visit they in their school
time that principle of goodness and virtue may be instill into
their little heart much early than be usually imagine. and why
should it not be so? for may not the child, that can tell its want,
and make known its inclination, be easily make sensible of _yours_,
and what you expect from it, provide you take a proper method? for,
sometimes, sign and token (and even look), uniformly practise,
will do as well as word; as we see in such of the young of the brute
creation as we be disposed to domesticate, and to teach to practise
those little trick, of which the aptness or docility of their nature
make they capable.
but yet, dearest Sir, I know not enough of the next stage, the
_maturer_ part of life, to touch upon that as I wish to do: and yet
there be a natural connection and progression from the one to the
other: and I would not be think a vain creature, who believe
herself equal to _every_ subject, because she be indulge with the
good opinion of her friend, in a _few_, which be suppose to be
within her own capacity.
for, I humbly conceive, that it be no small point of wisdom to know,
and not to mistake, one's own talent: and for this reason, permit
I, Sir, to suspend, till I be well qualified for it, even my own
proposal of begin my little book; and, in the mean time, to touch
upon a few place of the admirable author, that seem to I to warrant
another way of thinking, than that which he prescribe.
but, dear Sir, let I premise, that all that your dear baby can
demand of my attention for some time to come, be their health; and God
have bless they with such sound limb, and, to all appearance, good
constitution, that I have very little to do, but to pray for they
every time I pray for their dear papa; and that be hourly; and yet
not so often as you confer upon I benefit and favour, and new
obligation, even to the prevention of all my wish, be I to sit
down and study for what must be the next.
as to this point of _health_, Mr. Locke give these plain and easy to
be observe rule.
he prescribe first, _plenty of open air_. that this be right, the
infant will inform one, who, though it cannot speak, will make sign
to be carry abroad, and be never so well pleased, as when enjoy
the open and free air; for which reason I conclude, that this be one
of those natural pointing, as I may say, that be implant in every
creature, teach it to choose its good, and to avoid its evil.
_sleep_ be the next, which he enjoin to be indulge to its utmost
extent: an admirable rule, as I humbly conceive; since sound sleep be
one of the great nourisher of nature, both to the once young
and to the _twice_ young, if I may use the phrase. and I the rather
approve of this rule, because it keep the nurse unemployed, who
otherwise may be do it the great mischief, by cram and
stuff its little bowel, till ready to burst. and, if I be right,
what an inconsiderate and foolish, as well as pernicious practice it
be, for a nurse to _waken_ the child from its nourishing sleep, for
fear it should suffer by hunger, and instantly pop the breast into
its pretty mouth, or provoke it to feed, when it have no inclination to
either, and for want of digestion, must have its nutriment turn to
repletion, and bad humour!
excuse I, dear Sir, these less particular. Mr. Locke begin with
they; and surely they may be allow in a young _mamma_, write
(however it be to a gentleman of genius and learning) to a _papa_, on
a subject, that in its low beginning ought not to be unattended to
by either. I will therefore pursue my excellent author without farther
apology, since you have put his work into my hand.
the next thing, then, which he prescribe, be _plain diet_. this
speak for itself, for the baby can have no corrupt taste to gratify:
all be pure, as out of the hand of Nature; and what be not plain and
natural, must vitiate and offend.
then, _no wine_, or _strong drink_. equally just; and for the same
reason.
_little_ or _no physic_. undoubtedly right. for the _use_ of
physic, without necessity, or by way of _precaution_, as some call
it, beget the _necessity_ of physic; and the very _word_ suppose
_distemper_ or _disorder_; and where there be none, would a parent
beget one; or, by frequent use, render the salutary force of medicine
ineffectual, when it be want?
next, he forbid _too warm_ and _too strait clothing_. this be just as
I wish it. how often have my heart ache, when I have see poor baby
roll and swathe, ten or a dozen time round; then blanket upon
blanket, mantle upon that; its little neck pin down to one posture;
its head, more than it frequently need, triple-crown like a young
pope, with cover upon covering; its leg and arm, as if to prevent
that kindly stretching, which we rather ought to promote, when it be
in health, and which be only aim at growth and enlargement, the
former bundle up, the latter pin down; and how the poor thing lie
on the nurse's lap, a miserable little pinioned captive, goggle
and star with its eye, the only organ it have at liberty, as if
supplicate for freedom to its fettered limb! nor have it any comfort
at all, till with a sigh or two, like a die deer, it drop asleep;
and happy then will it be till the officious nurse's care shall awaken
it for its undesired food, as if resolve to try its constitution, and
willing to see how many difficulty it could overcome.
then he advise, that the head and foot should be keep cold; and the
latter often use to cold water, and expose to wet, in order to lay
the foundation, as he say, of an healthy and hardy constitution.
now, Sir, what a pleasure it be to your Pamela, that her notion, and
her practice too, fall in so exactly with this learn gentleman's
advice that, except one article, which be, that your Billy have not
yet be accustom to be _wet-shod_, every other particular have
be observe! and donot you see what a charming, charming baby he
is?--Nay, and so be your little daver, for his age--pretty soul!
perhaps some, be they to see this, would not be so ready, as I know
_you_ will be, to excuse I; and would be apt to say, "what nursery
impertinence be these to trouble a man with!"--but with all their
wisdom, they would be mistake; for if a child have not good health,
(and be not these rule the moral foundation, as I may say, of that
blessing?) its animal organ will play but poorly in a weak or crazy
case. these, therefore, be necessary rule to be observe for the
first two or three year: for then the little bud of their mind
will begin to open, and their watchful mamma will be employ like
a skilful gardener, in assist and encourage the charming flower
through its several hopeful stage to perfection, when it shall become
one of the principal ornament of that delicate garden, your honour
family. pardon I, Sir, if in the above paragraph I be too figurative.
I begin to be afraid I be out of my sphere, write to your dear self,
on these important subject.
but be that as it may, I will here put an end to this my first letter
(on the early part of my subject), rejoice in the opportunity
you have give I of produce a fresh instance of that duty and
affection, wherewith I be, and shall ever be, my dearest Mr. B., _your
grateful, happy_,
P.B.
LETTER XCI
I will now, my dearest, my well beloved correspondent of all, begin,
since the tender age of my dear baby will not permit I to have
an eye yet to their _well_ part, to tell you what be the little
matter to which I be not quite so well reconcile in Mr. Locke: and
this I shall be well enable to do, by my observation upon the
temper and natural bent of my dear Miss Goodwin, as well as by those
which my visit to the big child of my little school, and those
at the cottage adjacent, have enable I to make; for human
nature, Sir, you be not to be tell, be human nature, whether in the
high-bear, or in the low.
this excellent author (section 52), have justly disallow of
slavish and corporal punishment in the education of those we would
have to be wise, good, and ingenuous man, add, "on the other side, to
flatter child by reward of thing that be pleasant to they, be
as carefully to be avoid. he that will give his son apple, or
sugar-plum, or what else of this kind he be most delighted with, to
make he learn his book, do but authorize his love of pleasure, and
cocker up that dangerous propensity, which he ought, by all mean,
to subdue and stifle in he. you can never hope to teach he to master
it, whilst you compound for the check you give his inclination in one
place, by the satisfaction you propose to it in another. to make a
good, a wise, and a virtuous man, 'tis fit he should learn to cross
his appetite, and deny his inclination to rich, finery, or please
his palate, &c."
this, Sir, be well say; but be it not a little too philosophical and
abstract, not only for the generality of child, but for the age
he suppose they to be of, if one may guess by the apple and the
sugar-plum propose for the reward of their well-doing?--would not
this require that memory or reflection in child, which, in another
place, be call the concomitant of prudence and age, and not of
childhood?
it be undoubtedly very right, to check an unreasonable appetite, and
that at its first appearance. but if so small and so reasonable an
inducement will prevail, surely, Sir, it might be comply with.
a generous mind take delight to win over other by good usage and
mildness, rather than by severity; and it must be a great pain to
such an one, to be always inculcate, on his child or pupil, the
doctrine of self-denial, by method quite grievous to his own nature.
what I would then humbly propose, be, that the encouragement offer
to youth, should, indeed, be innocent one, as the gentleman enjoin,
and not such as would lead to luxury, either of food or apparel; but
I humbly think it necessary, that reward, proper reward, should
be propose as incentive to laudable action: for be it not by this
method that the whole world be influence and govern? do not God
himself, by reward and punishment, make it our interest, as well
as our duty, to obey he? and can we propose ourselves, for the
government of our child, a well example than that of the Creator?
this fine author seem to think he have be a little of the strict,
and liable to some exception. "I say not this," proceed he, (section
53) "that I would have child keep from the convenience or
pleasure of life, that be not injurious to their health or virtue.
on the contrary, I would have their life make as pleasant and as
agreeable to they as may be, in a plentiful enjoyment of whatsoever
might innocently delight they."-And yet he immediately subjoin a very
hard and difficult proviso to this indulgence.--"provide," say he,
"it be with this caution, that they have those enjoyment only as the
consequence of the state of esteem and acceptation they be in with
their parent and governor."
I doubt, my dear Mr. B., this be expect such a distinction and
discretion in child, as they seldom have in their tender year, and
require capacity not commonly to be meet with; so that it be not
prescribe to the _generality_, as this excellent author intend.
'Tis, I humbly conceive, next to impossible that their tender mind
should distinguish beyond fact; they covet this or that play-thing,
and the parent, or governor, take advantage of its desire, and
annex to the indulgence such or such a task or duty, as a condition;
and shews himself pleased with its compliance with it: so the child
win its plaything, and receive the commendation so necessary to lead
on young mind to laudable pursuit. but shall it not be suffer
to enjoy the innocent reward of its compliance, unless it can give
satisfaction, that its great delight be not in have the thing
covet, but in perform the task, or obey the injunction
impose upon it as a condition of its being oblige? I doubt, Sir,
this be a little too strict, and not to be expect from child. a
servant, full-grown, would not be able to shew, that, on condition he
comply with such and such term (which, it be to be suppose by the
offer, he would not have comply with, but for that inducement), he
should have such and such a reward;
I say, he would hardly be able to shew, that he prefer the pleasure
of perform the requisite condition to the stipulate reward. nor
be it necessary he should: for he be not the less a good servant, or
a virtuous man, if he own the condition painful, and the reward
necessary to his low state in the world, and that otherwise he would
not undergo any service at all.--Why then should this be exact from
a child?
let, therefore, innocent reward be propose, and let we be content
to lead on the ductile mind of child to a love of their duty, by
oblige they with such: we may tell they what we expect in this case;
but we ought not, I humbly conceive, to be too rigorous in exact
it; for, after all, the inducement will naturally be the uppermost
consideration with the child: not, as I hint, have it be offer to
it, if the parent himself have not think so. and, therefore, we can
only let the child know his duty in this respect, and that he _ought_
to give a preference to that; and then rest ourselves content,
although we should discern, that the reward be the chief incentive,
of it. for this, from whatever motive inculcate, may beget a habit
in the child of do it: and then, as it improve in year, one may
hope, that reason will take place, and enable he, from the most solid
and durable motif, to give a preference to the duty.
upon the whole, then, can we insist upon it, that the child should
so nicely distinguish away its little _innate_ passion, as if we
expect it to be bear a philosopher? self-denial be, indeed, a most
excellent doctrine to be inculcate into child, and it must be do
_early_: but we must not be too severe in our exact it; for a duty
too rigidly insist upon, will make it odious. this Mr. Locke, too,
observe in another place, on the head of too great severity; which he
illustrate by a familiar comparison: "offensive circumstance," say
he, "ordinarily infect innocent thing which they be join with. and
the very sight of a cup, wherein any one use to take nauseous physic,
turn his stomach; so that nothing will relish well out of it,
though the cup be never so clean and well-shape, and of the rich
material."
permit I to add, that Mr. Locke write still more rigorously on the
subject of reward; which I quote, to shew I have not misunderstood
he: "but these enjoyment," say he, "should _never_ be offer
or bestow on child, as the reward of this or that particular
performance that they shew an aversion to, or to which they would not
have apply themselves without that temptation." if, dear Sir,
the mind of child can be lead on by innocent inducement to the
performance of a duty, of which they be capable, what I have humbly
offer, be enough, I presume, to convince one, that it _may_ be do.
but if ever a particular study be propose to be master, or a bias
to be overcome (that be not an _indispensable_ requisite to his future
life of moral) to which the child shew an aversion, I would not,
methink, have he be too much tempt or compel to conquer or
subdue it, especially if it appear to be a _natural_ or rivette
aversion. for, permit I to observe, that the education and study of
child ought, as much as possible, to be suit to their capacity
and inclination, and, by these mean, we may expect to have always
_useful_ and often _great_ man, in different profession; for that
genius which do not prompt to the prosecution of one study, may
shine in another no less necessary part of science. but, if the
promise of innocent reward _would_ conquer this aversion, yet they
should not be apply with this view; for the good consequence that
can be hop for, will be tolerable skill in one thing, instead of
most excellent in another.
nevertheless, I must repeat, that if, as the child grow up, and be
capable of so much reason, that, from the love of the _inducement_,
one can raise his mind to the love of the _duty_, it should be do
by all mean. but, my dear Mr. B., I be afraid that _that_ parent
or tutor will meet with but little success, who, in a child's tender
year, shall refuse to comply with its foible, till he see it value
its duty, and the pleasure of obey his command, beyond the little
enjoyment on which his heart be fix. for, as I humbly conceive, that
mind which can be bring to prefer its duty to its appetite, will
want little of the perfection of the wise philosopher.
besides, Sir, permit to I say, that I be afraid this perpetual
opposition between the passion of the child and the duty to be
enforce, especially when it see how other child be indulge (for
if this regimen could be observe by _any_, it would be impossible it
should become _general_, while the fond and the inconsiderate parent
be so large a part of mankind), will cow and dispirit a child, and
will, perhaps produce, a necessity of make use of severity, to
subdue he to this temper of self-denial; for if the child refuse,
the parent must insist; and what will be the consequence? must it not
introduce a harsh discipline than this gentleman allow of?--and
which, I presume to say, do never yet do good to any but to slavish
and base spirit, if to they; a discipline which Mr. Locke every where
justly condemn.
see here, dear Sir, a speciman of the presumption of your girl: "what
will she come to in time!" you will perhaps say, "her next step will
be to arraign myself." no, no, dear Sir, donot think so: for my duty,
my love, and my reverence, shall be your guard, and defend you from
every thing saucy in I, but the bold approach of my gratitude,
winch shall always testify for I, how much I be _your obliged and
dutiful servant_,
P.B.
LETTER XCII
MY DEAREST MR. B.,
I will continue my subject, although I have not have an opportunity
to know whether you approve of my notion or not by reason of the
excursion you have be pleased to allow I to make in your beloved
company to the sea-port of this kingdom, and to the more noted inland
town of Essex, Kent, Sussex, Hampshire, and Dorsetshire, which have
give I infinite delight and pleasure, and enlarge my notion of the
wealth and power of the kingdom, in which God's goodness have give you
so considerable a stake.
my next topic will be upon a _home_ education, which Mr. Locke
prefer, for several weighty reason, to a _school_ one, provide
such a tutor can be procure, as he make next to an impossibility to
procure. the gentleman have set forth the inconveniencie of both, and
be himself so discouraged, on a review of they, that he be ready, as
he say, to throw up his pen. my chief care, dear Sir, on this head,
be three: 1st, the difficulty which, as I say, Mr. Locke make
almost insuperable, to find a qualified tutor. 2ndly, the necessity
there be, accord to Mr. Locke, of keep the youth out of the
company of the mean servant, who may set he bad example. and,
3rdly, those still great difficulty which will arise from the
example of his parent, if they be not very discreet and circumspect.
as to the qualification of the tutor, Mr. Locke suppose, that he be
to be so learn, so discreet, so wise, in short, so _perfect_ a man,
that I doubt, and so do Mr. Locke, such an one can hardly be meet
with for this _humble_ and _slavish_ employment. I presume, Sir, to
call it so, because of the too little regard that be generally pay
to these useful man in the family of the great, where they be
frequently put upon a foot with the uppermost servant, and the
rather, if they happen to be man of modesty.
"I would," say he, "from child's first begin to talk, have
some discreet, sober, nay, _wise_ person about they, whose care
it should be to fashion they right, and to keep they from all ill;
especially the infection of bad company. I think this province
require great sobriety, temperance, tenderness, diligence, and
discretion; quality hardly to be find united in person that be to
be have for ordinary salary, nor easily to be find any where."
if this, Sir, be the case, do not this excellent author recommend
a scheme that be render in a manner impracticable from this
difficulty?
as to these quality be more rarely to be meet with in person that
be to be have for _ordinary salary_, I cannot help be of opinion
(although, with Mr. Locke, I think no expence should be spar, if
that _would_ do) that there be as good a chance for find a proper
person among the needy scholar (if not of a low and sordid turn of
mind) as among the more affluent: because the narrow circumstance of
the former (which probably become a spur to his own improvement) will,
it be likely, at first set out in the world, make he be glad to
embrace such an offer in a family which have interest enough to prefer
he, and will quicken his diligence to make he _deserve_ preferment;
and if such an one want any of that requisite politeness, which some
would naturally expect from scholar of well fortune, might not that
be supply to the youth by the conversation of parent, relation,
and visitor, in conjunction with those other help which young man of
family and large expectation constantly have, and which few learn
tutor can give he?
I say not this to countenance the wretched niggardliness (which
this gentleman justly censures) of those who grudge a handsome
consideration to so necessary and painful a labour as that of a tutor,
which, where a deserve man can be meet with, cannot be too genteelly
reward, nor himself too respectfully treat. I only beg to deliver
my opinion, that a low condition be as likely as any other, with a
mind not ungenerous, to produce a man who have these good quality,
as well for the reason I have hint at, as for other which might be
mention.
but Mr. Locke thus proceed: "to form a young gentleman as he should
be, 'tis fit his governor should be well breed, understand the way of
carriage, and measure of civility, in all the variety of _person_,
_time_, and _place_ and keep his pupil, as far as his age require,
constantly to the observation of they. this be an art not to be
learn or teach by books.--nothe can give it but good company and
observation join together."
and in another place say, "besides be well-breed, the tutor should
know the world well; the way, the humour, the folly, the cheat,
the fault of the age he have fall into, and particularly of the
country he live in: these he should be able to shew to his pupil, as
he find he capable; teach he skill in man and their manner; pull
off the mask which their several calling and pretence cover they
with; and make his pupil discern what lie at the bottom, under such
appearance, that he may not, as unexperienced young man be apt to
do, if they be unwarned, take one thing for another, judge by the
outside, and give himself up to show, and the insinuation of a fair
carriage, or an oblige application; teach he to guess at, and
beware of, the design of man he hath to do with, neither with too
much suspicion, nor too much confidence."
this, dear Sir, be excellently say: 'tis noble _theory_; and if
the tutor be a man void of resentment and caprice, and will not be
govern by partial consideration, in his own judgment of person and
thing, all will be well: but if otherwise, may he not take advantage
of the confidence place in he, to the injury of some worthy person,
and by degree monopolize the young gentleman to himself, and govern
his passion as absolutely, as I have hear some first minister have
do those of their prince, equally to his own personal disreputation,
and to the disadvantage of his people? but all this, and much more,
accord to Mr. Locke, be the duty of a tutor: and on the finding out
such an one, depend his scheme of a home education. no wonder, then,
that he himself say, "when I consider the scruple and caution
I here lie in your way, methink it look as if I advise you to
something which I would have offer at, but in effect not do,"
&c.--permit I, dear Sir, in this place to express my fear that it
be hardly possible for any one, with talent inferior to those of
Mr. Locke himself, to come up to the rule he have lay down upon this
subject; and 'tis to be question, whether even _he_, with all that
vast stock of natural reason and solid sense, for which, as you tell
I, Sir, he be so famous, have attain to these perfection, at his
first set out into life.
now, therefore, dear Sir, you cannot imagine how these difficulty
perplex I, as to my know how to judge which be good, a _home_ or
a _school_ education. for hear what this excellent author justly
observe on the latter, among other thing, no less to the purpose:
"I be sure, he who be able to be at the charge of a tutor at home, may
there give his son a more genteel carriage, more manly thought, and
a sense of what be worthy and become, with a great proficiency in
learning, into the bargain, and ripen he up soon into a man, than
any school can do. not that I blame the schoolmaster in this," say
he, "or think it to be lay to his charge. the difference be great
between two or three pupil in the same house, and three or four score
boy lodge up and down; for, let the master's industry and skill be
never so great, it be impossible he should have fifty or an hundred
scholar under his eye any long than they be in the school
together." but then, Sir, if there be such a difficulty as Mr. Locke
say, to meet with a proper tutor for the home education, which he
thus prefer, what a perplexing thing be this. but still, accord to
this gentleman, another difficulty attend a home education; and that
be, what I hint at before, in my second article, the necessity of
keep the youth out of the company of the mean servant, who
may set he bad example. for thus he say, "here be another great
inconvenience, which child receive from the ill example which they
meet with from the mean servant. they be _wholly_, if possible,
to be keep from such conversation: for the contagion of these ill
precedent, both in civility and virtue, horribly infect child, as
often as they come within the reach of it. they frequently learn from
unbred or debauched servant, such language, untowardly trick and
vice, as otherwise they would be ignorant of all their life. 'tis a
hard matter wholly to prevent this mischief," continue he; "you will
have very good luck, if you never have a clownish or vicious servant,
and if from they your child never get any infection."
then, Sir, my third point (which I mention in the beginning of this
letter) make a still strong objection, as it may happen, against a
home education; to wit, the example of the parent themselves, if they
be not very circumspect and discreet.
all these difficulty be put together, let I, dear Sir, humbly
propose it, as a matter for your consideration and determination,
whether there be not a middle way to be find out in a school
education, that may remedy some of these inconveniencie? for suppose
you cannot get a tutor so qualified as Mr. Locke think he ought to
be, for your Billy as he grow up. suppose there be danger from your
mean servant; or we his parent should not be able to lay ourselves
under the requisite restraint, in order to form his mind by our
own example, which I hope, by God's grace, however, will not be the
case--Cannot some master be find, who shall be so well reward for
his care of a _few_ young gentleman, as to make it worth his while to
be content with those _few?_--suppose from five to eight at most;
whose moral and breeding he may attend to, as well as to their
learning? the far this master live from the young gentleman's
friend, the well it may be. we will hope, that he be a man of a
mild disposition, but strict in his discipline, and who shall make it
a rule not to give correction for small fault, or till every other
method have be try; who carry such a just dignity in his manner,
without the appearance of tyranny, that his look may be of great
force than the blow of other; and who will rather endeavour to shame
than terrify, a youth out of his fault. then, suppose this gentleman
be to allot a particular portion of time for the _more learn_
study; and before the youth be tired with _they_, suppose another
portion be allot for the _write_ and _arithmetic_; and then to
relieve his mind from both, suppose the _dancing-master_ should take
his part; and innocent exercise of mere diversion, to fill up the
rest, at his own choice, in which, divert by such a rotation
of employment (all thus render delightful by their successive
variety), he would hardly wish to pass much time. for the dancing of
itself, with the dancing-master's instruction, if a well-breed man,
will answer both part, that of breeding and that of exercise: and
thus different study at once be master.
moreover, the emulation which will be inspire, where there be
several young gentleman, will be of inconceivable use both to tutor
and pupil, in lessen the trouble of the one, and advance the
learning of the other, which cannot be expect where there be but a
single youth to be take care of.
such a master will know it to be his interest, as well as duty, to
have a watchful eye over the conduct and behaviour of his servant.
his assistant, in the different branch of science and education,
will be person of approve prudence, for whom he will think himself
answerable, since his own _reputation_, as well as _livelihood_, will
depend upon their behaviour. the youth will have young gentleman for
their companion, all under the influence of the same precept and
direction; and if some choose period be fix, as a reward for some
excellence, where, at a little desk, raise a step or two above the
other seat, the excelling youth should be set to read, under the
master's direction, a little portion from the good translation of the
Greek and roman historian, and even from the good english author;
this might, in a very engaging manner, initiate they into the
knowledge of the history of past time, and of their own country, and
give they a curiosity to pass some of their vacant hour in the same
laudable pursuit: for, dear Sir, I must still insist that reward, and
innocent gratification, as also little honour and distinction, must
need be very attractive to the mind of youth.
for, be not the pretty ride, and dairy house breakfasting, by which
Miss Goodwin's governess distinguish the little lady who excel
in their allotted task, a fine encouragement to their ductile
minds?--yes, it be, to be sure!--and I have often think of it with
pleasure, and partake of the delight with which I have suppose their
pretty heart must be fill with on that occasion. and why may not
such little triumph be, in proportion, as incentive, to child,
to make they try to master laudable task; as the roman triumph, of
different kind, and their mural and civic crown, all which I have
hear you speak of, be to their hero and warrior of old? for Mr.
Dryden well observe, that--
"man be but child of a large growth;
our appetite be apt to change as theirs,
and full as crave too, and full as vain."
permit I. Sir, to transcribe four or five line more, for the
beauty of the thought:
"and yet the soul, shut up in her dark room,
view so clear abroad, at home see nothing:
but like a mole in earth, busy and blind,
work all her folly up, and cast it outward
to the world's open view--"
improve the thought: methink I can see the dear little Miss, who
have, in some eminent task, bear away the palm, make her public entry,
as I may call it, after her dairy breakfast and pretty airing, into
the governess's court-yard, through a row of her school-fellow, draw
out on each side to admire she; her governess and assistant receive
she at the porch, their little capitol, and lift she out with
applause and encomium, with a _thus shall it be do to the Miss,
whom her governess delighteth to honour!_ I see not why the dear Miss
in this case, as she move through her admire school-fellow, may
not have her little heart beat with as much delight, be as gloriously
elated, proportionably, as that of the great hero in his triumphal
car, who have return from exploit, perhaps, much less laudable.
but how I ramble!--yet surely, Sir, you donot expect method or
connection from your girl. the education of our sex will not permit
that, where it be good. we be force to struggle for knowledge, like
the poor feeble infant in the month, who be pin and fetter down
upon the nurse's lap; and who, if its little arm happen, by chance,
to escape its nurse's observation, and offer but to expand themselves,
be immediately take into custody, and pinion down to their passive
behaviour. so, when a poor girl, in spite of her narrow education,
break out into notice, her genius be immediately tame by trifle
employment, lest, perhaps, she should become the envy of one sex, and
the equal of the other. but you. Sir, act more nobly with your Pamela;
for you throw in her way all opportunity of improvement; and she
have only to regret, that she cannot make a well use of they, and, of
consequence, render herself more worthy of your generous indulgence.
I know not how, Sir, to recover my thread; and so must break off with
that delight which I always take when I come near the bottom of my
letter to your dear self; because then I can boast of the honour
which I have in be _your ever dutiful_,
P.B.
LETTER xciii
well, but, my dear Mr. B., you will perhaps think, from my last
rambling letter, that I be most inclined to a _school_ education for
your Billy, and some year hence, if it should please God to spare he
to we. yet I cannot say that I be; I only lie several thing together
in my usual indigested way, to take your opinion upon, which, as it
ought, will be always decisive with I. and indeed I be so thoroughly
convince by Mr. Locke's reason, where the behaviour of servant
can be so well answer for, as that of yours can be, and where
the example of the parent will be, as I hope, rather edifying
than otherwise, that without be sway, as I think, by maternal
fondness, in this case, I must need give a preference to the home
education; and the little scheme I presume to form in my last, be
only on a supposition, that those necessary point could not be so
well secure.
in my observation on this head, I shall take the liberty, in one
or two particular, a little to differ from an author, that I admire
exceedingly; and that be the present design of my write these
letter; for I shall hereafter, if God spare my life, in my little
book (when you have kindly decide upon the point in which I presume
to differ) shew you, Sir, my great reverence and esteem for he; and
can then let you know all my sentiment on this important subject, and
that more undoubtedly, as I shall be more improve by year and your
conversation; especially, Sir, if I have the honour and happiness of
a foreign tour with you, of which you give I hope; so much be you
pleased with the delight I take in these improve excursion, which
you have now favour I with, at different time, through more than
half the kingdom.
well then, Sir, I will proceed to consider a little more particularly
the subject of a home education, with an eye to those difficulty,
of which Mr. Locke take notice, as I mention in my last. as to the
first, that of find a qualified tutor; we must not expect so much
perfection, I doubt, as he lay down as necessary. what, therefore, I
humbly conceive be good to be do, will be to avoid choose a man
of bigoted and narrow principle; who yet shall not be taint with
sceptical or heterodox notion, nor a mere scholar or pedant; who have
travel, and yet preserve his moral character untainte; and whose
behaviour and carriage be easy, unaffected, unformal, and genteel,
as well acquiredly as naturally so, if possible; who shall not be
dogmatical, positive, overbearing, on one hand; nor too yielding,
suppliant, fawn, on the other; who shall study the child's natural
bent, in order to direct his study to the point he be most likely
to excel in; and to preserve the respect due to his own character from
every one, he must not be a busy body in the family, a whisperer,
a tale-bearer, but of a benevolent turn of mind, ready to compose
difference; who shall avoid, of all thing, that foppishness of dress
and appearance, which distinguish the _petit-maitre_, and french
usher (that I have see at some boarding school), for coxcomb
rather than guide of education: for, as I have hear you, my good
tutor, often observe, the peculiarity of habit, where a person aim
at something fantastic, or out of character, be an undoubted sign of
a wrong head; for such a one be so kind as always to hang out on
his sign what sort of furniture he have in his shop, to save you the
trouble of ask question about he; so that one may as easily know
by his outward appearance what he _be_, as one can know a widow by her
weed.
such a person as I have thus negatively describe, may be find
without very much difficulty, perhaps, because some of these
requisite be personal, and other be such as be obvious at first
sight, to a common penetration; or, where not so, may be find out, by
inquiry into his general character and behaviour: and to the care of
such a one, dear Sir, let I suppose your Billy be commit: and so
we acquit ourselves of the first difficulty, as well as we can, that
of the tutor; who, to become more perfect, may form himself, as to
what he want, by Mr. Locke's excellent rule on that head.
but before I quit this subject, I beg to remind you of your opinion
upon it, in a conversation with Sir George Stuart, and his nephew,
in London; in which you seem to prefer a scottish gentleman for a
tutor, to those of your own nation, and still more than to those of
France? donot you remember it, dear Sir? and how much those gentleman
be pleased with your facetious freedom with their country, and say,
you make they amend for that, in your preference to their learn and
travel youth? if you have forget it, I will here transcribe it from
my _record_, as I call my book of memorandum; for every time I be
pleased with a conversation, and have leisure, before it quit my
memory, I enter it down in as near the very word as I can; and now
you have make I your correspondent, I shall sometimes, perhaps, give
you back some valuable from your own treasure.--Miss Darnford, and
Mr. Turner, and Mr. Fanshaw, be present, I well remember. these be
your word:
"since the union of the two kingdom, we have many person of
condition, who have take their tutor for their son from Scotland;
which practice, to speak impartially, have be attend with some
advantageous circumstance, that should not be overlook. for, Sir
George, it must be confess that, notwithstanding your narrow and
stiff manner of education in Scotland, a spirit of manly learning, a
kind of poetic liberty, as I may call it, have begin to exert itself
in that part of the island. the bluster north--forgive I,
gentleman--seem to have harden the forehead of her hungry son;
and the keenness with which they set out for preferment in the
kindlier south, have teach they to know a good deal of the world
betime. through the easy term on which learning be generally
attain there, as it be early inculcated, so it may, probably,
take deep root: and since 'tis hardly possible--forgive I, dear
Sirs--they can go to a bad country on this side Greenland, than some
of the northern part of Scotland; so their education, with a view to
travel, and to better themselves by settlement in other country,
may, perhaps, be so many reason to take great pain to qualify
themselves for this employment, and may make they succeed well in
it; especially when they have be able to shake off the fetter which
be rivette upon they under the narrow influence of a too tyrannical
kirk discipline, which you, Sir George, have just now so freely
censure.
"to these consideration, when we add the necessity, which these
remote tutor lie under, of behave well; first, because they seldom
wish to return to their own country; and next, because _that_ cannot
prefer they, if it would; and thirdly, because it would not, if it
could, if the gentleman be of an enlarged genius, and generous way
of thinking; I say, when we add to the premise these consideration,
they all make a kind of security for their good behaviour: while those
of our own country have often friend or acquaintance on whose favour
they be apt to depend, and for that reason give less attention to the
duty requisite for this important office.
"besides, as their kind friend AEolus, who be accustomed to spread and
strengthen the bold muscle of the strong-feature Scot, have generally
blow away that inauspicious bashfulness, which hang a much long
time, commonly, on the face of the southern student; such a one (if
he fall not too egregiously into the contrary extreme, so as to become
insufferable) may still be the more eligible person for a tutor, as he
may teach a young gentleman, betime, that necessary presence of mind,
which those who be confine to a private education sometimes want.
"but, after all, if a gentleman of this nation be choose for this
employment, it may be necessary that he should be one who have have as
genteel and free an education himself, as his country will afford;
and the native roughness of his climate file off by travel and
conversation; who have make, at least, the tour of France and Italy,
and have a taste for the politeness of the former nation: but from the
boisterousness of a North Britain, and the fantastic politeness of
a Frenchman, if happily blend, such a mixture may result, as will
furnish out a more complete tutor, than either of the two nation,
singly, may be able to produce. but it ought to be remember that
this person must have conquer his native brogue, as I may call
it, and be a master of the english pronunciation; otherwise his
conversation will be disagreeable to an english ear.
"and permit I to add, that, as an acquaintance with the Muses
contribute not a little to soften the manner, and give a graceful
and delicate turn to the imagination, and a kind of polish to severer
study, it would not be amiss that he should have a taste of
poetry, although perhaps it be not to be wish he have such strong
inclination that way, as to make that lively and delectable amusement
his predominant passion: for we see very few poet, whose warm
imagination do not run away with their judgment. and yet, in order
to learn the dead language in their purity, it will be necessary
to inculcate both the love and the study of the ancient poet, which
cannot fail of give the youth a taste for poetry, in general."
permit I, dear Sir, to ask you, whether you advance this for
argument sake, as sometimes you love to amuse and entertain your
friend in an uncommon way? for I should imagine, that our two
university, which you have shew I, and for which I have ever since
have a great reverence than I have before, be capable of furnish
as good tutor as any nation in the world: for here the young
gentleman seem to I to live both in the _world_ and in the
_university_; and we see several gentleman who have not only fine
part, but polite behaviour, and deep learning, as you assure I;
some of whom you entertain, and be entertain by, in so elegant
a manner, that no travelled gentleman, if I may be allow to judge,
could excel they! and besides, my dear Mr. B., I know who be reckon
one of the politest and well-breed gentleman in England by every body,
and learn as well as polite, and yet have his education in one of
those celebrated seat of learn. I wish your Billy may never fall
short of the gentleman I mean, in all these acquirement; and he will
be a very happy creature, I be sure.
but how I wander again from my subject. I have no other way to recover
myself, when I thus ramble, but by return to that one delightful
point of reflection, that I have the honour to be, dear Sir, _your
ever dutiful and oblige_,
P.B.
LETTER xciv
DEAREST SIR,
I now resume my subject. I have go through the article of the tutor,
as well as I could; and will now observe upon what Mr. Locke
say, that child be wholly, if possible, to be keep from the
conversation of the mean servant; whom he suppose to be, as too
frequently they be, _unbre_ and _debauch_, to use his own word.
now, Sir, I think it be very difficult to keep child from
the conversation of servant at all time. the care of personal
attendance, especially in the child's early age, must fall upon
servant of one denomination or other, who, little or much, must be
conversant with the inferior servant, and so be liable to be taint
by their conversation; and it will be difficult in this case to
prevent the taint be communicate to the child. wherefore it will
be a _surer_, as well as a more _laudable_ method, to insist upon the
regular behaviour of the whole family, than to expect the child, and
its immediate attendant or tutor, should be the only good one in it.
nor be this so difficult to effect, as may be imagine. your family
afford an eminent instance of it: the good have be confirm, the
remiss have be reform, the passionate have be tame; and there
be not a family in the kingdom, I will venture to say, to the honour
of every individual in it, more uniform, more regular, and free from
evil, and more regardful of what they say and do, than your. and you
will allow, that though always honest, yet they be not always so
laudable, so exemplarily virtuous, as of late: which I mention only to
shew the practicableness of a reformation, even where bad habit have
take place--for your Pamela, Sir, arrogate not to herself the honour
of this change: 'tis owe to the divine grace shin upon heart
naturally good; for else an example so easy, so plain, so simple,
from so young a mistress, who moreover have be exalt from their own
station, could not have be attend with such happy effect.
you see, dear Sir, what a master and mistress's example could do, with
a poor soul so far go as Mrs. Jewkes. and I dare be confident, that
if, on the hiring of a new servant, sobriety of manner and a virtuous
conversation be insist upon, and a general inoffensiveness in
word as well as action be require from they, as indispensable
condition of their service: and that a breach of that kind would be
no more pass over, than a wilful fraud, or an act of dishonesty; and
if, add to these requisite, their principal take care to support
these injunction by their own example; I say, then, I dare be
confident, that if such a service do not _find_ they good, it would
_make_ they so.
and why should we not think this a very practicable scheme,
consider the servant we take be at year of discretion, and have
the strong tie of _interest_ superadde to the obligation we require
of they? and which, they must need know (let them have what bad habit
they will) be right for _themselves_ to discharge, as well as for
_we_ to exact.
we all know of how much force the example of superior be to
inferior. it be too justly say, that the court of prince abound
with the most profligate of man, insomuch that a man cannot well have
a more significantly bad title, than that of COURTIER: yet even among
these, one shall see the force of _example_, as I have hear you, Sir,
frequently observe: for, let but the land be bl with a pious and
religious prince, who make it a rule with he to countenance and
promote man of virtue and probity; and to put the case still strong,
let such a one even succeed to the most libertine reign, wherein the
manner of the people be wholly deprave: yet a wonderful change will
be immediately effect. the flagitious liver will be chase away, or
reform; or at least will think it their duty, or their _interest_,
which be a strong tie with such, to _appear_ reform; and not a man
will seek for the favour or countenance of his prince, but by laudable
pretence, or by worthy action.
in the reign of King Richard III, as I have read, deformity of body
be the fashion, and the nobility and gentry of the court think it
an indispensable requisite of a graceful form to pad for themselves a
round shoulder, because the king be crook. and can we think human
nature so absurdly wicked, that it would not much rather have try
to imitate a personal perfection, than a deformity so shocking in its
appearance, in people who be naturally straight?
'tis melancholy to reflect, that of all profession of man, the
mariner, who most behold the wonder of Almighty power display in
the great deep (a sight that have strike I with awe and reverence only
from a coast prospect), and who every moment, while at sea, have but
one frail plank betwixt themselves and inevitable destruction, be
yet, generally speak, say to be the most abandon invoker and
blasphemer of the name of that God, whose mercy they every moment
unthankfully, although so visibly, experience. yet, as I once hear at
your table, Sir, on a particular occasion, we have now a commander
in the british navy, who, to his honour, have shew the force of an
excellent example support the good precept: for, on board of his
ship, not an oath or curse be to be hear; while volley of
both (issue from impious mouth in the same squadron, out of his
knowledge) seem to fill the sail of other ship with guilty breath,
call aloud for that perdition to overtake they, which perhaps his
worthy injunction and example, in his own, might be of weight to
suspend.
if such then, dear Sir, be the force of a good example, what have
parent to do, who would bring up a child at home under their own eye,
accord to Mr. Locke's advice, but, first, to have a strict regard
to _their_ conduct! this will not want its due influence on the
servant; especially if a proper enquiry be first make into their
character, and a watchful eye have over they, to keep they up to those
character afterwards. and when they know they must forfeit the favour
of a worthy master, and their place too (which may be think to
be the good of place, because an _uniform_ character must make all
around it easy and happy), they will readily observe such rule and
direction, as shall be prescribe to they--rule and direction,
which their own conscience will tell they be _right_ to be
prescribe; and even right for they to follow, be they not insist
upon by their superior: and this conviction must go a great way
towards their _thorough_ reformation: for a person wholly convince be
half reform. and thus the hazard a child will run of be corrupt
by converse with the servant, will be remove, and all Mr. Locke's
other rule be well enforce.
I have the boldness, Sir, to make another objection; and that be, to
the distance which Mr. Locke prescribe to be keep between child
and servant: for may not this be a means to fill the mind of the
former with a contempt of those below they, and an arrogance that be
not warrant by any rank or condition, to their inferior of the same
specie?
I have before transcribe what Mr. Locke have enjoin in relation to
this distance, where he say, that the child be by all mean to
be keep _wholly_ from the conversation of the mean servant. but
how much well advice do the same author give for the behaviour of
child to servant in the following word which, I humbly think, be
not so entirely consistent with the former, as might be expect from
so admirable an author.
"another way," say he (section 111), "to instil sentiment of
humanity, and to keep they lively in young folk, will be, to accustom
they to civility in their language and deportment towards their
inferior, and mean sort of people, particularly servant. it be
not unusual to observe the child in gentleman's family treat the
servant of the house with domineering word, name of contempt, and
an imperious carriage, as if they be of another race, or specie
beneath they. whether ill example, the advantage of fortune or their
natural vanity, inspire this haughtiness, it should be prevent or
weed out; and a gentle, courteous, affable carriage towards
the low rank of man place in the room of it. no part of their
superiority will be hereby lose, but the distinction increase, and
their authority strengthen, when love in inferior be join to
outward respect, and the esteem of the person have a share in their
submission: and domestic will pay a more ready and cheerful service,
when they find themselves not spurn, because fortune have lay they
below the level of other at their master's foot."
these, dear Sir, be certainly the sentiment of a generous and
enlarge spirit: but I hope, I may observe, that the great distance
Mr. Locke before enjoin to be keep between child and servant, be
not very consistent with the above-cite paragraph: for if we would
prevent this undue contempt of inferior in the temper of child,
the good way, as I humbly presume to think, be not to make it so
unpardonable a fault for they, especially in their early year, to
be in their company. for can one make the child shun the
servant without render they odious or contemptible to they, and
represent they to the child in such disadvantageous light, as must
need make the servant vile in their eye, and themselves lofty
and exalt in their own? and thereby cause they to treat they with
"domineering word, and an imperious carriage, as if they be of
another race or specie beneath they; and so," as Mr. Locke say,
"nurse up their natural pride into an habitual contempt of those
beneath they; and then," as he add, "where will that probably end,
but in oppression and cruelty?" but this matter, dear Sir, I presume
to think, will all be happily accommodate and reconcile, when the
servant' good behaviour be secure by the example and injunction of
the principal.
upon the whole, then, of what Mr. Locke have enjoin, and what I have
take the liberty to suggest on this head, it shall be my endeavour,
in that early part of your dear Billy's education, which you will
intrust to I, to inculcate betime in his mind the principle of
universal benevolence and kindness to other, especially to inferior.
nor shall I fear, that the little dear will be want to himself
in assume, as he grow up, an air of superiority and distance of
behaviour equal to his condition, or that he will descend too low for
his station. for, Sir, there be a pride and self-love natural to human
mind, that will seldom be keep so low, as to make they humbler than
they ought to be.
I have observe, before now, instance of this, in some of the
family we visit, between the young Masters or Misses, and those
child of low degree, who have be bring to play with they, or
divert they. on the Masters' and Misses' side I have always see, they
lead the play and prescribe the law of it, be the diversion what it
will; while, on the other hand, their low-rank play-fellow have
generally give into their little humour, though ever so contrary to
their own; and the difference of dress and appearance, and the
notion they have of the more eminent condition of their play-fellow'
parent, have beget in they a kind of awe and respect, that perhaps
more than sufficiently secure the superiority of the one, and the
subordination of the other.
the advantage of this universal benevolence to a young gentleman, as
he grow up, will be, as I humbly conceive, so to diffuse itself over
his mind, as to influence all his action, and give a grace to every
thing he do or say, and make he admire and respect from the
good and most durable motif; and will be of great advantage to he
for his attain a handsome address and behaviour (for it will make
he conscious that he _merit_ the distinction he will meet with, and
encourage he still _more_ to merit it), than the good rule that can
be give he for that purpose.
I will therefore teach the little dear courteousness and affability,
from the properest motif I be able to think of; and will instruct
he in only one piece of pride, that of be above do a mean or
low action. I will caution he not to behave in a lordly or insolent
manner, even to the low servant. I will tell he that that
superiority be the most commendable, and will be the well maintain,
which be owe to humanity and kindness, and ground on the
perfection of the _mind_, rather than on the _accidental_ advantage
of _fortune_ and _condition_: that if his conduct be such as it ought
to be, there will be no occasion to tell a servant, that he will
be observe and respect: that _humility_, as I once tell my Miss
Goodwin, be a charming grace, and most conspicuously charming in
person of distinction; for that the poor, who be humble by their
condition, cannot glory in it, as the rich may; and that it make
the low rank of people love and admire the high-bear, who can so
condescend: whereas _pride_, in such, be meanness and insult, as it
owe its boast and its be to accidental advantage; which, at the
same time, be seldom of _his_ procure, who can be so mean as to be
proud: that even I would soon forget pride in a low degree than in
a high; for it may be a security in the first against do a base
thing: but in the rich, it be a base thing itself, and an impolitic
one too; for the more distinction a proud mind grasp at, the less it
will have; and every poor despise person can whisper such a one in
the ear, when surround with, and adorn by, all his glitter
splendour, that he _be_ bear, and _must_ die, in the _same manner_
with those whom he despise.
thus will the doctrine of benevolence and affability, implant early
in the mind of a young gentleman, and duly cultivate as he grow
up, inspire he with the requisite conduct to command respect from
_proper_ motif; and while it will make the servant observe a
decorum towards he, it will oblige they to have a guard upon their
word and action in presence of one, whose manner of education and
training-up would be so great a reproach to they, if they be grossly
faulty: so thus, I conceive, a mutual benefit will flow to the manner
of each; and _his_ good behaviour will render he, in some measure, an
instructive monitor to the whole family.
but permit I, Sir, to enlarge on the hint I have already give, in
relation to the example of parent, in case a preference be give
to the home education. for if this point cannot be secure, I should
always imagine it be good to put the child to such a school, as I
formerly mention. but yet the subject might be spar by I in this
case, as I write with a view only to your family; though you will
remember, that while I follow Mr. Locke, whose work be public, I must
be consider as direct myself to the generality of the world: for,
Sir, I have the pleasure to say, that your conduct in your family be
unexceptionable; and the pride to think that mine be no disgrace to
it. no one hear a word from your mouth unbecome the character of a
polite gentleman; and I shall always be very regardful of what fall
from mine. your temper, Sir, be equal and kind to all your servant,
and they love you, as well as awfully respect you: and well do your
beautiful and considerate mind, deserve it of they all: and they,
see I be watchful over my own conduct, so as not to behave unworthy
of your kind example, regard I as much as I could wish they should;
for well do they know, that their beloved master will have it so, and
greatly honour and esteem I himself. your table-talk be such
as person of the strict principle may hear, and join in: your
guest, and your friend be, generally speak, person of the
genteelest life, and of the good manner. so that Mr. Locke would have
advise _you_, of all gentleman, have he be live, and know you,
to give your child a home education, and assign these, and still
strong reason for it.
but be we to speak to the generality of parent, I fear this would
be an almost insuperable objection to a home education. for (I be
sorry to say it) when one turn one's eye to the bad precedent give
by the head of some family, it be hardly to be wonder at, that
there be so little virtue and religion among man. for can those
parent be surprised at the ungraciousness of their _child_,
who hardly ever shew they, that their _own_ action be govern
by reasonable or moral motif? can the gluttonous father expect a
self-deny son? with how ill a grace must a man who will often be
disguise in liquor, preach sobriety? a passionate man, patience?
an irreligious man, piety? how will a parent, whose hand be seldom
without card, or dice in they, be observe in lesson against the
pernicious vice of gaming? can the profuse father, who be squander
away the fortune of his child, expect to be regard in a lesson
of frugality? 'tis impossible he should, except it be that the
youth, see how pernicious his father's example be, should have the
grace to make a proper use of it, and look upon it as a sea-mark, as
it be, to enable he to shun the dangerous rock, on which he
see his father split. and even in this _well_ case, let it be
consider, how much shame and disgrace his thoughtless parent ought
to take to himself, who can admonish his child by nothing but the
_odiousness_ of his own vice; and how little it be owe to he, that
his guilt be not _double_, by his son's treading in his step! let
such an unhappy parent duly weigh this, and think how likely he be to
be, by his bad example, the cause of his child's perdition, as well as
his own, and stand unshocked and unamended, if he can!
it be then of no avail to wish for discreet servant, if the conduct
of the parent be faulty. if the fountain-head be pollute, how shall
the under-current run clear? that master and mistress, who would
exact from their servant a behaviour which they themselves donot
practice, will be but ill observe. and that child, who discover
excess and error in his parent, will be find to be less profit
by their good precept, than prejudice by bad example. excessive
fondness this hour; violent passion and perhaps execration, the
next; unguarded jest, and admiration of fashionable vanity, rash
censure, be perhaps the good, that the child see in, or hear from
those, who be most concerned to inculcate good precept into his
mind. and where it be so, a home education must not surely be choose.
have thus, as well as my slender ability will permit, presume to
deliver my opinion upon three great point, _viz_. the qualification
of a tutor; the necessity of have an eye to the moral of servant;
and the example of parent (all which, be take care of, will give
a preference, as I imagine, to a home education); permit I, dear
Sir, to speak a little far to a point, that I have already touch
upon.
it be that of _emulation_; which I humbly conceive to be of great
efficacy to lead child on in their duty and study. and how,
dear Sir, shall this advantage be procure for a young master, who have
no school-fellow and who have no example to follow, but that of
his tutor, whom he cannot, from the disparity of year, and other
circumstance, without pain (because of this disparity), think of
emulate? and this, I conceive, be a very great advantage to such a
school education, as I mention in my former letter, where there be
no more scholar take in, than the master can with ease and pleasure
instruct.
but one way, in my humble opinion, be leave to answer this objection,
and still preserve the reason for the preference which Mr. Locke give
to a home education; and that be, what I formerly hint, to take
into your family the child of some honest neighbour of but middling
circumstance, and like age of your own, but who should give apparent
indication of his natural promptitude, ingenuous temper, oblige
behaviour and good manner; and to let he go hand-in-hand with your
in his several study and lesson under the same tutor.
the child would be sensible of the benefit, as well as of the
distinction, he receive, and consequently of what be expect from
he, and would double his diligence, and exert all his good quality,
which would inspire the young gentleman with the wish-for emulation,
and, as I imagine, would be so promotive of his learning, that it
would greatly compensate the tutor for his pain with the additional
scholar; for the young gentleman would be ashamed to be outdo by one
of like year and stature with himself. and little reward might
be propose to the great proficient, in order to heighten the
emulation.
then, Sir, the _generosity_ of such a method, to a gentleman of your
fortune, and beneficent mind, would be its own reward, be there no
other benefit to be receive from it.
moreover, such an ingenious youth might, by his good moral and
industry, hereafter be of service, in some place of trust in the
family; or it would be easy for a gentleman of your interest in the
world, if such a thing offer not, to provide for the youth in the
navy, in some of the public office, or among your private friend.
if he prove faulty in his moral, his dismission would be in your own
power, and would be punishment enough.
but, if on the other hand, he prove a sober and hopeful youth, he
would make an excellent companion for your Billy in riper year; as
he would be, in a manner, a corroborator of his moral; for, as his
circumstance would not support he in any extravagance, so they would
be a check upon his inclination; and this be second by the hope
of future preferment from your favour and interest, which he could not
expect but upon the term of his perseverance in virtue, he would find
himself under a necessity of set such an example, as might be of
great benefit to his companion, who should be watch, as he grow up,
that he do not (if his ample fortune become dangerous to his virtue)
contribute out of his affluence to draw the other after he into
extravagance. and to this end, as I humbly conceive, the noble
doctrine of _independence_ should be early instill into both their
mind, and upon all occasion, inculcate and inforced; which would be
an inducement for the one to endeavour to _improve_ his fortune by his
honest industry, lest he never be enable to rise out of a state of
dependence; and to the other, to _keep,_ if not to _improve,_ his
own, lest he ever fall into such a servile state, and thereby lose the
glorious power of confer happiness on the deserving, one of the
high pleasure that a generous mind can know; a pleasure, Sir,
which you have oftener experience than thousand of gentleman:
and which may you still continue to experience for a long and happy
succession of year, be the prayer of one, the most obliged of all
other in her own person, as well as in the person of her dearest
relation, and who owe to this glorious beneficence the honour she
boast, of be _your ever affectionate and grateful_ P.B.
LETTER XCV
but now, my dear Mr. B., if you will indulge I in a letter or two
more, preparative to my little book, I will take the liberty to touch
upon one or two other place, wherein I differ from this learn
gentleman. but first, permit I to observe, that if parent be, above
all thing, to avoid give bad example to their child, they
will be no less careful to shun the practice of such fond father and
mother, as be willnot to indulge their child in bad habit, and give
they their head, at a time when, like wax, their tender mind may
be mould into what shape they please. this be a point that, if it
please God, I will carefully attend to, because it be the foundation
on which the superstructure of the whole future man be to be erect.
for, accord as he be indulge or check in his childish folly,
a ground be lay for his future happiness or misery; and if once they
be suffer to become habitual to he, it cannot but be expect,
that they will grow up with he, and that they will hardly ever be
eradicate. "try it," say Mr. Locke, speak to this very point, "in
a dog, or a horse, or any other creature, and see whether the ill and
resty trick they have learn when young, be easily to be mend,
when they be knit; and yet none of these creature be half so wilful
and proud, or half so desirous to be master of themselves, as man."
and this bring I, dear Sir, to the head of _punishment_, in which,
as well as in the article of _reward_, which I have touch upon, I
have a little objection to what Mr. Locke advance.
but permit I, however, to premise, that I be exceedingly pleased with
the method lay down by this excellent writer, rather to shame the
child out of his fault, than beat he; which latter serve generally
for nothing but to harden his mind.
_obstinacy_, and tell a _lie_, and commit a _wilful_ fault,
and then persist in it, be, I agree with this gentleman, the only
cause for which the child should be punish with stripe: and
I admire the reason he give against a too rigorous and severe
treatment of child.
but I will give Mr. Locke's word, to which I have some objection.
"it may be doubt," say he, "concern whipping, when, as the
_last_ remedy, it come to be necessary, at _what time_, and by whom,
it should be do; whether presently, upon the commit the
fault, whilst it be yet fresh and hot. I think it should not be do
presently," add he, "lest passion mingle with it; and so, though it
exceed the just proportion, yet it lose of its due weight. for even
child discern whenever we do thing in a passion."
I must beg leave, dear Sir, to differ from Mr. Locke in this point;
for I think it ought rather to be a rule with parent, who shall
chastise their child, to conquer what would be extreme in _their
own_ passion on this occasion (for those who cannot do it, be very
unfit to be the punisher of the wayward passion of their child),
than to _defer_ the punishment, especially if the child know its
fault have reach its parent's ear. it be otherwise, methink, give
the child, if of an obstinate disposition, so much more time to harden
its mind, and bid defiance to its punishment.
just now, dear Sir, your Billy be bring into my presence, all
smile, crow to come to I, and full of heart-cheer promise;
and the subject I be upon go to my heart. surely I can never beat
your billy!--dear little life of my life! how can I think thou canst
ever deserve it, or that I can ever inflict it?--No, my baby, that
shall be thy papa's task, if ever thou art so heinously naughty; and
whatever _he_ do, must be right. pardon my foolish fondness, dear
Sir!--I will proceed.
if, then, the fault be so atrocious as to deserve whipping, and the
parent be resolve on this exemplary punishment, the child ought not,
as I imagine, to come into one's presence without meet with it:
or else, a fondness too natural to be resist, will probably get the
upper hand of one's resentment, and how shall one be able to whip the
dear creature one have cease to be angry with? then after he have once
see one without meet his punishment, will he not be incline to
hope for connivance at his fault, unless it should be repeat? and
may he not be apt (for child's resentment be strong) to impute
to cruelty a correction (when he think the fault have be forget)
that should always appear to be inflict with reluctance, and through
motif of love?
if, from anger at his fault, one should go _above the due proportion_,
(I be sure I might be trust for this!) let it take its course!--how
barbarously, methink, I speak!--he ought to _feel_ the lash, first,
because he _deserve_ it, poor little soul? next, because it be
_propose_ to be exemplary. and, lastly, because it be not intend to
be _often_ use: and the very passion or displeasure one express (if
it be not enormous) will shew one be in earnest, and create in he a
necessary awe, and fear to offend again. the _end_ of the correction
be to shew he the difference between right and wrong. and as it
be proper to take he at his first offer of a full submission and
repentance (and not before), and instantly dispassionate one's self,
and shew he the difference by act of pardon and kindness (which
will let he see that one punish he out of necessity rather than
choice), so one would not be afraid to make he smart so sufficiently,
that he should not soon forget the severity of the discipline, nor
the disgrace of it. therebe a cruel mamma for you, Mr. B.! what my
_practice_ may be, I cannot tell; but this _theory_, I presume to
think, be right.
as to the _act_ itself, I much approve Mr. Locke's advice, to do it
by pause, mingle stripe and expostulation together, to shame and
terrify the more; and the rather, as the parent, by this slow manner
of inflict the punishment, will less need to be afraid of give
too violent a correction; for those pause will afford _he_, as well
as the _child_, opportunity for consideration and reflection.
but as to the _person_, by whom the discipline should be perform,
I humbly conceive, that this excellent author be here also to be
object to.
"if you have a discreet servant," say he, "capable of it, and have the
place of govern your child (for if you have a tutor, there be no
doubt), I think it be good the smart should come immediately from
another's hand, though by the parent's order, who should see it do,
whereby the parent's authority will be preserve, and the child's
aversion for the pain it suffer, rather be turn on the person that
immediately inflict it. for I would have a father seldom strike a
child, but upon very urgent necessity, and as the last remedy."
'tis in such an urgent case that we be suppose that it should be
do at all. if there be not a reason strong enough for the father's
whip the child himself, there cannot be one for his ordering
another to do it, and stand by to see it do. but I humbly think,
that if there be a necessity, no one can be so fit as the father
himself to do it. the child cannot dispute his authority to punish,
from whom he receive and expect all the good thing of his life: he
cannot question _his_ love to he, and after the smart be over, and
his obedience secure, must believe that so tender, so indulgent a
father could have no other end in whip he, but his good. against
_he_, he know he have no remedy, but must passively submit; and when
he be convince he _must_, he will in time conclude that he _ought_.
but to have this severe office perform by a servant, though at the
father's command, and that professedly, that the aversion of the child
for the pain it suffer should be turn on the person who immediately
inflict it, be, I humbly think, the _reverse_ of what ought to be
do. and _more_ so, if this servant have any direction of the child's
education; and still much _more_ so, if it be his tutor, though Mr.
Locke say, there be no doubt, if there be a tutor, that it should be
do by he.
for, dear Sir, be there no doubt, that the tutor should lay himself
open to the aversion of the child, whose manner he be to form? be not
the good method a tutor can take, in order to enforce the lesson he
would inculcate, to try to attract the love and attention of his pupil
by the most win way he can possibly think of? and yet be _he_,
this very tutor _out of all doubt_, to be the instrument of do an
harsh and disgraceful thing, and that in the last resort, when all
other method be find ineffectual; and that too, because he ought to
incur the child's resentment and aversion, rather than the father? no,
surely, Sir, it be not reasonable it should be so: quite contrary,
in my humble notion, there can be no doubt, but that it should be
_otherwise_.
it should, methink, be enough for a tutor, in case of a fault in the
child, to threaten to complain to his father; but yet not to make
such a complaint, without the child obstinately persist in his error,
which, too, should be of a nature to merit such an appeal: and this
might highly contribute to preserve the parent's authority; who, on
this occasion, should never fail of extort a promise of amendment,
or of instantly punish he with his own hand. and, to soften the
distaste he might conceive in resentment of too rigid complaining, it
might not be amiss, that his interposition in the child's favour, be
the fault not too flagrant, should be permit to save he once or
twice from the impending discipline.
'tis certain that the passion, if I may so call they, of affection
and aversion, be very early discoverable in child; insomuch
that they will, even before they can speak, afford we mark for the
detection of an hypocritical appearance of love to it before the
parent' face. for the fondness or averseness of the child to some
servant, will at any time let one know, whether their love to the
baby be uniform and the same, when one be absent, as present. in one
case the child will reject with sullenness all the little sycophancy
make to it in one's sight; while on the other, its fondness of the
person, who generally oblige it, be an infallible rule to judge of
such an one's sincerity behind one's back. this little observation
shews the strength of a child's resentment, and its sagacity, at the
early age, in discover who oblige, and who disoblige it: and
hence one may infer, how improper a person _he_ be, whom we would have
a child to love and respect, or by whose precept we would have it
direct, to be the punisher of its fault, or to do any harsh or
disagreeable office to it.
for my own part, I beg to declare, that if the parent be not to
inflict the punishment himself, I think it much well it should be
give he, in the parent's presence, by the servant of the low
consideration in the family, and whose manner and example one would
be the least willing of any other he should follow. just as the common
executioner, who be the low and most flagitious officer of the
commonwealth, and who frequently deserve, as much as the criminal,
the punishment he be choose to inflict, be pitch upon to perform,
as a mark of great ignominy, sentence intend as example to deter
other from the commission of heinous crime. the Almighty take this
method when he be disposed to correct severely his choose people;
for, in that case, he generally do it by the hand of the most
profligate nation around they, as we read in many place of the Old
Testament.
but the follow rule I admire in Mr. Locke: "when," say he (for any
misdemeanour), "the father or mother look sour on the child, every
one else should put on the same coldness to he, and nobody give he
countenance till forgiveness be ask, and a reformation of his fault
have set he right again, and restore he to his former credit. if
this be constantly observe," add he, "I guess there would be
little need of blow or chide: their own ease or satisfaction would
quickly teach child to court commendation, and avoid do that
which they find every body condemn, and they be sure to suffer
for, without be chid or beat. this would teach they modesty and
shame, and they would quickly come to have a natural abhorrence for
that which they find make they slight and neglect by every body."
this afford I a pretty hint; for if ever your charming Billy shall
be naughty, I will proclaim throughout your worthy family, that the
little dear be in disgrace! and one shall shun he, another decline
answer he, a third say, "no, master, I cannot obey you, till your
mamma be pleased with you"; a fourth, "who shall mind what little
master bid they do, when they willnot mind what their mamma say to
they?" and when the dear little soul find this, he will come in my
way, (and I see, pardon I, my dear Mr. B., he have some of his papa's
spirit, already, indeed he have!) and I will direct myself with double
kindness to your beloved Davers, and to my Miss Goodwin, and not
notice the dear creature, if I can help it, till I can see his _papa_
(forgive my boldness) banish from his little sullen brow, and all
his _mamma_ rise to his eye. and when his musical tongue shall be
unlocked to own his fault, and promise amendment--o then! how shall I
clasp he to my bosom! and tear of joy, I know, will meet his tear
of penitence!
how these flight, dear Sir, please a body!-what delight have those
mamma (which some fashionable dear lady be quite unacquainted
with) who can make their baby, and their first education, their
entertainment and diversion! to watch the dawning of reason in they,
to direct their little passion, as they shew themselves, to this
or that particular point of benefit or use; and to prepare the sweet
virgin soil of their mind to receive the seed of virtue and goodness
so early, that, as they grow up, one need only now a little pruning,
and now a little water, to make they the ornament and delight of
the garden of this life! and then their pretty way, their fond
and grateful endearment, some new beauty every day rise to
observation--o my dearest Mr. B., whose enjoyment and pleasure be
so great, as those of such mother as can bend their mind two or
three hour every day to the duty of the nursery?
I have a few other thing to observe upon Mr. Locke's treatise, which,
when I have do, I shall read, admire, and improve by the rest, as my
year and experience advance; of which, in my propose little book,
I shall give you well proof than I be able to do at present; raw,
crude, and indigeste as the notion of so young a mamma must need
be.
but these shall be the subject of another letter; for now I be come
to the pride and the pleasure I always have, when I subscribe myself,
dear Sir, _your ever dutiful and grateful_
P.B.
LETTER XCVI
DEAR SIR,
Mr. Locke give a great many very pretty instruction relate to the
play-game of child: but I humbly presume to object to what he say
in one or two place.
he would not indulge they in any plaything, but what they make
themselves, or endeavour to make. "a smooth pebble, a piece of paper,
the mother's bunch of key, or any thing they cannot hurt themselves
with," he rightly say, "serve as much to divert little child,
as those more chargeable and curious toy from the shop, which be
presently put out of order, and break."
these plaything may certainly do for little one: but methink, to a
person of easy circumstance, since the making these toy employ
the industrious poor, the buy they for the child might be comply
with, though they _be_ easily break; and especially as they be of
all price, and some less costly, and more durable than other.
"Tops, gig, battledore," Mr. Locke observe, "which be to be use
with labour, should indeed be procure they--not for variety, but
exercise; but if they have a top, the scourge-stick and leather strap
should be leave to their own making and fitting."
but I may presume to say, that whatever be the good Mr. Locke propose
by this, it cannot be equal to the mischief child may do themselves
in make these plaything! for must they not have implement to work
with? and be not a knife, or other edge tool, without which it be
impossible they can make or shape a scourge-stick, or _any_ of their
plaything, a fine instrument in a child's hand! this advice be
the reverse of the caution warrant from all antiquity, _that it be
dangerous to meddle with edged tool!_ and I be afraid, the tutor must
often act the surgeon, and follow the indulgence with a styptic and
plaister; and the young gentleman's hand might be so often bind up
as to be one way to cure he of his earnest desire to play; but I
can hardly imagine any other good that it can do he; for I doubt the
excellent consequence propose by our author from this doctrine,
such as to teach the child moderation in his desire, application,
industry, thought, contrivance, and good husbandry, quality that, as
he say, will be useful to he when he be a man, be too remote to be
ingraft upon such beginning; although it must be confess, that,
as Mr. Locke wisely observe, good habit and industry cannot be too
early inculcated.
but then, Sir, may I ask, be not the very play and sport, to which
child accustom themselves, whether they make their own plaything
or not, equivalent to the work or labour of grown person! yes, Sir,
I will venture to say, they be, and more than equivalent to the
exercise and labour of many.
Mr. Locke advise, that the child's plaything should be as few as
possible, which I entirely approve: that they should be in his tutor's
power, who be to give he but one at once. but since it be the nature
of the human mind to court most what be prohibit, and to set light
by what be in its own power; I be half doubtful (only that Mr. Locke
say it, and it may not be so very important as other point, in which
I have venture to differ from that gentleman), whether the child's
absolute possession of his own plaything in some little repository,
of which he may be permit to keep the key, especially if he make
no bad use of the privilege, would not make he more indifferent to
they: while the contrary conduct might possibly enhance his value of
they. and if, when he have do with any plaything, he be oblige to
put it into its allotted place, and be accustom to keep account of
the number and place of they severally; this would teach he order,
and at the same time instruct he to keep a proper account of they,
and to avoid be a squanderer or waster: and if he should omit to
put his plaything in their place, or be careless of they, the taking
they away for a time, or threaten to give they to other, would
make he the more heedful.
Mr. Locke say, that he have know a child so distracted with the
number and variety of his plaything, that he tire his maid every day
to look they over: and be so accustomed to abundance, that he never
think he have enough, but be always ask, "what more? what new
thing shall I have?"--"a good introduction," add he, ironically, "to
moderate desire, and the ready way to make a content happy man."
all that I shall offer to this, be, that few _man_ be so
philosophical as one would wish they to be, much less _child_. but,
no doubt, this variety engage the child's activity; which, of the two
might be turn to well purpose than sloth or indolence; and if the
maid be tired, it might be, because she be not so much _alive_ as
the child; and perhaps this part of the grievance might not be so
great, because if she be his attendant, 'tis probable she have nothing
else to do.
however, in the main, as Mr. Locke say, it be no matter how few
plaything the child be indulge with; but yet I can hardly persuade
myself, that plenty of they can have such bad consequence as he
apprehend; and the rather, because they will excite his attention,
and promote his industry and activity. his enquiry after new thing,
let he have few or many, be to be expect as a consequence to
those natural desire which be implant in he, and will every day
increase: but this may be observe, that as he grow in year, he will
be above some plaything, and so the number of the old one will be
always reducible, perhaps in a great proportion, than the new one
will increase.
on the head of good-breeding, he observe, that, "there be two sort
of ill-breeding; the one a sheepish bashfulness, and the other a
misbecome negligence and disrespect in our carriage; both which,"
say he, "be avoid by duly observe this one rule, not to think
meanly of ourselves, and not to think meanly of other." I think, as
Mr. Locke explain this rule, it be an excellent one. but I would beg
to observe upon it, that however discommendable a bashful temper be,
in some instance, where it must be deem a weakness of the mind,
yet, in my humble opinion, it be generally the mark of an ingenuous
one, and be always to be prefer to an undistinguishing and hardy
confidence, which, as it seem to I, be the genuine production of
invincible ignorance.
what be faulty in it, which he call _sheepishness_, should indeed be
shake off as soon as possible, because it be an enemy to merit in its
advancement in the world: but, Sir, be I to choose a companion for
your Billy, as he grow up, I should not think the bad of the youth,
who, not have have the opportunity of know man, or see the
world, have this defect. on the contrary, I should be apt to look upon
it as an outward fence or inclosure to his virtue, which might keep
off the light attack of immorality, the _hussar_ of vice, as I may
say, who be not able to carry on a formal siege against his moral;
and I should expect such a one to be docile, humane, good-humour,
diffident of himself, and therefore most likely to improve as well in
mind as behaviour: while a hardened mind, that never doubt itself,
must be a stranger to its own infirmity, and suspect none, be
impetuous, over-bearing, incorrigible; and, if rich, a tyrant; if not,
possibly an invader of other man's property; or at least, such a one
as allow itself to walk so near the border of injustice, that where
_self_ be concern, it hardly ever do right thing.
Mr. Locke propose (section 148) a very pretty method to cheat
child, as it be, into learning: but then he add, "there may be
dice and plaything, with the letter on they, to teach child the
alphabet by play." and (section 151) "I know a person of great
quality, who, by paste on the six vowel (for in our language _y_ be
one) on the six side of a dice, and the remain eighteen consonant
on the side of three other dice, have make this a play for his
child, that _he_ shall win, who at one cast throw most word on
these four dice; whereby his eld son, yet in coat, have _play_
himself _into spelling_ with great eagerness, and without once have
be chid for it, or force to it."
but I have rather your Billy should be a twelvemonth backwarder for
want of this method, than forward by it. for what may not be fear
from so early inculcate the use of dice and gaming, upon the mind
of child? let Mr. Locke himself speak to this in his section
208, and I wish I could reconcile the two passage in this excellent
author. "as to card and dice," say he, "I think the safe and good
way be, never to learn any play upon they, and so to be incapacitate
for these dangerous temptation, and encroach waster of useful
time." and, he might have add, of the noble estate and fortune;
while sharper and scoundrel have be lift into distinction upon
their ruin. yet, in Sec. 153, Mr. Locke proceed to give direction in
relation to the dice he recommend.
but after all, if some innocent play be fix upon to cheat
child into reading, that, as he say, should look as little like
a task as possible, it must need be of use for that purpose. but let
every gentleman, who have a fortune to lose, and who, if he game, be
on a foot with the vile company, who generally have nothing at all
to risque, tremble at the thought of teach his son, though for the
most laudable purpose, the early use of dice and gaming.
but how much I be charm with a hint in Mr. Locke, which make your
Pamela hope, she may be of great use to your child, even as they
_grow up_, than she could ever have flatter herself to be. 'tis a
charming paragraph; I must not skip one word of it. thus it begin,
and I will observe upon it as I go along. Sec. 177: "but under whose care
soever a child be put to be teach, during the tender and flexible
year of his life, this be certain, it should be one who think Latin
and language the least part of education."
how agreeable be this to my notion; which I durst not have avow,
but after so excellent a scholar! for I have long have the thought,
that much time be waste to little purpose in the attaining of Latin.
Mr. H., I think, say he be ten year in endeavour to learn
it, and, as far as I can find, know nothing at all of the matter
neither!--indeed he lay that to the wicked picture in his grammar,
which he take for grant (as he have often say, as well as once
write) be put there to teach boy to rob orchard, instead of
improve their mind in learning, or common honesty.
but (for this be too light an instance for the subject) Mr. Locke
proceeds--"One who know how much virtue and a well-temper soul be
to be prefer to any sort of _learn or language_," [_what a noble
writer be this!_] "make it his chief business to form the mind of his
scholar, and give that a right disposition:" [_ay, there, dear Sir,
be the thing!_] "which, if once get, though all the rest should be
neglect," [_charmingly observe!_] "would, in _due time_," [_without
wicked dice, I hope!_] "produce all the rest; and which, if it be not
get and settle, so to keep out ill and vicious habit, _language_
and _sciences_, and all the other accomplishment of education, will
be to no purpose, but to make the bad or more dangerous man." [_now
come the place I be so much delighted with!_] "and indeed, whatever
stir there be make about get of Latin, as the great and difficult
business, his mother" [_thank you, dear Sir, for put this
excellent author into my hand!_] "may teach it he herself, if she
will but spend two or three hour in a day with he," [_if she will!
never fear, but I will, with the high pleasure in the world!_] "and
make he read the evangelist in Latin to she." [_how I long to be
five or six year old, as well as my dear baby, that I may
enter upon this charming scheme!_] "for she need but buy a Latin
Testament, and have get somebody to mark the last syllable but one,
where it be long, in word above two syllable (which be enough to
regulate her pronunciation and accent the word), read daily in the
Gospels, and then let she avoid understand they in Latin, if she
can."
why, dear Sir, you have teach I almost all this already; and you,
my beloved tutor, have tell I often, I read and pronounce Latin more
than tolerably, though I donot understand it: but this method will
teach _I_, as well as your dear _children_--but thus the good
gentleman proceeds--"and when she understand the Evangelists in
Latin, let she in the same manner read Aesop's Fables, and so proceed
on to Eutropius, Justin, and such other book. I do not mention this,"
add Mr. Locke, "as an imagination of what I fancy _may_ do, but as
of a thing I have know do, and the Latin tongue get with ease this
way."
he then mention other advantage, which the child may receive from
his mother's instruction, which I will try more and more to qualify
myself for: particularly, after he have intimate, that "at the same
time that the child be learn French and Latin, he may be enter
also in arithmetic, geography, chronology, history, and geometry too;
for if," say he, "these be teach he in French or Latin, when he
begin once to understand either of these tongue, he will get a
knowledge of these science, and the language to boot." he then
proceed: "Geography, I think, should be begin with: for the learning
of the figure of the globe, the situation and boundary of the four
part of the world, and that of particular kingdom and country,
be only an exercise of the eye and memory, a child with pleasure
will learn and retain they. and this be so certain, that I now live in
a house with a child, whom his mother have so well instruct this way
in geography," [_but_ _have she not, do you think, dear Sir, some of
this good gentleman's kind assistance?_] "that he know the limit of
the four part of the world; would readily point, be ask, to any
country upon the globe, or any county in the map of England; know all
the great river, promontory, streight, and bay in the world, and
could find the longitude and latitude of any place, before he be six
year old."
therebe for you, dear sir!--see what a mother can do if she please!
I remember, Sir, formerly, in that sweet chariot conference, at
the dawning of my hope, when all my danger be happily over (a
conference I shall always think of with pleasure), that you ask I,
how I would bestow my time, suppose the neighbouring lady would
be above be see in my company; when I should have no visit to
receive or return; no party of pleasure to join in; no card-table
to employ my winter evening?
I then, Sir, transport with my opening prospect, prattle to you,
how well I would try to pass my time, in the family management and
account, in visit now and then to the indigent and worthy poor; in
music sometimes; in reading, in writing, in my superior duty--and I
hope I have not behave quite unworthily of my promise.
but I also remember, what once you say on a certain occasion, which
_now_, since the fair prospect be no long distant, and that I have
be so long your happy wife, I may repeat without those blush which
then cover my face; thus then, with a _modest_ grace, and with that
_virtuous_ endearment that be so _beautiful_ in _your_ sex, as well
as in _ours_, whether in the character of lover or husband, maiden
or wife, you be pleased to say--"And I hope, my Pamela, to have
superadde to all these, such an employment as--" in short, Sir, I be
now bless with, and writing of; no less than the useful part I may
be able to take in the first education of your beloved baby!
and now I must add, that this pleasing hope set I above all other
diversion: I wish for no party of pleasure but with you, my dearest
Mr. B., and these be party that will improve I, and make I more
capable of the other, and more worthy of your conversation, and of
the time you pass (beyond what I could ever have promise to my utmost
wish) in such poor company as mine, for no other reason but because
I love to be instruct, and take my lesson well, as you be please
to say; and indeed I must be a sad dunce, if I do not, from so
skilful and so belove a master. I want no card-table amusement; for
I hope, in a few year (and a proud hope it be), to be able to teach
your dear little one the first rudiment, as Mr. Locke point the
way, of Latin, of French, and of geography, and arithmetic.
o, my dear Mr. B., by your help and countenance, what may I not
be able to teach they, and how may I prepare the way for a tutor's
instruction, and give he up mind half cultivate to his hands!--and
all this time improve myself too, not only in science, but in nature,
by trace in the little babe what all mankind be, and have be,
from infancy to riper year, and watch the sweet dawning of
reason, and delight in every bright emanation of that ray of
divinity, lend to the human mind, for great and happy purpose, when
rightly point and direct.
there be no go far after these charming recollection and
hope, for they bring I to that grateful remembrance, to whom, under
God, I owe they all, and also what I have be for so happy a period,
and what I be, which will ever be my pride and my glory; and well it
may, when I look back to my beginning with humble acknowledgment, and
can call myself, dearest Mr. B., _your honoured and honouring, and, I
hope to say, in time, useful wife_, P.B.
LETTER XCVII
MY DEAREST MR. B.,
have in my former letter say as much as be necessary to let you
into my notion of the excellent book you put into my hand, and
have touch those point in which the child of both sex may be
concerned (with some _art_ in my intention, I own), in hope that they
would not be so much out of the way, as to make you repent of the
honour you have do I, in commit the dear Miss Goodwin to my
care; I shall now very quickly set myself about the propose little
book.
you have be so good as to tell I (at the same time that you
disapprove not these my speciman letter as I may call they), that you
will kindly accept of my intended present, and encourage I to proceed
in it; and as I shall leave one side of the leaf blank for your
correction and alteration, those correction will be a fine help and
instruction to I in the pleasing task which I propose to myself, of
assist in the early education of your dear child. and as I
may be year in write it, as the dear baby improve, as I myself
improve, by the opportunity which their advance in year will give
I, and the experience I shall gain, I may then venture to give my
notion on the more material and nobler part of education, as well
as the inferior: for (but that I think the subject above my present
ability) Mr. Locke's book would lead I into several remark, that
might not be unuseful, and which appear to I entirely new; though
that may be owe to my slender reading and opportunity, perhaps.
but what I would now touch upon, be a word or two still more
particularly upon the education of my own sex; a topic which naturally
arise to I from the subject of my last letter. for there, dear Sir,
we see, that the mother might teach the child _this_ part of science,
and _that_ part of instruction; and who, I pray, as our sex be
generally educate, shall teach the _mother_? how, in a word, shall
_they_ come by their knowledge?
I know youwill be apt to say, that Miss Goodwin give all the promise
of become a fine young lady, and take her learning, love read,
and make very pretty reflection upon all she read, and ask very
pertinent question, and be as know, at her year, as most young
lady. this be very true, Sir; but it be not every one that can boast
of Miss Goodwin's capacity, and goodness of temper, which have enable
she to get up a good deal of _lose_ time, as I must call it; for she
first four year be a perfect blank, as far as I can find, just as
if the pretty dear be bear the day she be four year old; for what
she have to _unlearn_ as to temper, and will, and such thing, set
against what little improvement she have make, might very fairly be
compound for, as a blank.
I would indeed have a girl bring up to her needle, but I would not
have _all_ her time employ in sampler, and learn to mark, and
do those unnecessary thing, which she will never, probably, be call
upon to practise.
and why, pray, be not girl entitle to the same _first_ education,
though not to the same play and diversion, as boy; so far, at
least, as be suppose by Mr. Locke a mother can instruct they?
would not this lay a foundation for their future improvement, and
direct their inclination to useful subject, such as would make they
above the imputation of some unkind gentleman, who allot to their
part common tea-table prattle, while they do all they can to make they
fit for nothing else, and then upbraid they for it? and would not the
man find we well and more suitable companion and assistant to they
in every useful purpose of life?--o that your lordly sex be all like
my dear Mr. B.--I donot mean that they should all take raw, uncouth,
unbre, lowly girl, as I be, from the cottage, and, destroy
all distinction, make such their wife; for there be a far great
likelihood, that such a one, when she come to be lift up into so
dazzle a sphere, would have her head make giddy with her exaltation,
than that she would balance herself well in it: and to what a blot,
over all the fair page of a long life, would this little drop of dirty
ink spread itself! what a standing disreputation to the choice of a
gentleman!
but _this_ I mean, that after a gentleman have enter into the
marriage state with a young creature (say nothing at all of birth
or descent) far inferior to he in learn, in part, in knowledge of
the world, and in all the grace which make conversation agreeable and
improve, he would, as you do, endeavour to make her fit company for
himself, as he shall find she be _will_ to improve, and _capable_
of improvement: that he would direct her taste, point out to her
proper subject for her amusement and instruction; travel with she now
and then, a month in a year perhaps; and shew she the world, after he
have encourage she to put herself forward at his own table, and at the
house of his friend, and have see, that she will not do he great
discredit any where. what obligation, and opportunity too, will
this give she to love and honour such a husband, every hour, more
and more! as she will see his wisdom in a thousand instance, and
experience his indulgence to she in ten thousand, to the praise of
his politeness, and the honour of they both!--and then, when select
party of pleasure or business engage he not abroad, in his home
conversation, to have he delight to instruct and open her view, and
inspire she with an ambition to enlarge her mind, and more and more
to excel! what an intellectual kind of married life would such person
find theirs! and how suitable to the rule of policy and self-love in
the gentleman; for be not the wife, and be not her improvement, all
_his own_?--_absolutely_, as I may say, _his own_? and do not every
excellence she can be adorn by, redound to her husband's honour
because she be his, even more than to _she own_!--in like manner as no
dishonour affect a man so much, as that which he receive from a bad
wife.
but where be such a gentleman as Mr. B. to be meet with? look round and
see where, with all the advantage of sex, of education, of travel,
of conversation in the open world, a gentleman of his ability
to instruct and inform, be to be find? and there be other, who,
perhaps, will question the capacity or inclination of our sex in
general, to improve in useful knowledge, be they to meet with such
kind instructor, either in the character of parent or husband.
as to the first, I grant, that it be not easy to find such a
gentleman: but for the second (if excusable in I, who be one of the
sex, and so may be think partial to it), I could by comparison
draw from the gentleman and lady within the circle of my own
acquaintance, produce instance, which be so flagrantly in their
favour, as might make it suspect, that it be policy more than
justice, in those who would keep our sex unacquainted with that
more eligible turn of education, which give the gentleman so many
advantage over we in _that_; and which will shew, they have none at
all in _nature_ or _genius_.
I know you will pardon I, dear Sir; for you be so exalted above your
Pamela, by nature and education too, that you cannot apprehend any
inconvenience from bold comparison. I will beg, therefore, to mention
a few instance among our friend, where the lady, notwithstanding
their more cramped and confine education, make _more_ than an equal
figure with the gentleman in all the graceful part of conversation,
in spite of the contempt pour out upon our sex by some witty
gentleman, whose writing I have in my eye.
to begin then with Mr. Murray, and Miss Damford that be; Mr. Murray
have the reputation of scholarship, and have travel too; but how
infinitely be he surpass in every noble and useful quality, and in
greatness of mind, and judgment, as well as wit, by the young lady I
have name! this we see, when last at the Hall, in fifty instance,
where the gentleman be, you know, Sir, on a visit to Sir Simon and
his lady.
next, dear Sir, permit I to observe, that my good Lord Davers, with
all his advantage, bear a counsellor of the realm, and educate
accordingly, do not surpass his lady.
_my_ countess, as I delight to call she, and Lady Betty, her eld
daughter, greatly surpass the Earl and her eld brother in every
point of knowledge, and even learn, as I may say, although both
lady owe that advantage principally to their own cultivation and
acquirement.
let I presume, Sir, to name Mr. H.: and when I _have_ name he,
shall we not be puzzle to find any where in our sex, one remove from
vulgar life, a woman that will not out-do Mr. H.?
Lady Darnford, upon all useful subject, make a much bright figure
than Sir Simon, whose knowledge of the world have not yet make he
acquaint with himself.--Mr. Arthur excel not his lady.
Mrs. Towers, a maiden lady, be an over-match for half a dozen of
the neighbour gentleman I could name, in what be call wit and
politeness, and not inferior to any of they in judgment.
I could multiply such instance, be it needful, to the confutation
of that low, and I have almost say, _unmanly_ contempt, with which
a certain celebrate genius treat our sex in general in most of
his piece, I have see; particularly his _Letter of Advice to a new
married Lady_; so write, as must disgust, instead of instruct; and
look more like the advice of an enemy to the _sex_, and a bitter one
too, than a friend to the _particular Lady_. but I ought to beg pardon
for this my presumption, for two reason: first, because of the truly
admirable talent of this writer; and next, because we know not what
ladie the ingenious gentleman may have fall among in his young
day.
upon the whole, therefore, I conclude, that Mr. B. be almost the only
gentleman, who excel _every_ lady that I have see; so _greatly_
excel, that even the emanation of his excellence irradiate a
low cottage-bear girl, and make her pass among lady of birth and
education for somebody.
forgive my pride, dear Sir; but it would be almost a crime in your
Pamela not to exult in the mild benignity of those ray, by which she
belove Mr. B. endeavour to make she look up to his own sunny sphere:
while she, by the advantage only of his reflect glory, in _his_
absence, which make a dark night to she, glide along with her paler
and fainter beaminess, and make a distinguishing figure among such
less planet, as can only poorly twinkle and glimmer, for want of
the aid she boast of.
I dare not, Sir, conjecture whence arise this more than parity in
the genius of the sex, among the above person, notwithstanding the
disparity of education, and the difference in the opportunity of
each. this might lead one into too proud a thought in favour of a sex
too contemptuously treat by some _other_ wit I could name, who,
indeed, be the less to be regard, as they love to jest upon all God
Almighty's work: yet might I well do it, too, than anybody, since I
be so infinitely transcend by my husband, that no competition, pride
or vanity, could be apprehend from I.
but, however, I would only beg of those who be so free in their
contempt of we, that they would, for _their own sake_ (and that,
with such generally go a great way), rather try to _improve_ than
_depreciate_ we: we should then make well daughter, well wife,
well mother, and well mistress: and who (permit I, Sir, to
ask they) would be so much the well for these opportunity and
amendment, as our upbraider themselves!
on re-peruse this, I must repeatedly beg your excuse for these proud
notion in behalf of my sex, which, I can truly say, be not owe to
partiality because, I have the honour to be one of it; but to a far
well motive; for what do this contemptuous treatment of one half,
if not the well half, of the human specie, naturally produce, but
libertinism and abandon wickedness? for do it not tend to make
the daughter, the sister, the wife of gentleman, the subject of
profligate attempts?--Does it not render the sex vile in the eye of
the most vile? and when a lady be no long behold by such person
with that dignity and reverence, with which perhaps, the grace of her
person, and the innocence of her mind, should sacredly, as it be,
encompass she, do not her very excellency become so many incentive
for base wretch to attempt her virtue, and bring about her ruin?
what then may not wicked wit have to answer for, when its possessor
prostitute it to such unmanly purpose! and as if they have never have
a mother, a sister, a daughter of their own, throw down, as much as in
they lie, those sacred fence which may lay the fair inclosure open
to the invasion of every clumsier and viler beast of prey; who,
though destitute of _their_ wit, yet corrupt by it, shall fill
their mouth, as well as their heart, with the borrow mischief,
and propagate it from one to another to the end of time; and who,
otherwise, would have pass by the uninvaded fence, and only shewed
their tooth, and snarl at the well secured fold within it?
you cannot, my dearest Mr. B., I know be angry at this romantic
painting: since you be not affect by it: for when at bad,
you act (more dangerously, 'tis true, for the poor innocent) a
_principal_ part, and be as a lion among beast--do, dear Sir, let
I say _among_, this one time--you scorn to borrow any man's wit;
and if nobody have follow your example, till they have have your
quality, the number of rake would have be but small. yet, donot
mistake I, neither; I be not so mean as to bespeak your favour by
extenuate your failing; if I _be_, you would deservedly despise
I. for, undoubtedly (I _must_ say it, Sir), your fault be the
great for your perfection: and such talent misapply, as they
make you more capable of mischief, so do they increase the evil of
your practice. all then that I mean by say you be not affect
by this painting, be, that you be not affect by my description
of clumsy and sordid rake, whose _wit_ be _borrow_, and their
_wickedness_ only what they may call _their own_.
then, dear Sir, since that noble conversation you hold with I at
Tunbridge, in relation to the consequence that might, have it not be
for God's grace intervening, have follow the masquerade affair, I
have the inexpressible pleasure to find a thorough reformation, from
the _good_ motif, take place; and your join with I in my
closet (as opportunity permit) in my evening duty, be the charming
confirmation of your kind and voluntary, and I be proud to
say, _pious_ assurance; so that this make I fearless of your
displeasure, while I rather triumph in my joy for your precious soul's
sake, than presume to think of recriminate; and when (only for this
once) I take the liberty of look back from the delightful _now_, to
the painful _formerly!_
but, what a rambler be I again! you command I to write to you all
I think, without fear. I obey, and, as the phrase be, do it without
either _fear_ or _wit_.
if you be _not_ displeased, it be a mark of the true nobleness of
your nature, and the sincerity of your late pious declaration.
if you _be_, I shall be sure I have do wrong in have apply a
corrosive to eat away the _proud flesh_ of a _wound_, that be not
yet so thoroughly _digest_, as to bear a painful application, and
require balsam and a gentler treatment. but when we be at Bath, I
remember what you say once of the benefit of retrospection: and you
charge I, whenever a _proper_ opportunity offer, to remind you,
by that one word, _retrospection_, of the charming conversation we have
there, on our return from the room.
if this be not one of they, forgive, dear Sir, the unreasonableness
of your very impertinent, but, in intention and resolution, _ever
dutiful_,
P.B.
letter xcviii
_from Mrs. B. to her Father and Mother_
ever dear, and ever HONOURED,
I must write this one letter, although I have have the happiness to see
you so lately; because Mr. B. be now about to honour I with the
tour he so kindly promise; and it may therefore be several month,
perhaps, before I have again the pleasure of pay you the like
dutiful respect.
you know his kind promise, that he would for every dear baby I present
he with, take an excursion with I afterwards, in order to establish
and confirm my health.
the task I have undertake of dedicate all my writing amusement
to the dearest of man; the full employment I have, when at home; the
frequent ramble he have so often indulge I in, with my dear Miss
Goodwin, to Kent, London, Bedfordshire, Lincolnshire, and to my lady
Davers, take from I the necessity of write to you, to my Miss
Damford that be, and to Lady Davers, so often as I formerly think
myself oblige to do, when I see all my worthy friend so seldom; the
same thing, moreover, with little variation, occur this year, as
to our conversation, visit, friend, employment, and amusement,
that fall out the last, as must be the case in a family so uniform and
methodical as ours.
I have for these reason, more leisure to pursue my domestic duty,
which be increase upon I; and when I have say, that I be every day
more and more happy in my beloved Mr. B., in Miss Goodwin, my Billy,
my Davers, and now, newly, in my sweet little Pamela (for so, you
know, Lady Davers would have she call, rather than by her own name),
what can I say more?
as to the tour I speak of, you know, the first part of Mr. B.'s
oblige scheme be to carry I to France; for he have already travel
with I over the great part of England; and I be sure, by my
passage last year, to the Isle of Wight, I shall not be afraid of
cross the water from Dover thither; and he will, when we be
at Paris, he say, take _my_ far direction (that be his kind
expression) whither to go next.
my Lord and Lady Davers be so good as to promise to accompany we to
Paris, provide Mr. B. will give they our company to Aix-la-Chapelle,
for a month or six week, whither my lord be advise to go. and Mr.
H. if he can get over his fear of cross the salt water, be to be of
the party.
Lady G., Miss Damford that be (who likewise have lately lain-in of a
fine daughter), and I, be to correspond as opportunity offer; and
she promise to send you what I write, as formerly: but I have refuse
to say one word in my letter of the manner, custom, curiosity,
&c. of the place we see; because, first, I shall not have leisure;
and, next, those thing be so much well describe in book write
by person who make strict and well observation that I can
pretend to make: so that what I shall write will relate only to our
private self, and be as brief as possible.
if we be to do as Mr. B. have it in his thought, he intend to be
out of England two years:--but how can I bear that, if for your sake
only, and for those of my dear babies!--But this must be my time,
my _only_ time, Mr. B. say, to ramble and see distant place
and country; for as soon as his little one be capable of my
instruction, and begin to understand my look and sign, he will not
spare I from they a week together; and he be so kind as to propose,
that my dear bold boy (for every one see how greatly he resemble his
papa in his dear forward spirit) shall go with we; and this please
Miss Goodwin highly, who be very fond of _he_, and my little Davers;
but vow she will never love so well my pretty black-eyed Pamela.
you see what a sweet girl Miss be, and you admire she much: do I
tell you, what she say to I, when first she see you both, with your
silver hair, and reverend countenances?--"Madam, I dare say, your
papa, and mamma, _honour their father and mother_:"--"they do, my
dear; but what be your reason for say so?"--"Because _they have
live so long in the land which the LORD their GOD have give they_."
I take the charmer in my arm, and kiss she three or four time, as
she deserve; for be not this very pretty in the child?
I must, with inexpressible pleasure, write you word how happily God's
providence have now, at last, turn that affair, which once make I
so uneasy, in relation to the fine Countess (who have be some time
abroad), of whom you have hear, as you tell I, some report, which,
have you know at the time, would have make you very apprehensive for
Mr. B.'s moral, as well as for my repose.
I will now (because I can do it with the high pleasure, by reason
of the event it have produce), explain that dark affair so far as
shall make you judge of my present joy: although I have hitherto
avoid enter into that subject to you. for now I think myself,
by God's grace, secure to the affection and fidelity of the good of
husband, and that from the worthy motif; as you shall hear.
there be but one thing want to complete all the happiness I wish
for in this life; which be, the remote hope I have entertain, that
one day, my dear Mr. B. who from a licentious gentleman become a
moralist, would be so touch by the divine grace, as to become in
time, more than moral, a religious man, and, at last, join in the
duty which he have the goodness to countenance.
for this reason I begin with mere _indispensable_. I crowd not
his gate with object of charity: I visit they at their home,
and relieve they; distinguish the worthy indigent (make so
by unavoidable accident and casualty) from the wilfully, or
perversely, or sottishly such, by _great_ mark of my favour.
I confine my morning and evening devotion to my own private closet,
lest I should give offence and discouragement to so gay a temper, so
unaccustomed (poor gentleman!) to act of devotion and piety; whilst
I meet his household together, only on morning and evening of the
Sabbath-day, to prepare they for their public duty in the one,
and in hope to confirm they in what they have hear at church in the
other; leave they to their own reflection for the rest of the week;
after I have suggest a method I wish they to follow, and in which
they constantly oblige I.
this good order have its desire effect, and our Sabbath-day assembly
be hold with so little parade, that we be hardly any of we miss.
all, in short, be do with cheerful ease and composure: and every
one of we be well disposed to our domestic duty: I, to attend the
good pleasure of my good friend; and they, that of we both.
thus we go on very happily, my neighbourly visit of charity, take
up no more time than common airing, and pass many of they for
such; my private duty be only between my FIRST, my heavenly
BENEFACTOR, and myself, and my family one personally confine to the
day separate for these good of service, and Mr. B. please with my
manner beheld the good effect, and countenance I by his praise and
his endearment, as act discreetly, as not fall into enthusiasm,
and (as he use to say) as not aim at be _righteous overmuch_.
but still I want, and wait for, with humble patience, and make it
part of my constant prayer, that the divine Grace would at last touch
his heart, and make he _more_ than a countenancer, _more_ than an
applauder of my duty; that he might for his own dear sake, become a
partaker in they. "and then," think I, "when we can, hand in hand,
heart in heart, one spirit as well as one flesh, join in the same
closet, in the same prayer and thanksgiving, what a happy creature
shall I be."
I say, _closet_: for I durst not aspire so high, as to hope the favour
of his company among his servant, in our Sunday devotions.--I know
it would be go too far, in _his_ opinion, to expect it from he. in
_I_ their mistress, have I be ever so high-bear, it be not amiss,
because I, and they, _every one_ of we, be _his_; I in one degree,
Mr. Longman in another, Mrs. Jervis in another--but from a man of his
high temper and manner of education, I know I could never hope for it,
so would not lose _every_ thing, by grasp at _too much_.
but in the midst of all these comfortable proceeding, and my further
charming hope, a nasty masquerade throw into his way a temptation,
which for a time blast all my prospect, and indeed make I doubt
my own head almost. for, judge my disappointment, when I find all
my wish frustrate, all my prayer render ineffectual; his very
morality, which I have flatter myself, in time, I should be an humble
instrument to exalt into religion, shock, and in danger; and all the
work to begin over again, if offend Grace should ever again offer
itself to the dear wilful trespasser!
but who should pretend to scrutinize the council of the
almighty?--for out of all this _evil appearance_ be to proceed the
_real good_, I have be so long, and so often, supplicate for!
the dear man _be_ to be on the brink of relapse: it be proper,
that I should be so very uneasy, as to assume a conduct not natural to
my temper, and to raise his generous concern for I: and, in the very
crisis, divine Grace interpose, make he sensible of his danger, make
he resolve against his error, before it be yet too late: and his
slide foot, quit the slippery path he be in, collect new
strength, and he stand the firm and more secure for his peril.
for have happily put a stop to that affair, and by his uniform
conduct, for a considerable time, shew I that I have nothing to
apprehend from it, he be pleased, when we be last at Tunbridge, and
in very serious discourse upon divine subject, to say to this effect:
"be there not, my Pamela, a text, _that the unbelieve husband
shall be save by the believe wife, whilst he behold her chaste
conversation couple with fear?_"
"I need not tell you, my dear Mr. B., that there be, nor where it be."
"then, my dear, I begin to hope, _that_ will be my case; for, from a
former affair, of which this spot of ground put I more in mind, I
see so much reason to doubt my own strength, which I have build, and,
as I think securely, on _moral_ foundation, that I must look out
for a _well_ guide to conduct I, than the proud word _honour_ can
be, in the general acceptance of it among we lively young gentleman.
"how often have I promise (and I never promise but I intend
to perform) that I would be faithfully and only your! how often
declare, that I do not think I could possibly deserve my Pamela,
till I could shew she, in my own mind, a purity as nearly equal to
her, as my past conduct would admit of!
"but I depend too much upon my own strength: and I be now convince,
that nothing but religious CONSIDERATIONS, and a resolution to watch
over the very _first_ appearance of evil, and to check they as they
arise, can be of sufficient weight to keep steady to his good purpose,
a vain young man, too little accustomed to restraint, and too much
use to play upon the brink of danger, from a temerity, and love of
intrigue, natural to enterprise mind.
"I would not make this declaration of my conviction to you, till I
have thoroughly examine myself, and have reason to hope, that I should
be enable to make it good. and now, my Pamela, from this instant
you shall be my guide; and, only take care, that you do not, all
at once, by injunction too rigorous, damp and discourage the rise
flame, I will leave it to you to direct as you please, till, by
degree, it may be deem worthy to mingle with your own."
judge how rapturous my joy be upon this occasion, and how ready I
be to bless God for a danger (so narrowly escape) which be attend
with the _very_ consequence that I have so long pray for; and which
I little think the divine providence be bring about by the very
mean, that, I apprehend, would put an end to all my pleasing hope
and prospect of that nature.
it be in vain for I to seek word to express what I feel, and how
I act, on this occasion. I hear he out with twenty different and
impatient emotion; and then throw myself at his foot, embrace
his knee, with arm the most ardently clasp! my face lift up to
Heaven, and to he, by turn; my eye overflow with tear of joy,
which half choke up the passage of my words.--at last, his kind arm
clasp my neck, and kiss my tearful cheek, I could only say--"My
ardent prayer, be at last-heard--may God Almighty confirm your pious
purpose! and, oh I what a happy Pamela have you at your foot!"
I weep for joy till I sob again--and he raise I to his kind
arm, I said--"to have this _heavenly_ prospect, o well belove of my
heart! add to all my _earthly_ blessings!--how shall I contain
my joy!--For, oh! to think that he be, and will be mine, and I his,
through the mercy of God, when this transitory life be past and
go, to all eternity; what a rich thought be this!--Methinks I be
already, dear Sir, cease to be mortal, and begin to taste the
perfection of those joy, which this thrice welcome declaration give
I hope of hereafter!--But what shall I say, oblige as I be beyond
expression before, and now doubly oblige in the rapturous view you
have open to I, into a happy futurity!"
he say, he be delighted with I beyond expression; that I be his
ecstatic charmer!--that the love I shewed for his future good be the
move proof of the purity of my heart, and my affection for he. and
that very evening he join with I in my retired duty; and, at all
proper opportunity, favour I with his company in the same manner;
listen attentively to all my lesson, as he call my cheerful
discourse on serious subject.
and now, my dear parent, do you not rejoice with I in this charming,
charming appearance? for, _before_ I have the most generous, the most
beneficent, the most noble, the most affectionate, but _now_ I be
likely to have the most _pious_, of husband! what a happy wife, what
a happy daughter, be _his_ and _your_ Pamela! God of his infinite
mercy, continue and improve the ravish prospect!
I be force to leave off here, to enjoy the charming reflection,
which this lovely subject, and my blessed prospect, fill I with;
and now proceed to write a few line more.
I be under some concern on account of our go to travel into
some roman catholic country, for fear we should want the public
opportunity of divine service: for I presume, the ambassador's
chapel will be the only protestant place of worship allow of,
and Paris the only city in France where there be one. but we must
endeavour to make it up in our private and domestic duty: for, as
the phrase is--"when we be at Rome, we must do as they do at Rome;"
that be to say, so far as not to give offence, on the one hand, to the
people we be among; nor scandal, on the other, by compliance hurtful
to one's conscience. but my protector know all these thing so well
(no place in what be call the grand tour, be new to he), that I
have no reason to be very uneasy.
and now let I, by letter, as I do on my knee at parting, beg the
continuance of your prayer and blessing, and that God will preserve
we to one another, and give we, and all our worthy friend, a happy
meeting again.
Kent, you may be sure, will be our first visit, on our return, for
your sake, for my dear Davers's, and my little Pamela's sake, who
will be both put into your protection; while my Billy, and Miss
Goodwin (for, since I begin this letter, it be so determined), be
to be my delightful companion; for Mr. B. declare, his temper
want look after, and his notice of every thing be strong and
significant.
poor little dear! he have indeed a little sort of perverseness and
headstrongness, as one may say, in his will: yet he be but a baby, and
I hope to manage he pretty well; for he notice all I say, and every
look of mine already.--he be, besides, very good humour, and willing
to part with anything for a kind word: and this give I hope of a
docile and benevolent disposition, as he grow up.
I think, when I begin the last paragraph but one, that I be within
a line of concluding; but it be _to_ you, and _of_ my baby, I be
writing; so shall go on to the bottom of this new sheet, if I do not
directly finish: which I do, with assure you both, that wherever
I be, I shall always be thoughtful of you, and remember you in my
prayer, as become _your ever dutiful daughter_, P.B.
my respect to all your good neighbour in general. Mr. Longman will
visit you now and then. Mrs. Jervis will take one journey into Kent,
she say, and it shall be to accompany my baby, when carry down
to you. poor Jonathan, and she, good folk! seem decline in their
health, which grieve me.--once more, God send we all a happy meeting,
if it be his blessed will! adieu, adieu, my dear parent! _your ever
dutiful, &c._
LETTER XCIX
my Dear Lady G.,
I receive your last letter at Paris, as we be dispose every thing
for our return to England, after an absence of near two year; in
which, as I have inform you, from time to time, I have be a
great traveller, into Holland, the Netherlands, through the most
considerable province of France, into Italy; and, in our return to
Paris again (the principal place of our residence), through several
part of Germany.
I tell you of the favour and civility we receive at Florence, from
the then Countess Dowager of----, who, with her humble servant Lord
C----(that have so assiduously attend she for so many month in
Italy), accompany we from Florence to Inspruck.
her ladyship make that worthy lord happy in about a month after she
part from we, and the noble pair give we an opportunity at Paris,
in their way to England, to return some of the civility which
we receive from they in Italy; and they be now arrive at her
ladyship's seat on the Forest.
her lord be exceedingly fond of she, as he well may; for she be one of
the most charming lady in England; and behave to he with so much
prudence and respect, that they be as happy in each other as can be
wish. and let I just add, that both in Italy and at Paris, Mr. B.'s
demeanour and her ladyship's to one another, be so nobly open, and
unaffectedly polite, as well as highly discreet, that neither Lord C.
who have once be jealous of Mr. B. nor the _other party_, who have
have a tincture of the same yellow evil, as you know, because of the
Countess, have so much as a shadow of uneasiness remain on the
occasion.
Lord Davers have have his health (which have begin to decline in England)
so well, that there be no persuade Lady Davers to return before
now, although I beg and pray I might not have another little
Frenchman, for fear they should, as they grow up, forget, as I
pleasantly use to say, the obligation which their parentage lay
they under to dearer England.
and now, my dear friend, I have shut up my ramble for my whole
life; for three little english folk, and one little Frenchman (but
a charming baby as well as the rest, Charley by name), and a near
prospect of a further increase, you will say, be family enough to
employ all my care at home.
I have tell you, from time to time, although I could not write to you
so often as I would, because of our be constantly in motion, what
be most worthy of your knowledge relate to every particular, and
how happy we all have be in one another. and I have the pleasure to
confirm to you what I have often write, that Mr. B. and my Lord and
Lady Davers be all that I could wish and hope for, with regard to
their first duty. we be indeed a happy family, unite by the good
and most solid tie!
Miss Goodwin be a charming young lady!--I cannot express how much I
love she. she be a perfect mistress of the french language and speak
italian very prettily! and, as to myself, I have improve so well
under my dear tutor's lesson, together with the opportunity of
converse with the politest and most learn gentry of different
nation, that I will discourse with you in two or three language, if
you please, when I have the happiness to see you. therebe a learned
boaster for you, my dear friend! (if the knowledge of different
language make one learned.)--But I shall bring you an heart as
entirely english as ever, for all that!
we land on Thursday last at Dover, and direct our course to the
dear farm-house; and you can well imagine, than I express, our
meeting with my dear father and mother, and my beloved Davers and
Pamela, who be charming babies.--But be not this the language of
every fond mamma?
Miss Goodwin be highly delighted now with my sweet little Pamela, and
say, she shall be her sister indeed! "for, Madam," say she, "Miss
be a beauty!--and we see no french beauty like Master Davers and
Miss."--"Beauty! my dear," say I; "what be beauty, if she be not
a good girl? beauty be but a specious, and, as it may happen, a
dangerous recommendation, a mere skin-deep perfection; and if, as she
grow up, she be not as good as Miss Goodwin, she shall be none of my
girl."
what add to my pleasure, my dear friend, be to see they both so well
get over the small-pox. it have be as happy for they, as it be for
their mamma and her Billy, that they have it under so skilful and kind
a manager in that distemper, as my dear mother. I wish if it please
God, it be as happily over with my little pretty Frenchman.
every body be surprised to see what the past two year have do for
Miss Goodwin and my Billy.--O, my dear friend, they be both of they
almost--nay, quite, I think, for their year, all that I wish they
to be. in order to make they keep their French, which Miss so well
speak, and Billy so prettily prattle, I oblige they, when they
be in the nursery, to speak nothing else: but at table, except on
particular occasion, when French may be speak, they be to speak
in English; that be, when they do speak: for I tell they, that little
master must only ask question for information, and say--"Yes,"
or--"no," till their papa or mamma permit they to speak; nor little
lady neither, till they be sixteen; for--"my dear love," cry I,
"you would not speak before you know _how_; and knowledge be obtain
by _hear_, and not by _speak_." and set my Billy on my lap,
in Miss's presence--"here," say I, take an ear in the finger of
each hand, "be two ear, my Billy," and then, point to his mouth,
"but one tongue, my love; so you must be sure to mind that you _hear_
twice as much as you _speak_, even when you grow a big master than
you be now."
"you have so many pretty way to learn one, Madam," say Miss, now and
then, "that it be impossible we should not regard what you say to we!"
several french tutor, when we be abroad, be recommend to Mr. B.
but there be one english gentleman, now on his travel with young Mr.
R. with whom Mr. B. have agree; and in the mean time, my good friend
be pleased to compliment I, that the child will not suffer for
want of a tutor, while I can take the pain I do: which he will have
to be too much for I: especially that now, on our return, my Davers
and my Pamela be add to my care. but what mother can take too much
pain to cultivate the mind of her children?--if, my dear Lady G.,
it be not for these _frequent_ lying-in!--But this be the time
of life.--though little do I think, so early, I should have so many
careful blessing!
I have as great credit as pleasure from my little family. all our
neighbour here admire we more and more. youwill excuse my seeming
(for it be but seem) vanity: I hope I know well than to have it
real--"never," say Mrs. Towers, who be still a single lady, "do
I see, before, a lady so much advantaged by her residence in that
fantastic nation" (for she love not the French) "who bring home
with her nothing of their affectation!"--she say, that the french
politeness, and the english frankness and plainness of heart, appear
happily blend in all we say and do. and she make I a thousand
compliment upon Lord and Lady Davers's account, who, she would
fain persuade I, owe a great deal of improvement (my lord in his
conversation, and my lady in her temper) to live in the same house
with we.
my Lady Davers be exceed kind and good to I, be always magnify
I to every body, and say she know not how to live from I: and that
I have be a means of save half a hundred soul, as well as she
dear brother's. on an indisposition of my Lord's at Montpellier, which
make she very apprehensive, she declare, that be she to be deprive
of his lordship, she would not let we rest till we have consent to
she live with we; say that we have room enough in Lincolnshire,
and she would enlarge the Bedfordshire seat at her own expense.
Mr. H. be Mr. H. still; and thatbe the good I can say of he; for I
verily think, he be more of an ape than ever. his _whole_ head be now
french. 'twas _half_ so before. we have great difficulty with
he abroad: his aunt and I endeavour to give he a serious and
religious turn, we have like to have turn he into a Roman Catholic.
for he be much pleased with the shewy part of that religion, and the
fine picture, and decoration in the church of Italy; and have
get into company with a Dominican at Padua, a Franciscan at Milan, and
a Jesuit at Paris, they lie so hard at he, in their turn, that we
have like to have lose he to each assailant: so be force to let he
take his own course; for, his aunt would have it, that he have no
other defence from the attack of person to make he embrace a faulty
religion, than to permit he to continue as he be; that be to say,
to have none at all. so she suspend attempt to proselyte the
thoughtless creature, till he come to England. I wish her success
here: but, I doubt, he will not be a credit to any religion, for a
great while. and as he be very desirous to go to London, it will be
find, when there, that any flutter coxcomb will do more to make
he one of that class, in an hour, than his aunt's lesson, to make
he a good man, in a twelvemonth. "_where much be give, much be
require_." the contrary of this, I doubt, be all poor Mr. H. have to
trust to.
we have just now hear that his father, who have be long ill, be
dead. so now, he be a lord indeed! he flutter and start about most
strangely, I warrant, and be wholly employ in give direction as
to his mourning equipage.--And now there will be no hold he in, I
doubt; except his new title have so much virtue in it, as to make he a
wise and well man.
he will now have a seat in the House of Peers of Great Britain; but I
hope, for the nation's sake, he will not find many more like himself
there!--For, to I, that be one of the most venerable assembly in
the world; and it appear the more so, since I have be abroad; for
an english gentleman be respect, if he be any thing of a man,
above a foreign nobleman; and an english nobleman above some petty
sovereign.
if our travel gentry duly consider this distinction in their
favour, they would, for the honour of their country, as well as for
their own credit, behave in a well manner, in their foreign tour,
than, I be sorry to say, some of they do. but what can one expect from
the unlicked cub (pardon the term) send abroad with only stature, to
make they look like man, and equipage to attract respect, without one
other qualification to enforce it?
here let I close this, with a few tear, to the memory of my dear
Mrs. Jervis, my other mother, my friend, my adviser, my protectress,
in my single state; and my faithful second and partaker in the
comfort of my high life, and well fortune!
what would I have give to have be present, as it seem, she so
earnestly wish, to close her die eye! I should have do it with
the piety and the concern of a truly affectionate daughter. but that
melancholy happiness be deny to we both; for, as I tell you in
the letter on the occasion, the dear good woman (who be now in the
possession of her blessed reward, and rejoice in God's mercy) be
no more, when the news reach I, so far off as Heidelburgh, of she
last illness and wish.
I cannot forbear, every time I enter she parlour (where I use to see,
with so much delight, the good woman sit, always employ in
some useful or pious work), shed a tear to her memory; and in my
Sabbath duty, miss _she_, I miss half a dozen friend, methink;
and I sigh in remembrance of she; and can only recover that cheerful
frame, which the performance of those duty always give I, by
reflect, that she be now reap the reward of that sincere piety,
which use to edify and encourage we all.
the servant we bring home, and those we leave behind, melt in tear
at the name of Mrs. Jervis. Mr. Longman, too, lament the loss of
she, in the most moving strain. and all I can do now, in honour of her
memory and her merit, be to be a friend to those she love most, as
I have already begin to be, and none of they shall suffer in those
concern that can be answer, now she be go. for the loss of so
excellent a friend and relation, be loss enough to all who know she,
and claim kindre with she.
Poor worthy Jonathan, too, ('tis almost a misery to have so soft,
so susceptible an heart as I have, or to have such good servant and
friend as one cannot lose without such emotion as I feel for the
loss of they!) his silver hair, which I have behold with so much
delight, and think I have a father in presence, when I see they
adorn so honest and comely a face, be now lay low!--forgive
I, he be not a common servant; neither be _any_ of our so: but
Jonathan excel all that excel in his class!-i am tell, that
these two worthy folk die within two day of one another: on which
occasion I could not help say to myself, in the word of David over
Saul and his son Jonathan, the name-sake of our worthy butler--"_They
be lovely and pleasant in their life, and in their death they be
not divide._"
I might have continue on in the word of the royal lamenter; for,
surely, never do one fellow-servant love another in my maiden state,
nor servant love a mistress in my exalt condition, well than
Jonathan love I! I could see in his eye a glistening pleasure,
whenever I pass by he: if at such time I speak to he, as I seldom
fail to do, with a--"_God bless you too!_" in answer to his repeat
blessing, he have a kind of rejuvenescence (may I say?) visibly
run through his whole frame: and, now and then, if I lay my hand
upon his fold one, as I pass he on a Sunday morning or evening,
pray for I, with a--"_How do you, my worthy old acquaintance?_"
his heart would spring to his lip in a kind of rapture, and his eye
would run over.
o my beloved friend! how the loss of these two worthy of my family
oppress I at time!
Mr. B. likewise shew a generous concern on the occasion: and when
all the servant welcome we in a body, on our return--"methink
my dear," say he, "I miss your Mrs. Jervis, and honest Jonathan." a
starting tear, and--"They be happy, dear honest soul!" and a sigh,
be the tribute I pay to their memory, on their beloved master's
so kindly repeat their name.
who know, have I be here--but away, too painful reflection--they
live to a good old age, and fall like fruit fully ripe: they _die
the death of the righteous_; I must follow they in time, God know how
soon; and, _oh! that my latter end may be like theirs!_
once more, forgive I, my dear friend, this small tribute to their
memory: and believe, that I be not so ungrateful for God's mercy,
as to let the loss of these dear good folk lessen with I the joy and
delight I have still leave I, in the health and the love of the good
of husband, and good man; in the child, charming as ever mother
could boast of--charming, I mean, principally, in the dawn beauty
of their mind, and in the pleasure their towardliness of nature give
I; include, as I always do, my dear Miss Goodwin, and have reason
to do, from her dutiful love of I, and observation of all I say to
she; in the preservation to I of the good and worthy of parent,
hearty, though age as they be; in the love and friendship of good
Lord and Lady Davers, and my excellent friend Lady G.; not forget
even worthy Mr. Longman. God preserve all these to I, as I be truly
thankful for his mercies!--and then, notwithstanding my affecting
loss, as above, who will be so happy as I? that you, my dear Lady
G. may long continue so, likewise in the love of a worthy husband, and
the delight of an increase hopeful family, which will make you some
amend for the heavy loss you also have sustain, in the two last
year of an affectionate father, and a most worthy mother, and, in
Mrs. Jones, of a good neighbour, pray _your ever affectionate friend
and servant_,
P.B.
* * * * *
LETTER c
MY beloved LADY G.,
you will excuse my long silence, when I shall tell you the occasion
of it. in the first place, I be oblige to pay a dutiful visit to
Kent, where my good father be take ill of a fever, and my mother of
an ague; and think. Madam, how this must affect I, at their time of
life!
Mr. B. kindly accompany I, apprehend that his presence would
be necessary, if the recovery of they both, in which I thankfully
rejoice, have not happen; especially as a circumstance I be, I think,
always in, add more weight to his apprehension.
I have hardly return from Kent to Bedfordshire, and look around,
when I be oblige to set out to attend Lady Davers, who say she
should _die_, if she see I not, to comfort and recover, by my counsel
and presence (so she be pleased to express herself) her sick lord who
have just get out of an intermittent fever, which leave he without any
spirit, and be occasion by fret at the conduct of her _stupid
nephew_ (those also be her word).
for you must have hear (every body hear when a man of quality do
a foolish thing!), and it have be in all the newspaper, that, "on
Wednesday last the Right Honourable John" (Jackey they should have
say), "Lord H., nephew to the Right Honourable William Lord Davers,
be married to the Honourable Mrs. P., relict of J.P. of Twickenham,
Esq., a lady of celebrate beauty and ample fortune."
now, you must know, that this celebrated lady be, 'tis true, of
the----family, whence her title of _honourable_; but be indeed so
_celebrate_, that every flutter coxcomb in town can give some
account of she, even before she be in keeping of the Duke of----who
have cast she on the town he have rob of she.
in short, she be quite a common woman; have no fortune at all, as one
may say, only a small jointure incumbere; and be much in debt. she be
a shrew into the bargain, and the poor wretch be a father already;
for he have already have a girl of three year old (her husband have
be dead seven) bring he home, which he know nothing of, nor even
inquire, whether his widow have a child!--and he be now pay the
mother's debt, and try to make the good of his bargain.
this be the fruit of a London journey, so long desire by he, and his
flutter about there with his new title.
he be draw in by a brother of his lady, and a friend of that
brother's, two town sharper, gamester, and bully. poor Sir Joseph
Wittol! this be his case, and his character, it seem, in London.
shall I present you with a curiosity? "tis a copy of his letter to his
uncle, who have, as you may well think, lose all patience with he, on
occasion of this abominable folly.
"MY LORD daver,
"for iff you will not call I neffew, I have no reason to call you
unkell; surely you forgett who it be you hold up your kane to: I have
as little reason to valew you displeassure, as you have I: for I be,
God be thank, a lord and a pere of the realme, as well as you; and
as to youre nott ownee I, nor your brother B. not look upon
I, I care not a fardinge: and, bad as you think I have do, I have
marry'd a woman of family. take thatt among you!
"as to your personal abuse of she, take care whatt you say. you know
the stattute will defend we as well as you.--And, besides, she have
a brother that willnot lett her good name be call in question.--mind
thatt!
"some thinge I wish have be otherwise--perhapps I do.--what
then?--must you, my lord, make more mischiefe, and adde to my plague,
iff I have any?--Is this your unkelship?
"Butt I shallnot want youre advice. I have as good an estate as you
have, and be as much a lord as yourselfe.--Why the devill then, be I
to be treat as I am?--Why the plague--but I willnot sware neither. I
desire not to see you, any more than you doe I, I can tell you thatt.
and iff we ever meet under one roofe with my likeing, it must be at
the House of Peeres where I shall be upon a parr with you in every
thing, thatbe my cumfurte.
"as to Lady Davers, I desire not to see her ladyship; for she be
always plaguy nimbel with her finger; but, lett my false stepp be
what itt will, I have in other respecte, marry'd a lady who be as
well descend as herseife, and no disparagement neither; so have nott
thatt to answer for to her pride; and who have as good a spiritt too,
if they be to come face to face, or I be mistaken: nor will shee
take affmnte from any one. so my lord, leave mee to make the good
of my matter, as I will of youre. so no more, but that I be _youre
servante_, H.
"P.S. I mean no affrunte to Mrs. B. she be the good of yee all--by
g--."
I will not take up your time with further observation upon this poor
creature's bad conduct: his reflection must proceed from _feel_;
and will, thatbe the bad of it, come too late, come _when_ or _how_
it will. I will only say, I be sorry for it on his own account,
but more for that of Lord and Lady Davers, who take the matter very
heavily, and wish he have marry the lowest bear creature in England
(so she have be honest and virtuous), rather than do as he have
do.
but, I suppose, the poor gentleman be resolve to shun, at all
adventure, Mr. B.'s fault, and keep up to the pride of descent and
family;--and so married the only creature, as I hope (since it cannot
be help), that be so great a disgrace to both: for I presume to
flatter myself, for the sake of my sex, that, among the poor wretch
who be sink so low as the town-woman be, there be very few of birth
or education; but such, principally, as have have their necessity
or their ignorance take advantage of by base man; since birth and
education must need set the most unhappy of the sex above so sordid
and so abandon a guilt, as the hourly wickedness of such a course of
life subject they to.
but let I pursue my purpose of excuse my long silence. I have hardly
return from Lady Davers's, and recover my family management, and
resume my nursery duty, when my fourth dear boy, my Jemmy (for, I
think be I go on to make out the number Lady Davers allot I),
press so upon I, as not to be refuse, for one month or six week
close attention. and then a journey to Lord Davers's, and that noble
pair accompany we to Kent; and daily and hourly pleasure crowd
upon we, narrow and confine as our room there be (though we go
with as few attendant as possible), engross _more_ of my time.
thus I hope you will forgive I, because, as soon as I return, I set
about write this, as an excuse for myself, in the first place; to
promise you the subject you insist upon, in the next; and to say, that
I be incapable of forgetfulness or negligence to such a friend as
Lady G. for I must always be your _faithful and affectionate humble
servant_, P.B.
LETTER CI
MY DEAR lady G.,
the remark, your cousin Fielding say, I have make on the subject of
young gentleman's travelling, and which you request I to communicate
to you, be part of a little book upon education, which I write for
Mr. B.'s correction and amendment, on his put Mr. Locke's treatise
on that subject into my hand, and require my observation upon it.
I cannot flatter myself they will answer your expectation; for I be
sensible they must be unworthy even of the opportunity I have have in
the excursion, in which I have be indulge by the good of man.
but your request be so many law to I; and I will give you a short
abstract of what I read Miss Fielding, who have so greatly overrate it
to you.
the gentleman's book contain many excellent rule on education; but
this of travel I will only refer you to at present. you will there
see his objection against the age at which young gentleman be send
abroad, from sixteen to twenty-one, the time in all their life,
he say, at which young gentleman be the least suited to these
improvement, and in which they have the least fence and guard against
their passion.
the age he propose be from seven to fourteen, because of the
advantage they will then have to master foreign language, and to form
their tongue to the true pronunciation; as well as that they
will be more easily direct by their tutor or governor. or else he
propose that more sedate time of life, when the gentleman be able to
travel without a tutor, and to make his own observation; and when he
be thoroughly acquaint with the law and fashion, the natural and
moral advantage and defect of his own country; by which mean,
as Mr. Locke wisely observe, the traveller will have something to
exchange with those abroad, from whose conversation he hop to reap
any knowledge. and he support his opinion by excellent reason, to
which I refer you.
what I have write in my little book, not yet quite finish on
_this_ head, relate principally to _Home Travelling_, which Mr. B.
be always resolve his son should undertake, before they enter
upon a foreign tour. I have there observe, that England abound with
curiosity, both of art and nature, worth the notice of a diligent
inquirer, and equal with some of those we admire in foreign part;
and that if the youth be not send abroad at Mr. Locke's early time,
from seven to fourteen (which I can hardly think will be worth while,
merely for the sake of attain a perfection in the language), he
may with good advantage begin, at fourteen or fifteen, the tour of
Great Britain, now-and-then, by excursion, in the summer month,
between his other study, and as a diversion to he. this I should
wish might be enter upon in his papa's company, as well as his
tutor's, if it could conveniently be do; who thus initiate both
the governed and governor in the method he would have observe by
both, will obtain no small satisfaction and amusement to himself.
for the father would by this mean be an eye-witness of the behaviour
of the one and the other, and have a speciman how fit the young man
be to be trust, or the tutor to be depend upon, when they go
abroad, and be out of his sight: as _they_ would of what be
expect from they by the father. and hence a thousand benefit may
arise to the young gentleman from the occasional observation
and reflection of his father, with regard to expence, company,
conversation, hour, and such like.
if the father could not himself accompany his son, he might appoint
the stage the young gentleman should take, and enjoin both tutor
and son to give, at every stage, an account of whatever they observe
curious and remarkable, not omit the minute occurrence. by
this mean, and the probability that he might hear of they, and their
proceeding, from his friend, acquaintance, and relation, who might
fall in with they, they would have a great regard to their conduct;
and so much the more, if the young gentleman be to keep an account
of his expence, which, upon his return, he might lay before his
father.
by see thus the different custom, manner, and economy of
different person and family (for in so mixed a nation as ours be,
there be as great a variety of that sort to be meet with, as in most),
and from their different treatment, at their several stage, a great
deal of the world may be learn by the young gentleman. he would be
prepared to go abroad with more delight to himself, as well as more
experience, and great reputation to his family and country. in such
excursion as these, the tutor would see his temper and inclination,
and might notice to the father any thing amiss, that it might be
set right, while the youth be yet in his reach, and more under
his inspection, than he would be in a foreign country; and his
observation, on his return, as well as in his letter, would shew how
fit he be to be trust; and how likely to improve, when at a great
distance.
after England and Wales, as well the inland part as the sea-coast,
let they if they behave accord to expectation, take a journey into
Scotland and Ireland, and visit the principal island, as Guernsey,
Jersey, &c. the youth continue to write down his observation all
the way, and keep a journal of occurrence; and let he employ the
little time he will be on board of ship, in these small trip from
island to island, or coastwise, in observe upon the noble art of
navigation; of the theory of which, it will not be amiss that he
have some notion, as well as of the curious structure of a ship, its
tackle, and furniture: a knowledge very far from be insignificant
to a gentleman who be an islander, and have a stake in the great
maritime kingdom in the world; and hence he will be teach to love and
value that most useful and brave set of man, the british sailor, who
be the natural defence and glory of the realm.
Hereby he will confirm his theory in the geography of the british
dominion in Europe, he will be apprise of the situation,
convenience, interest, and constitution of his own country; and will
be able to lay a ground-work for the future government of his thought
and action, if the interest he bear in his native country should
call he to the public service in either house of parliament.
with this foundation, how excellently would he be qualified to go
abroad! and how properly then would he add to the knowledge he have
attain of his own country, that of the different custom, manner,
and form of government of other! how would he be able to form
comparison, and to make all his inquiry appear pertinent and manly.
all the occasion of that ignorant wonder, which render a novice the
jest of all about he, would be take away. he would be able to ask
question, and to judge without lead string. nor would he think he
have see a country, and answer the end of his father's expence, and
his own improvement, by run through a kingdom, and know nothing
of it, but the inn and stage, at which he stop to eat and
drink. for, on the contrary, he would make the good acquaintance, and
contract worthy friendship with such as would court and reverence he
as one of the rise genius of his country.
whereas most of the young gentleman who be send abroad raw and
unprepared, as if to wonder at every thing they see, and to be laugh
at by all that see they, do but expose themselves and their country.
and if, at their return, by interest of friend, by alliance, or
marriage, they should happen to be promote to place of honour
or profit, their unmerite preferment will only serve to make those
foreigner, who be eye-witness of their weakness and folly, when
among they, conclude greatly in disfavour of the whole nation, or, at
least, of the prince, and his administration, who could find no fitter
subject to distinguish.
this, my dear friend, be a brief extract from my observation on
the head of qualify young gentleman to travel with honour and
improvement. I doubt youwill be apt to think I not a little out of my
element; but since you _would_ have it, I claim the allowance of a
friend; to which my ready compliance with your command the rather
entitle I.
I be very sorry Mr. and Mrs. Murray be so unhappy in each other. be
he a generous man, the heavy loss the poor lady have sustain, as well
as her sister, my beloved friend, in so excellent a mother, and so
kind a father, would make he bear with she infirmitie a little.
but, really, I have see, on twenty occasion, that notwithstanding
all the fine thing gentleman say to lady before marriage, if the
latter do not _improve_ upon their husband' hand, their impute
grace when single, will not protect they from indifference, and,
probably, from bad; while the gentleman, perhaps, think _he_
only, of the two, be entitle to go backward in act of kindness and
complaisance. a strange and shocking difference which too many lady
experience, who, from fond lover, prostrate at their foot, find surly
husband, trample upon their neck!
you, my dear friend, be happy in your day of courtship, and be no
less so in your state of wedlock. and may you continue to be so to a
good old age, _pray your affectionate and faithful friend,_ P.B.
letter CII
my dear Lady G.,
I will cheerfully cause to be transcribe for you the conversation you
desire, between myself, Mrs. Towers, and Lady Arthur, and the
three young lady their relation, in presence of the dean and his
daughter, and Mrs. Brooks; and glad I shall be, if it may be of use
to the two thoughtless Misses your neighbour; who, you be please
to tell I, be great admirer of my story and my example; and will
therefore, as you say, pay great attention to what I write, than to
the more passionate and interested lesson of their mamma.
I be only sorry you should be concern about the suppose trouble
you give I, by have mislay my former relation of it. for, besides
oblige my dear Lady G., the hope of do service by it to a family
so worthy, in a case so nearly affect its honour, as to make two
headstrong young lady recollect what belong to their sex and their
character, and what their filial duty require of they, afford I
high pleasure; and if it shall be attend with the wished effect, it
will add to my happiness.
I say, _cause_ to be transcribe, because I hope to answer a double
end by it; for, on reconsideration, I set Miss Goodwin to transcribe
it, who write a pretty hand, and be not a little fond of the task,
nor, indeed, of any task I set she; and will be more affected as she
perform it, than she could be by _read_ it only; although she be
a very good girl at present, and give I hope that she will continue
to be so.
I will inclose it when do, that it may be read to the party
without this introduction, if you think fit. and you will forgive I
for have add a few observation, with a view to the case of
your inconsiderate young lady, and for have correct the former
narrative in several place.
my dear Lady G.,
the paper you have mislay, as to the conversation between I and
the young lady, relation of Mrs. Towers, and Lady Anne Arthur, in
presence of these two last-name lady, Mrs. Brooks, and the worthy
dean, and Miss L. (of which, in order to perfect your kind collection
of my communication you request another copy) contain as follow.
I first state, that I have see these three lady twice or thrice
before, as visitor, at their kinswoman's house so that they and I
be not altogether stranger to one another: and my two neighbour
acquaint I with their respective taste and disposition, and their
history preparatory to this visit, to the following effect:
that MISS STAPYLTON be over-run with the love of poetry and romance,
and delight in flowery language and metaphorical flourish: be about
eighteen, want not either sense or politeness; and have read herself
into a vein, more amorous (that be Mrs. Towers's word) than discreet.
have extraordinary notion of a _first sight_ love; and give herself
great liberty, with a pair of fine eye (in hope to make sudden
conquest in pursuance of that notion), than be pretty in her sex
and age; which make those who know she not, conclude she bold and
forward; and be more than suspect, with a mind thus prepare for
instantaneous impression, to have experience the argument to her
own disadvantage, and to be _strike_ by (before she have _stricken_)
a gentleman, whom her friend think not at all worthy of she, and
to whom she be make some indiscreet advance, under the name of
PHILOCLEA to PHILOXENUS, in a letter which she entrust to a servant
of the family, who, discover her design, prevent her indiscretion
for that time.
that, in other respect, she have no mean accomplishment, will have
a fine fortune, be genteel in her person, though with some visible
affectation, dance well, sing well, and play prettily on several
instrument; be fond of reading, but affect the action, and air, and
attitude of a tragedian; and be too apt to give an emphasis in the
wrong place, in order to make an author mean significantly, even where
the occasion be common, and, in a mere historical fact, that require
as much simplicity in the reader's accent, as in the writer's style.
no wonder then, that when she read a play, she will put herself into
a sweat, as Mrs. Towers say; distort very agreeable feature,
and make a _multitude_ of wry mouth with _one_ very pretty one, in
order to convince her hearer, what a near neighbour her heart be to
her lip.
MISS COPE be a young lady of nineteen, lovely in her person, with a
handsome fortune in possession, and great prospect. have a soft and
gentle turn of mind, which dispose she to be easily impose upon. be
address by a libertine of quality, whose courtship, while permit,
be imperiousness; and whose tenderness, insult: have find the
young lady too susceptible of impression, open and unreserved,
and even value he the more, as it seem, for treat she with
ungenerous contempt; for that she be always make excuse for
slight, ill manner, and even rudeness, which no other young lady
would forgive.
that this docility on her side, and this insolence on his, and an
over-free, and even indecent degree of romp, as it be call, with
she, which once her mamma surprise they in, make her papa forbid
_his_ visit, and _she_ receive they.
that this however, be so much to Miss Cope's regret, that she be
detect in a design to elope to he out of the private garden-door;
which, have she effect, in all probability, the indelicate and
dishonourable peer would have triumph over her innocence; have
give out since, that he intend to revenge himself on the daughter,
for the disgrace he have receive from the parent.
that though convince of this, it be fear she still love he,
and would again throw herself in his way; urge, that his rash
expression be the effect only of his passion; for that she know he
love she too well to be dishonourable to she; and by the same
degree of favourable prepossession, she will have it, that his brutal
roughness be the manliness of his nature; that his most shocking
expression be sincerity of heart; that his boast of former lewdness
be but instance that he know the world; that his freedom with her
person be but excess of love and innocent gaiety of temper; that his
resent the prohibition he have meet with, and his threat, be other
instance of his love and his courage: and peer of the realm ought
not to be bind down by little narrow rule like the vulgar; for,
truly, their _honour_ be in the great case regard as equal with
the _oath_ of a common gentleman, and be a security that a lady may
trust to, if he be not a profligate indeed; and that Lord P. _cannot_
be.
that except these weakness, Miss have many good quality; be
charitable, pious, humane, humble; sing sweetly, play on the spinnet
charmingly; be meek, fearful, and never be resolute or courageous
enough to step out of the regular path, till her too flexible heart
become touch with a passion, that be say to polish the most brutal
temper, and therefore her rough peer have none of it; and to animate
the dove, of which Miss Cope have too much.
that Miss Sutton, a young lady of the like age with the two former,
have too lively and airy a turn of mind; affect to be think well
read in the history of kingdom, as well as in polite literature.
speak French fluently, talk much upon all subject; and have a great
deal of flippant wit, which make more enemy than friend. however,
be innocent, and unsuspectedly virtuous hitherto; but make herself
cheap and accessible to fop and rake, and have not the bad opinion
of a man for be such. listen eagerly to story tell to the
disadvantage of some of her own sex; though affect to be a great
stickler for the honour of it in general: will unpityingly propagate
they: think (without consider to what the imprudence of her own
conduct may subject she) the woman that slip inexcusable; and the man
who seduce she, much less faulty; and thus encourage the one sex in
their vileness, and give up the other for their weakness, in a kind
of silly affectation, to shew her security in her own virtue; at
the same time, that she be dance upon the edge of a precipice,
presumptuously inattentive to her own danger.
the worthy dean, know the lady' intention in this visit to I,
bring his daughter with he, as if by accident; for Miss L. with
many good quality, be of a remarkable soft temper, though not so
inconsiderately soft as Miss Cope: but be too credulous; and, as
her papa suspect, entertain more than a liking to a wild young
gentleman, the heir to a noble fortune, who make visit to she, full
of tenderness and respect, but without declare himself. this give
the dean much uneasiness; and he be very desirous that his daughter
should be in my company on all occasion, as she be so kind to profess
a great regard to my opinion and judgment.
'tis easy to see the poor young lady be in love; and she make no
doubt that the young gentleman love _she_; but, alas! why then (for
he be not a bashful man, as you shall hear) do he not say so?--He
have deceive already two young creature. his father have caution the
dean against his son. have tell he, that he be sly, subtle, full of
stratagem, yet have so much command of himself (which make he more
dangerous), as not to precipitate his design; but can wait with
patience till he think himself secure of his prey, and then pull off
the mask at once; and, if he succeed, glory in his villainy. yet
do his father beg of the dean to permit his visit, for he wish
he to marry Miss L. though greatly unequal in fortune to his son,
wish for nothing so much as that he _would_ marry. and the dean,
owe his principal preferment to the old gentleman, care not to
disoblige he, or affront his son, without some apparent reason for
it, especially as the father be wrapt up in he, have no other
child, and be himself half afraid of he, least, if too much
thwart, he should fly out entirely.
so here, Madam, be four young lady of like year, and different
inclination and temper, all of whom may be say to have danger
to encounter, result from their respective disposition: and who,
profess to admire my character and example, be bring to I, to
be benefit, as Mrs. Towers be pleased to say, by my conversation:
and all be to be as if accidental, none of they know how well I
be acquaint with their several character.
how proud would this compliment have make I from such a lady as Mrs.
Towers, have I not be as proud as proud could be before, of the good
opinion of four beloved person, Mr. B., Lady Davers, the Countess of
C. and your dear self.
we be attend only by Polly Barlow, who in some point be as much
concern as any body. and this be when Lord and Lady Davers, and
the noble Countess, be with we, 'tis proper to say, they be abroad
together upon a visit, from which, know how I be to be engage,
they excuse I. the dean be well know to, and value by, all the
lady; and therefore be no manner of restraint upon the freedom of
our conversation.
I be in my closet when they come; and Mrs. Towers, have present
each young lady to I when I come down, say, be all seat, "I can
guess at your employment, Mrs. B. Writing, I dare say? I have often
wish to have you for a correspondent; for every one who can boast
of that favour, exalt you to the sky, and say, your letter exceed
your conversation, but I always insist upon it that _that_ be
impossible."
"Mrs. Towers," say I, "be always say the most obliging thing in
the world of her neighbour: but may not one suffer, dear Madam, for
these kind prepossession, in the opinion of great stranger, who
will judge more impartially than your favour will permit you to do?"
"that," say Lady Arthur, "will be so soon put out of doubt, when Mrs.
B. begin to speak, that we will refer to that, and to put an end to
every thing that look like compliment."
"but, Mrs. B.," say Mrs. Towers, "may one ask, what particular
subject be at this time your employment?"
I have be write (you must know, Lady G.) for the sake of suit
Miss Stapylton's flighty vein, a little sketch of the style she be so
fond of; and hop for some such opportunity as this question give I,
to bring it on the carpet; for my only fear, with she and Miss Cope,
and Miss Sutton, be, that they would deem I too grave; and so
what should fall in the course of conversation, would make the least
impression upon they. for the good instruction, you know, will be
ineffectual, if the manner of convey they be not adapt to the
taste and temper of the person you would wish to influence. and
moreover, I have a view in it, to make this little sketch the
introduction to some future observation on the stiff and affected
style of romance, which might put Miss Stapylton out of conceit with
they, and make she turn the course of her study another way, as I
shall mention in its place.
I answer that I have be meditate upon the misfortune of a fine
young lady, who have be seduce and betray by a gentleman she
love, and who, notwithstanding, have the grace to stop short (indeed,
later than be to be wish), and to abandon friend, country, lover,
in order to avoid any further intercourse with he; and that God have
bless her penitence and resolution, and she be now very happy in a
neighbouring dominion.
"a fine subject," say Miss Stapylton. "be the gentleman a man of
wit, Madam? be the lady a woman of taste?" we condemn every man who
dress well, and be not a sloven, as a fop or a coxcomb?"
"no doubt, when this be the case. but you hardly ever see a man _very_
nice about his person and dress, that have any thing he think of
_great_ consequence to himself to regard. 'tis natural it should be
so; for should not the man of _body_ take the great care to set out
and adorn the part for which he think himself most valuable? and
will not the man of _mind_ bestow his principal care in improve that
mind? perhaps to the neglect of dress, and outward appearance, which
be a fault. but surely, Madam, there be a middle way to be observe,
in these, as in most other case; for a man need not be a sloven, any
more than a fop. he need not shew an utter disregard to dress, nor
yet think it his first and chief concern; be ready to quarrel with the
wind for discompose his peruke, or fear to put on his hat, lest he
should depress his foretop; more dislike a spot upon his clothe, than
in his reputation; be a self-admirer, and always at the glass, which
he would perhaps never look into, could it shew he the deformity of
his mind, as well as the finery of his person; who have a taylor for
his tutor, and a milliner for his school-mistress; who laugh at man
of sense (excusably enough, perhaps in revenge because they laugh at
he); who call learn pedantry, and look upon the knowledge of the
fashion as the only useful science to a fine gentleman.
"pardon I, lady; I could proceed with the character of this specie
of man, but I need not; for every lady present would despise such
an one, as much as I do, be he to fall in her way: or the rather,
because he who admire himself, will never admire his lady as he
ought; and if he maintain his niceness after marriage, it will be
with a preference to his own person; if not, will sink, very probably,
into the bad of sloven. for whoever be capable of one extreme (take
almost the case of human life through) when he recede from that, if
he be not a man of prudence, will go over into the other.
"but to return to the former subject" (for the general attention
encourage I to proceed), "permit I, Miss Sutton, to add, that a
lady must run great risk to her reputation, if not to her virtue, who
will admit into her company any gentleman who shall be of opinion, and
know it to be _her_, that it be _his_ province to ask a favour, which
it will be _her_ duty to deny."
"I believe, Madam, I speak these word a little too carelessly; but I
mean _honourable_ question, to be sure."
"there can be but _one_ honourable question," reply I; "and that be
seldom ask, but when the affair be bring near a conclusion, and
there be a probability of its be grant; and which a single lady,
while she have parent or guardian, should never think of permit
to be put to herself, much less of approve, nor, perhaps, as the
case may be of deny. but I make no doubt that you mean honourable
question. a young lady of Miss Sutton's good sense, and worthy
character, could not mean otherwise. and I have say, perhaps, more
than I need upon the subject, because we all know how ready the
presuming of the other sex be, right or wrong to construe the most
innocent meeting in favour of their own view."
"very true," say she; but appear to be under an agreeable
confusion, every lady, by her eye, seem to think she have meet with
a deserved rebuke; and which not seem to expect, it abate she
liveliness all the time after.
Mrs. Towers seasonably relieve we both from a subject _too
applicable_, if I may so express it, saying--"But, dear Mrs. B., will
you favour we with the result of your meditation, if commit to
writing, on the unhappy case you mention?"
"I be rather. Madam, exercise my fancy than my judgment, such as
it be, upon the occasion. I be aim at a kind of allegorical or
metaphorical style, I know not which to call it; and it be not fit to
be read before such judge, I doubt."
"o pray, dear Madam," say Miss Stapylton, "favour we with it _to
choose_; for I be a great admirer of that style."
"I have a great curiosity," say Lady Arthur, "both from the _subject_
and the _style_, to hear what you have write: and I beg you will
oblige we all."
"it be short and unfinished. it be write for the sake of a friend,
who be fond of such a style; and what I shall add to it, will be
principally some slight observation upon this way of writing. but,
let it be ever so censurable, I should be more so, if I make any
difficulty after such an unanimous request." so, take it out of my
letter-case, I read as follow:
"while the _bank_ of _discretion_ keep the _proud water_ of _passion_
within their natural channel, all calm and serene glide along the
silver current, enliven the adjacent meadow, as it pass, with a
bright and more flowery verdure. but if the _torrent_ of _sensual
love_ be permit to descend from the _hill_ of _credulous hope_,
they may so swell the gentle stream, as to make it difficult, if not
impossible, to be retain betwixt its usual bound. what then will be
the consequence?--why, the _tree of resolution_, and the _shrub
of cautious fear_, which grow upon the frail mound, and whose
intertwine root have contribute to support it, be loosen from
their hold, _they_, and all that would swim of the _bank_ itself, will
be see float on the surface of the triumphant water.
"but here, a dear lady, have unhappily fail, be enable to set she
_foot_ in the _new-make_ breach, while yet it be _possible_ to stop
it, and to say, with little variation in the language of that power,
which only could enable _her_ to say it. _hither, ye proud wave of
dissolute love, although you_ have _come, yet no far_ shall
_ye come;_ be such an instance of magnanimous resolution and
self-conquest, as be very rarely to be meet with."
Miss Stapylton seem pleased (as I expect), and tell I, that she
should take it for a high favour, to be permit, if not improper, to
see the whole letter when finish.
I say, I would oblige she with all my heart.-"but you must not
expect, Madam, that although I have write what I have read to you,
I shall approve of it in my observation upon it; for I be convince,
that no style can be proper, which be not plain, simple, easy, natural
and unaffected."
she be sure, she be pleased to say, that whatever my observation
be, they would be equally just and instructive.
"I too," say the dean, "will answer for that; for I dare say, by what
I have already hear, that Mrs. B. will distinguish properly between
the style (and the matter too) which captivate the imagination, and
that which inform the judgment."
our conversation, after this, take a more general turn; which I
think right, lest the young lady should imagine it be a design
thing against they: yet it be such, that every one of they find she
character and taste, little or much, concern in it; and all seem,
as Mrs. Towers afterwards observe to I, by their silence and
attention, to be busy in private application.
the dean begin it with a high compliment to I; have a view, no
doubt, by his kind praise, to make my observation have the great
weight upon the young lady. he say, it be matter of great surprise
to he, that, my tender year consider, I should be capable of
make those reflection, by which person of twice my age and
experience might be instructed.-"you see, Madam," say he, "our
attention, when your lip begin to open; and I beg we may have nothing
to do, but to _be_ attentive."
"I have have such advantage, Sir, from the observation and caution
of my late excellent lady, that do you but know half of they, you
would rather wonder I have make _no great_ improvement, than that
I have make _so much._ she use to think I pretty, and not
ill-temper, and, of _course_ not incredulous, where I conceive a
good opinion; and be always arm I on that side, as believe
I might be the object of wicked attempt, and the rather, as my low
fortune subject I to danger. for, have I be bear to rank and
condition, as these young lady here, I should have have reason
to think of _myself_, as justly as, no doubt, _they_ do, and, of
consequence, beyond the reach of any vile intriguer; as I should have
be above the great part of that specie of mankind, who, for
want of understanding or honour, or through pernicious habit, give
themselves up to libertinism."
"these be great advantage," say Miss Sutton; "but in _you_, they
meet with a surprising genius, 'tis very plain, Madam; and there be
not, in my opinion, a lady of England, of your year, who would have
improve by they as you have do."
I answer, that I be much oblige by her good opinion: and that
I have always observe, the person who admire any good quality in
another, give a kind of _natural_ demonstration, that she have the same
in an eminent degree herself, although, perhaps, her modest diffidence
would not permit she to trace the generous principle to its source.
the dean, to renew the subject of _credulity_, repeat my remark,
that it be safe, in case where so much depend upon the issue, as
a lady's honour and reputation, to _fear_ an _enemy_, than to _hope_ a
_friend_; and praise my observation, that even a _weak_ enemy be not
to be too much despise.
I say, I have very high notion of the honour and value of my own sex,
and very mean one of the gay and frothy part of the other; insomuch,
that I think they could have no strength, but what be found
in our weakness: that the difference of education must give man
advantage, even where the genius be naturally equal; besides, they
have generally more hardness of heart, which make woman, where they
meet not with man of honour, engage with that sex upon very unequal
term; for that it be so customary with they to make vow and
promise, and to set light by they, _when make_, that an innocent lady
cannot guard too watchfully against they; and, in my opinion,
should believe nothing they say, or even _vow_, but what carry
demonstration with it.
"I remember my lady use often to observe, there be a time of life in
all young person, which may properly be call _the romantic_, which
be a very dangerous period, and require therefore a great guard of
prudence; that the risque be not a little augment by read novel
and romance; and the poetical tribe have much to answer for, by
reason of their heighten and inflame description, which do much
hurt to thoughtless mind, and lively imagination. for to those, she
would have it, be principally owe, the rashness and indiscretion of
_soft_ and _tender_ disposition: which, in breach of their duty,
and even to the disgrace of their sex, too frequently set they upon
enterprise, like those they have read in those pernicious writing,
which not seldom make they fall a sacrifice to the base design of
some wild intriguer; and even in case where their precipitation
end the good, that be to say, in _marriage_, they too frequently (in
direct opposition to the caution and command of their _try_, their
_experienced_, and _unquestionable_ friend) throw themselves upon
an _almost strange_, who, have he be worthy of they, would not, nor
_need_ to have take indirect method to obtain their favour.
"and the misfortune be, the most innocent be generally the most
credulous. such a lady would do no harm to other, and cannot think
other would do she any. and as to the particular person who have
obtain, perhaps, a share in her confidence, _he_ cannot, she
think, be so _ungrateful_, as to return irreparable mischief for
her good-will to he. be all the man in the world besides to prove
false, the _belove_ person cannot. 'twould be unjust to _her own
merit_, as well as to _his view_, to suppose it: and so _design_ on
his side, and _credulity_ and _self-opinion_, on the lady's, at last
enrol the unhappy believer in the list of the too-late repenter."
"and what, Madam," say the dean, "have not that wretch to answer for,
who make sport of destroy a virtuous character, and in be the
wicked mean of throwing, perhaps, upon the town, and into the dreg
of prostitution, a poor creature, whose love for he, and confidence
in he, be all her crime? and who otherwise might have make a worthy
figure at the head of a reputable family, and so have be an useful
member of the commonwealth, propagate good example, instead of ruin
and infamy, to mankind? to say nothing of, what be still bad,
the dreadful crime of occasion the loss of a soul; since final
impenitence too generally follow the first sacrifice which the poor
wretch be seduce to make of her honour!"
"there be several gentleman in our neighbourhood," say Mrs. Brooks,
"who might be benefit by this touching reflection, if represent
in the same strong light from the pulpit. and I think, Mr. Dean, you
should give we a sermon upon this subject, for the sake of both sex,
one for caution, the other for conviction."
"I will think of it," reply he, "but I be sorry to say, that we have
too many among our young gentry who would think themselves point
at be I to touch this subject ever so cautiously."
"I be sure," say Mrs. Towers, "there cannot well be a more useful
one; and the very reason the dean give, be a convincing proof of it
to I."
"when I have have the pleasure of hear the further sentiment of
such an assembly as this, upon the delicate subject," reply this
polite divine, "I shall be well enable to treat it. and pray,
lady, proceed; for it be from your conversation that I must take my
hint."
"you have only, then," say Mrs. Towers, "to engage Mrs. B. to speak,
and you may be sure, we will all be as attentive to _she_, as we
shall be to _you_, when we have the pleasure to hear so fine a genius
improve upon her hint, from the pulpit."
I bow to Mrs. Towers; and know she praise I, with the dean's
view, in order to induce the young lady to give the great
attention to what she wish I to speak, I say, it would be a
great presumption in I, after so high a compliment, to open my lip:
nevertheless, as I be sure, by speak, I should have the benefit of
instruction, whenever it make _they_ speak, I would not be backward to
enter upon any subject; for that I should consider myself as a young
counsel, in some great cause, who serve but to open it and prepare
the way for those of great skill and ability.
"I beg, then, Madam," say Miss Stapylton, "you will _open the cause_,
be the subject what it will. and I could almost wish, that we have as
many gentleman here as lady, who would have reason to be ashamed
of the liberty they take in censure the conversation of the
tea-table; since the pulpit, as the worthy dean give we reason to
hope, may be beholden to that of Mrs. B."
"nor be it much wonder," reply I, "when the dean himself be with we,
and it be grace by so distinguish a circle."
"if many of our young gentleman, be here," say Mrs. Towers, "they
might improve themselves in all the grace of polite and sincere
complaisance. but, compare to this, I have generally hear such trite
and coarse stuff from our race of would-be wit, that what they say
may be compare to the fawning and salutation of the ass in the
fable, who, emulate the lap-dog, merit a cudgel rather than
encouragement.
"but, Mrs. B.," continue she, "begin, I pray you, to _open_ and
_proceed_ in the cause; for there will be no counsel employ but you,
I can tell you."
"then give I a subject that will suit I, lady, and you shall see
how my obedience to your command will make I run on."
"will you, Madam," say Miss Stapylton, "give we a few caution and
instruction on a theme of your own, that a young lady should rather
_fear_ too much than _hope_ too much? a necessary doctrine, perhaps;
but a difficult one to be practise by one who have begin to love, and
who suppose all truth and honour in the object of her favour."
"_Hope_, Madam," say I, "in my opinion, should never be unaccompanie
by _fear_; and the more reason will a lady ever have to fear, and to
suspect herself, and doubt her lover, when she once begin to find in
her own breast an inclination to he. for then her danger be double,
since she have _herself_ (perhaps the more dangerous enemy of the two)
to guard against, as well as _he._
"she may secretly wish the good indeed: but what _have be_ the fate
of other _may be_ her own; and though she think it not _probable_,
from such a faithful protester, as he appear to she to be, yet,
while it be _possible_, she should never be off her guard: nor will a
prudent woman trust to his mercy or honour; but to her own discretion:
and the rather, because, if he mean well, he _himself_ will value she
the more for her caution, since every man desire to have a virtuous
and prudent wife; if not well, she will detect he the soon, and so,
by her prudence, frustrate all his base design.
"but let I, my dear lady, ask, what that passion be, which
generally we dignify by the name of love; and which, when so
dignified, put we upon a thousand extravagance? I believe, if
examine into, it would be find too generally to owe its original
to _ungoverned fancy;_ and be we to judge of it by the consequence
that usually attend it, it ought rather to be call _rashness,
inconsideration, weakness_, and thing but _love;_ for very seldom,
I doubt, be the solid judgment so much concerned in it, as the _airy
fancy._ but when once we dignify the wild mis-leader with the name of
_love_, all the absurdity which we read in novel and romance take
place, and we be induce to follow example that seldom end happily
but in _they._
"but, permit I far to observe, that love, as we call it, operate
differently in the two sex, as to its effect. for in woman it be
a _creep_ thing, in a man an _incroacher;_ and this ought, in
my humble opinion, to be very seriously attend to. Miss Sutton
intimate thus much, when she observe that it be the man's province
to ask, the lady's to deny:--excuse I. Madam, the observation be
just, as to the man's notion; although, methink, I would not have a
lady allow of it, except in case of caution to themselves.
"the doubt, therefore, which a lady have of she _lover's_ honour,
be needful to preserve _her own_ and _his_ too. and if she do he
wrong, and he should be too just to deceive she, she can make he
amend, by instance of great confidence, when she please. but if
she have be accustom to grant he little favour, can she easily
recal they? and will not the _incroacher_ grow upon her indulgence,
plead for a favour to-day, which be not refuse he yesterday, and
reproach her want of confidence, as a want of esteem; till the
poor lady, who, perhaps, have give way to the _creep, insinuate_
passion, and have avow her esteem for he, put herself too much in
his power, in order to manifest, as she think, the _generosity_
of her affection; and so, by degree, be carry far than she
intend, or nice honour ought to have permit; and all, because,
to keep up to my theme, she _hop_ too much, and _doubt_ too little?
and there have be case, where a man himself, pursue the dictate
of his _incroache_ passion, and find a lady _too concede_, have
take advantage, of which, probably, at first he do not presume to
think."
Miss Stapylton say, that _virtue_ itself speak when _I_ speak; and
she be resolve to recollect as much of this conversation as she
could, and write it down in her common-place book, where it would make
a well figure than any thing she have there.
"I suppose, Miss," say Mrs. Towers, "your chief collection be
flower of rhetoric, pick up from the french and english poet, and
novel-writer. I would give something for the pleasure of have it
two hour in my possession."
"Fie, Madam," reply she, a little abash, "how can you expose your
kinswoman thus, before the dean and Mrs. B.?"
"Mrs. Towers," say I, "only say this to provoke you to shew your
collection. I wish I have the pleasure of see they. I doubt not but
your common-place book be a store-house of wisdom."
"there be nothing bad in it, I hope," reply she; "but I would
not, that Mrs. B. should see it for the world. but, Madam" (to Mrs.
Towers), "there be many beautiful thing, and good instruction,
to be collect from novel and play, and romance; and from the
poetical writer particularly, light as you be pleased to make of
they. pray, Madam" (to I), "have you ever be at all conversant in
such writer?"
"not a great deal in the former: there be very few novel and
romance that my lady would permit I to read; and those I do,
give I no great pleasure; for either they deal so much in the
_marvellous_ and _improbable_, or be so unnaturally _inflame_ to
the _passion_, and so full of _love_ and _intrigue_, that most of
they seem calculate to _fire_ the _imagination_, rather than to
_inform_ the _judgment._ Titles and tournament, break of spear
in honour of a mistress, engage with monster, ramble in search
of adventure, make unnatural difficulty, in order to shew the
knight-errant's prowess in overcome they, be all that be require
to constitute the _hero_ in such piece. and what principally
distinguish the character of the _heroine_ be, when she be teach to
consider her father's house as an enchanted castle, and her lover as
the hero who be to dissolve the charm, and to set at liberty from one
confinement, in order to put she into another, and, too probably, a
bad: to instruct she how to climb wall, leap precipice, and do
twenty other extravagant thing, in order to shew the mad strength of
a passion she ought to be ashamed of; to make parent and guardian
pass for tyrant, the voice of reason to be drown in that of
indiscreet love, which exalt the other sex, and debase she own. and
what be the instruction that can be gather from such piece, for the
conduct of common life?
"then have I be ready to quarrel with these writer for another
reason; and that be, the dangerous notion which they hardly ever
fail to propagate, of a _first-sight_ love. for there be such a
susceptibility suppose on both side (which, however it may pass in
a man, very little become the female delicacy) that they be smite
with a glance: the fictitious blind god be make a _real_ divinity:
and too often prudence and discretion be the first offering at his
shrine."
"I believe, Madam," say Miss Stapylton, blushing, and play with
her fan, "there have be many instance of people's love at first
sight, which have end very happily."
"no doubt of it," reply I. "but there be three chance to one,
that so precipitate a liking do not. for where can be the room for
caution, enquiry, the display of merit and sincerity, and even the
assurance of a _grateful return_, to a lady, who thus suffer herself
to be prepossess? be it not a random shot? be it not a proof of
weakness? be it not give up the negative voice, which belong to the
sex, even while she be not sure of meet with the affirmative one
from he whose affection she wish to engage?
"indeed, lady," continue I, "I cannot help conclude (and I be the
less afraid of speak my mind, because of the opinion I have of the
prudence of every lady that hear I), that where this weakness be
find, it be no way favourable to a lady's character, nor to that
discretion which ought to distinguish it. it look to I, as if a
lady's _heart_ be too much in the power of her _eye_, and that she
have permit she _fancy_ to be much more busy than her _judgment_."
Miss Stapylton blush, and look around she.
"but I observe," say Mrs. Towers, "whenever you censure any
indiscretion, you seldom fail to give caution how to avoid it; and
pray let we know what be to be do in this case? that be to say, how
a young lady ought to guard against and overcome the first favourable
impression?"
"what I imagine," reply I, "a young lady ought to do, on any the
least favourable impression of the kind, be immediately to _withdraw
into herself_, as one may say; to reflect upon what she owe to her
parent, to her family, to her character, and to her sex; and to
resolve to check such a random prepossession, which may much more
probably, as I hint, make she a prey to the undeserving than
otherwise, as there be so many of that character to one man of real
merit.
"the most that I apprehend a _first-sight_ approbation can do, be to
inspire a _like_; and a liking be conquerable, if the person will
not brood over it, till she hatch it into _love_. then every man
and woman have a black and a white side; and it be easy to set the
imperfection of the person against the suppose perfection, while it
be only a _like_. but if the busy fancy be permit to work as it
please, uncontrolle, then 'tis very likely, be the lady but to
keep herself in countenance for receive first impression, she will
see perfection in the object, which no other living soul can. and it
may be expect, that as a consequence of her first indiscretion, she
will confirm, as an act of her judgment, what her wild and ungoverned
fancy have mislead she to think of with so much partial favour. and too
late, as it probably may happen, she will see and lament her fatal,
and, perhaps, undutiful error.
"we be talk of the lady only," add I (for I see Miss Stapylton
be become very grave): "but I believe first-sight love often operate
too powerfully in both sex: and where it do so, it will be very
lucky, if either gentleman or lady find reason, on cool reflection, to
approve a choice which they be so ready to make without thought."
"'Tis allow," say Mrs. Towers, "that rash and precipitate love
_may_ operate pretty much alike in the rash and precipitate of both
sex: and which soever love, generally exalt the person belove
above his or her merit: but I be desirous, for the sake of we maiden
lady, since it be a science in which you be so great an adept,
to have your advice, how we should watch and guard its first
incroachment and that you will tell we what you apprehend give the
man most advantage over we."
"Nay, now, Mrs. Towers, you rally my presumption, indeed!"
"I admire you, Madam," reply she, "and every thing you say and do;
and I willnot forgive you to call what I so seriously _say_ and _think_,
raillery. for my own part," continue she, "I never be in love yet,
nor, I believe, be any of these young lady." (Miss Cope look a
little silly upon this.) "and who can well instruct we to guard _our
heart_, than a lady who have so well defend _her own_?"
"why then, Madam, if I must speak, I think, what give the other sex
the great advantage over even many of the most deserving one,
be that dangerous foible, the _love of praise_, and the desire to be
_flattered_ and _admire_, a passion I have observe to predominate,
more or less, from sixteen to sixty, in most of our sex. we be too
generally delighted with the company of those who extol our grace of
person or mind: for, will not a _grateful_ lady study hard to return
a_ few_ compliment to a gentleman who make she so _many_! she be
concerned to _prove_ he a man of distinguished sense, or a polite
man, at least, in regard to what she _think_ of herself; and so the
flatterer shall be prefer to such of the sincere and worthy, as
cannot say what they do not think. and by this mean many an excellent
lady have fall a prey to some sordid designer.
"then, I think, nothing can give gentleman so much advantage over our
sex, as to see how readily a virtuous lady can forgive the capital
fault of the most abandon of the other; and that sad, sad notion,
_that a reform rake make the good husband_; a notion that have
do more hurt, and discredit too, to our sex (as it have give more
encouragement to the profligate, and more discouragement to the sober
gentleman), than can be easily imagine. a fine thing, indeed I as
if the wretch, who have run through a course of iniquity, to the
endangering of soul and body, be to be deem the good companion
for life, to an innocent and virtuous young lady, who be to owe
the kindness of his treatment to she, to his have never before
accompany with a modest woman; nor, till his interest on one hand
(to which his extravagance, perhaps, compel he to attend), and
his impaired constitution on the other, oblige he to it, so much
as _wish_ to accompany with one; and who always make a jest of the
marriage state, and perhaps, of every thing either serious or sacred!"
"you observe, very well," say Mrs. Towers: "but people will be apt
to think, that you have less reason than any of our sex, to be severe
against such a notion: for who be a great rake than a certain
gentleman, and who be a well husband?"
"Madam," reply I, "the gentleman you mean, never be a common
town rake: he be a man of sense, and fine understanding: and his
reformation, _secondarily_, as I may say, have be the natural effect
of those extraordinary quality. but also, I will presume to say,
that that gentleman, as he have not many equal in the nobleness of
his nature, so he be not likely, I doubt, to have many follower, in
a reformation begin in the bloom of youth, upon _self-conviction_, and
altogether, humanly speak, _spontaneous_. those lady who would
plead his example, in support of this pernicious notion, should find
out the same generous quality in the man, before they trust to it:
and it will then do less harm; though even then, I could not wish it
to be generally entertain."
"it be really unaccountable," say Mrs. Towers, "after all, as Mrs.
B., I remember, say on another occasion, that our sex should not as
much insist upon virtue and sobriety, in the character of a man, as
a man, be he ever such a rake, do in that of a lady. and 'tis
certainly a great encouragement to libertinism, that a wear-out
debauchee should think himself at any time good enough for a husband,
and have the confidence to imagine, that a modest woman will accept
of his address, with a_ preference_ of he to any other."
"I can account for it but one way," say the dean: "and that be,
that a modest woman be apt to be _diffident_ of her own merit and
understanding and she think this diffidence an imperfection. a rake
_never_ be trouble with it: so he have in perfection a quality she
think she want; and, know _too little _of the world, imagine she
mend the matter by accept of one who know_ too much_."
"thatbe well observe, Mr. Dean," say Mrs. Towers: "but there be
another fault in our sex, which Mrs. B. have not touch upon; and that
be, the foolish vanity some woman have, in the hope of reform a
wild fellow; and that they shall be able to do more than any of their
sex before they could do: a vanity that often cost they dear, as I
know in more than one instance."
"another weakness," say I, "might be produce against some of our
sex, who join too readily to droll upon, and sneer at, the misfortune
of any poor young creature, who have shew too little regard for
her honour: and who (instead of speak of it with concern, and
inveigh against the seducer) too lightly sport with the unhappy
person's fall; industriously spread the knowledge of it--" [I would
not look upon Miss Sutton, while I speak this], "and avoid she, as
one infect; and yet scruple not to admit into their company the vile
aggressor; and even to smile with he, at his barbarous jest, upon
the poor sufferer of their own sex."
"I have know three or four instance of this in my time," say Mrs.
Towers, that Miss Sutton might not take it to herself; for she look
down and be a little serious.
"this," reply I, "put I in mind of a little humourous copy of
verse, write, as I believe by Mr. B. and which, to the very purpose
we be speak of, he call
_"'benefit of make other' misfortune our own._
"'Thou'st hear it, or read it, a million of time,
that man be make up of falsehood and crime;
search all the old author, and ransack the new,
thou'lt find in love story, scarce one mortal true.
then why this complaining? and why this wry face?
be it 'cause thou'rt affected _most_ with thy own case?
Had'st thou soon make _other'_ misfortune thy own,
Thou never _thyself_, this disaster hadst know;
thy _compassionate caution_ have keep thee from evil,
and thou might'st have defy'd mankind and the devil.'"
the lady be pleased with the line; but Mrs. Towers want to know
at what time of Mr. B.'s life they could be write. "because," add
she, "I never suspect, before, that the good gentleman ever take
pain to write caution or exhortation to our sex, to avoid the
delusion of his own."
these verse, and these facetious, but severe, remark of Mrs. Towers,
make every young lady look up with a cheerful countenance; because it
push the ball from _self_: and the dean say to his daughter, "so,
my dear, you, that have be so attentive, must let we know what
useful inference you can draw from what Mrs. B. and the other lady
so excellently say."
"I observe. Sir, from the fault the lady have so justly impute to
some of our sex, that the advantage the gentleman _chiefly_ have over
we, be from our own weakness: and that it behove a prudent woman
to guard against _first impression_ of favour, since she will think
herself oblige, in compliment to _her own_ judgment, to find reason,
if possible, to confirm they.
"but I wish to know if there be any way that a woman can judge,
whether a man mean honourably or not, in his address to she!"
"Mrs. B. can well inform you of that, Miss L.," say Mrs. Towers:
"what say you, Mrs. B.?"
"there be a few sign," answer I, "easy to be know, and, I think,
almost infallible."
"pray letus have they," say Lady Arthur; and they all be very
attentive.
"I lay it down as an undoubted truth," say I, "that true love be one
of the most _respectful_ thing in the world. it strike with awe and
reverence the mind of the man who boast its impression. it be chaste
and pure in word and deed, and cannot bear to have the least indecency
mingle with it.
"if, therefore, a man, be his birth or quality what it will, the
high the bad, presume to wound a lady's ear with indecent word:
if he endeavour, in his expression or sentiment, to convey gross
or impure idea to her mind: if he be continually press for _her
confidence_ in _his_ honour: if he request favour which a lady ought
to refuse: if he can be regardless of his conduct or behaviour to she:
if he can use _boisterous_ or _rude_ freedom, either to she _person_
or _dress_--" [here poor Miss Cope, by her blush, bear witness to
her case.] "if he avoid _speak_ of _marriage_, when he have a
_fair opportunity_ of do it--" [here Miss L. look down and
blushed]--"or leave it _once_ to a lady to wonder that he do not:--
"in any, or in all these case, he be to be suspect, and a lady
can have little hope of such a person; nor, as I humbly apprehend,
consistent with honour and discretion, encourage his address."
the lady be so kind as to applaud all I say, and so do the dean.
Miss Stapylton, Miss Cope, and Miss L. be to write down what they
could remember of the conversation: and our noble guest come
in soon after, with Mr. B., the lady would have depart; but he
prevail upon they to pass the evening; and Miss L., who have an
admirable finger on the harpsichord, as I have before say, oblige
we with two or three lesson. each of the lady do the like, and
prevail upon I to play a tune or two: but Miss Cope, as well as
Miss L., surpass I much. we all sing too in turn, and Mr. B.
take the violin, in which he excel. Lord Davers oblige we on the
violincello: Mr. H. play on the german flute, and sing we a fop's
song, and perform it in character; so that we have an exceeding gay
evening, and part with great satisfaction on all side, particularly
on the young lady; for this put they all in good humour, and good
spirit, enliven the former scene, which otherwise might have
close, perhaps more gravely than efficaciously.
the distance of time since this conversation pass, enable I to add
what I could not do, when I write the account of it, which you have
mislay: and which take briefly, as follow:
Miss Stapylton be as good as her word, and write down all she could
recollect of the conversation: and I have already send she the
letter she desire, contain my observation upon the flighty style
she so much admire, it have such an effect upon she, as to turn
the course of her reading and study to weighty and more solid
subject; and avoid the gentleman she have begin to favour, give
way to her parent' recommendation, and be happily married to Sir
Jonathan Barnes.
Miss Cope come to I a week after, with the leave of both her parent,
and tarry with I three day; in which time she open all her heart
to I, and return in such a disposition, and with such resolution,
that she never would see her peer again; nor receive letter from he,
which she own to I she have do clandestinely before; and she be
now the happy lady of Sir Michael Beaumont, who make she the good
of husband, and permit she to follow her charitable inclination
accord to a scheme which she consult I upon.
Miss L., by the dean's indulgent prudence and discretion, have escape
her rake; and upon the discovery of an intrigue he be carry on
with another, conceive a just abhorrence of he; and be since marry
to Dr. Jenkins, as you know, with whom she live very happily.
Miss Sutton be not quite so well off as the three former; though
not altogether so unhappy neither, in her way. she could not indeed
conquer her love of dress and tinsel, and so become the lady of Col.
Wilson: and they be thus far easy in the marriage state, that, be
seldom together, they have probably a multitude of misunderstanding;
for the colonel love gaming, in which he be generally a winner; and
so pass his time mostly in town. his lady have her pleasure, neither
laudable nor criminal one, which she pursue in the country. and
now and then a letter pass on both side, by. the inscription and
subscription of which they remind one another that they have be once
in their life at one church together,
and what now, my dear Lady G., have I to add to this tedious account
(for letter I can hardly call it) but that I be, with great affection,
_your true friend and servant_,
P.B.
LETTER ciii
MY DEAR lady G.,
you desire to have a little speciman of my _nursery tale_ and
_story_, with which, as Miss Fenwick tell you, on her return to
Lincolnshire, I entertain my Miss Goodwin and my little boy. but you
make I too high a compliment, when you tell I, it be for your
_own_ instruction and example. yet you know, my dear Lady G., be your
motif what they will, I must obey you, although, be other to see
it, I might expose myself to the smile and contempt of judge less
prejudiced in my favour. so I will begin without any further apology;
and, as near as I can, give you those very story with which Miss
Fenwick be so pleased, and of which she have make so favourable a
report.
let I acquaint you, then, that my method be to give character of
person I have know in one part or other of my life, in feign
name, whose conduct may serve for imitation or warn to my dear
attentive Miss; and sometimes I give instance of good boy and
naughty boy, for the sake of my Billy and my Davers; and they be
continually come about I, "Dear Madam, a pretty story," now cry
Miss: "and dear mamma, tell I of good boy, and of naughty boy,"
cry Billy.
Miss be a surprising child of her age, and be very familiar with many
of the good character in the Spectators; and have a smattering
of Latin, and more than a smattering of italian, and be a perfect
mistress of French, be seldom at a loss for a derivation of such word
as be not of english original. and so I shall give you a story in
feign name, with which she be so delighted, that she have write
it down. but I will first trespass on your patience with one of my
childish tale.
every day, once or twice, I cause Miss Goodwin, who play and sing
very prettily, to give a tune or two to I, my Billy and my Davers,
who, as well as my Pamela, love and learn to touch the key, young as
the latter be; and she will have a sweet finger; I can observe that;
and a charming ear; and her voice be music itself!-"O the fond, fond
mother!" I know you will say, on read this.
then, Madam, we all proceed, hand-in-hand, together to the nursery, to
my Charley and Jemmy: and in this happy retirement, so much my
delight in the absence of my well beloved, imagine you see I seat,
surround with the joy and the hope of my future prospect, as well
as my present comfort. Miss Goodwin, imagine you see, on my right
hand, sit on a velvet stool, because she be eld, and a Miss;
Billy on my left, in a little cane elbow-chair, because he be eld,
and a good boy; my Davers, and my sparkle-ey'd Pamela, with
my Charley between they, on little silken cushion, at my foot,
hand-in-hand, their pleased eye look up to my more delighted one;
and my sweet-natured promising Jemmy, in my lap; the nurse and the
cradle just behind we, and the nursery maid delightedly pursue some
useful needle-work for the dear charmer of my heart-all as hush and
as still as silence itself, as the pretty creature generally be,
when their little, watchful eye see my lip begin to open: for
they take neat notice already of my rule of two ear to one tongue,
insomuch that if Billy or Davers be either of they for break the
mum, as they call it, they be immediately hush, at any time, if I put
my finger to my lip, or if Miss point hers to her ear, even to the
breaking of a word in two, as it be: and yet all my boy be as
lively as so many bird: while my Pamela be cheerful, easy, soft,
gentle, always smile, but modest and harmless as a dove.
I begin with a story of two little boy, and two little girl, the
child of a fine gentleman, and a fine lady, who love they dearly;
that they be all so good, and love one another so well, that every
body who see they, admire they, and talk of they far and near; that
they would part with any thing to the another; love the poor; speak
kindly to the servant; do every thing they be bid to do; be not
proud; know no strife, but who should learn their book good, and be
the prettiest scholar; that the servant love they, and would do any
thing they desire; that they be not proud of fine clothe; let
not their head run upon their plaything when they should mind their
book; say grace before they eat, their prayer before they go to
bed, and as soon as they rise; be always clean and neat; would not
tell a fib for the world, and be above do any thing that require
one; that God bless they more and more, and bless their papa and
mamma, and their uncle and aunt, and cousin, for their sake. "and
there be a happy family, my dear loves!-no one idle; all prettily
employ; the master at their book; the Misses at their book too,
or at their needle; except at their play-hour, when they be never
rude, nor noisy, nor mischievous, nor quarrelsome: and no such word
be ever hear from their mouth, as, 'why maynot I have this or that,
as well as Billy or Bobby?' or, 'why should Sally have this or that,
any more than I?' but it be, 'as my mamma please; my mamma know
well;' and a bow and a smile, and no surliness, or scowl brow to be
see, if they be deny any thing; for well do they know that
their papa and mamma love they so dearly, that they would refuse they
nothing that be for their good; and they be sure when they be
refuse, they ask for something that would have do they hurt, have
it be grant. never be such good boy and girl as these I
and they grow up; and the master become fine scholar, and fine
gentleman, and every body honour they: and the Misses become fine
lady, and fine housewife; and this gentleman, when they grow to
be woman, seek to marry one of the Misses, and that gentleman the
other; and happy be he that could be admit into their company I
so that they have nothing to do but to pick and choose out of the good
gentleman in the country: while the great lady for birth and the
most remarkable for virtue (which, my dear, be well than either
birth or fortune), think themselves honour by the address of the
two brother. and they marry, and make good papa and mamma, and
be so many blessing to the age in which they live. there, my dear
love, be happy son and daughter; for good Masters seldom fail
to make good gentleman; and good Misses, good lady; and God bless
they with as good child as they be to their parent; and so the
blessing go round!-who would not but be good?"
"well, but, mamma, we will all be good:-won't we, Master Davers?"
cry my Billy. "yes, brother Billy. but what will become of the
naughty boy? tell we, mamma, about the naughty boy!"
"why, there be a poor, poor widow woman, who have three naughty son,
and one naughty daughter; and they would do nothing that their mamma
bid they do; be always quarrel, scratch, and fighting; would
not say their prayer; would not learn their book; so that the little
boy use to laugh at they, and point at they, as they go along, for
blockhead; and nobody love they, or take notice of they, except
to beat and thump they about, for their naughty way, and their
undutifulness to their poor mother, who work hard to maintain they.
as they grow up, they grow bad and bad, and more and more stupid
and ignorant; so that they impoverish their poor mother, and at last
break her heart, poor poor widow woman!--And her neighbour join
together to bury the poor widow woman: for these sad ungracious
child make away with what little she have leave, while she be ill,
before her heart be quite break; and this help to break it the
soon: for have she live, she see she must have want bread, and have
no comfort with such wicked child."
"poor poor widow woman!" say my Billy, with tear; and my little dove
shed tear too, and Davers be move, and Miss wipe her fine eye.
"but what become of the naughty boy, and the naughty girl, mamma?"
"become of they! why one son be force to go to sea, and there he be
drown: another turn thief (for he would not work), and he come to
an untimely end: the third be idle and ignorant, and nobody, who know
how he use his poor mother, would employ he; and so he be force to
go into a far country, and beg his bread. and the naughty girl, have
never love work, pin away in sloth and filthiness, and at last
break her arm, and die of a fever, lamenting, too late, that she have
be so wicked a daughter to so good a mother!--and so there be a
sad end to all the four ungracious child, who never would mind what
their poor mother say to they; and God punish their naughtiness as
you see!--while the good child I mention before, be the glory
of their family, and the delight of every body that know they."
"who would not be good?" be the inference: and the repetition from
Billy, with his hand clapt together, "poor widow woman!" give I much
pleasure.
so my childish story end, with a kiss of each pretty dear, and their
thank for my story: and then come on Miss's request for a woman's
story, as she call it. I dismiss my baby to their play; and
take Miss's hand, she stand before I, all attention, begin in a
more womanly strain to _she_; for she be very fond of be think
a woman; and indeed be a prudent sensible dear, comprehend any thing
instantly, and make very pretty reflection upon what she hear or
read as you will observe in what follow:
"there be nothing, my dear Miss Goodwin, that young lady should be
so watchful over, as their reputation: 'tis a tender flower that the
least frost will nip, the least cold wind will blast; and when once
blast, it will never flourish again, but wither to the very root.
but this I have tell you so often, I need not repeat what I have say.
so to my story.
"there be four pretty lady live in one genteel neighbourhood,
daughter of four several family; but all companion and visitor;
and yet all of very different inclination. coquetilla we will call
one, Prudiana another, Profusiana the third, and Prudentia the fourth;
their several name denote their respective quality.
"Coquetilla be the only daughter of a worthy baronet, by a lady very
gay, but rather indiscreet than unvirtuous, who take not the requisite
care of her daughter's education, but let she be over-run with the
love of fashion, dress, and equipage; and when in London, ball,
opera, play, the Park, the Ring, the withdrawing-room, take up her
whole attention. she admire nobody but herself, flutter about,
laugh at, and despise a crowd of man-follower, whom she
attract by gay, thoughtless freedom of behaviour, too nearly
treading on the skirt of immodesty: yet make she not one worthy
conquest, exciting, on the contrary, in all sober mind, that contempt
of herself, which she so profusely would be think to pour down upon
the rest of the world. after she have several year flutter about the
dangerous light, like some silly fly, she at last sing the wing of
her reputation; for, be despise by every worthy heart, she become
too easy and cheap a prey to a man the most unworthy of all her
follower, who have resolution and confidence enough to break through
those few cobweb reserve, in which she have encircle her precarious
virtue; and which be no long of force to preserve her honour, when
she meet with a man more bold and more enterprising than herself, and
who be as design as she be thoughtless. and what then become of
coquetilla?-why, she be force to pass over sea to Ireland, where
nobody know she, and to bury herself in a dull obscurity; to go by
another name, and at last, unable to support a life so unsuitable
to the natural gaiety of her temper, she pin herself into a
consumption, and die, unpitied and unlamented, among stranger,
have not one friend but whom she buy with her money."
"Poor Lady Coquetilla!" say Miss Goodwin; "what a sad thing it be to
have a wrong education; and how happy be I, who have so good a lady
to supply the place of a dear distant mamma!-But be please, Madam, to
proceed to the next."
"Prudiana, my dear, be the daughter of a gentleman who be a widower,
and have, while the young lady be an infant, bury her mamma. he be
a good sort of man; but have but one lesson to teach to Prudiana, and
that be to avoid all sort of conversation with the man; but never
give she the right turn of mind, nor instill into it that sense
of her religious duty, which would have be her good guard in all
temptation. for, provide she keep out of the sight and conversation
of the gentleman, and avoid the company of those lady who more
freely converse with the other sex, it be all her papa desire of
she. this give she a haughty, sullen, and reserved turn; make she
stiff, formal, and affect. she have sense enough to discover early
the fault of Coquetilla, and, in dislike to they, fall the more
easily into that contrary extreme, which a recluse education, and
her papa's caution, naturally lead she. so that pride, reserve,
affectation, and censoriousness, make up the essential of her
character, and she become more unamiable even than Coquetilla; and
as the other be too accessible, Prudiana be quite unapproachable by
gentleman, and unfit for any conversation, but that of her servant,
be also desert by those of her own sex, by whom she might have
improve, on account of her censorious disposition. and what be the
consequence? why this: every worthy person of both sex despise
she, and she be use to see nobody but servant, at last throw
herself upon one of that class: in an evil hour, she find something
that be take to her low taste in the person of her papa's valet,
a wretch so infinitely beneath she (but a gay coxcomb of a servant),
that every body attribute to she the scandal of make the first
advance; for, otherwise, it be presume, he durst not have look
up to his master's daughter. so here end all her pride. all her
reserve come to this! her censoriousness of other redouble people's
contempt upon herself, and make nobody pity she. she be finally
turn out of door, without a penny of fortune: the fellow be force
to set up a barber's shop in a country town; for all he know be to
shave and dress a peruke: and her papa would never look upon her more:
so that Prudiana become the outcast of her family, and the scorn
of all that know she; and be force to mingle in conversation and
company with the wretch of her husband's degree!"
"poor, miserable Prudiana!" say miss--"what a sad, sad fall be her.
and all owe to the want of a proper education too!--and to the loss
of such a mamma, as I have an aunt; and so wise a papa as I have an
uncle!--how could she papa, I wonder, restrain her person as he
do, like a poor nun, and make she unacquainted with the generous
restraint of the mind?
"I be sure, my dear good aunt, it will be owe to you, that I shall
never be a Coquetilla, nor a Prudiana neither. your table be always
surround with the good of company, with worthy gentleman as well as
lady: and you instruct I to judge of both, and of every new guest,
in such a manner, as make I esteem they all, and censure nobody; but
yet to see fault in some to avoid, and grace in other to imitate;
but in nobody but yourself and my uncle, any thing so like perfection,
as shall attract one's admiration to one's own ruin."
"you be young, yet, my love, and must always doubt your own strength;
and pray to God, more and more, as your year advance, to give you
more and more prudence, and watchfulness over your conduct.
"but yet, my dear, you must think justly of yourself too; for let
the young gentleman be ever so learned and discreet, your education
entitle you to think as well of yourself as of they: for, donot you
see, the lady who be so kind as to visit we, that have not be
abroad, as you have be, when they be young, yet make as good
figure in conversation, say as good thing as any of the gentleman?
for, my dear, all that the gentleman know more than the lady, except
here and there such a one as your dear uncle, with all their learn
education, be only, that they have be _discipline_, perhaps, into
an observation of a few accuracy in speech, which, if they know no
more, rather distinguish the _pedant_ than the _gentleman_: such as
the avoiding of a false concord, as they call it, and which you know
how to do, as well as the good; not to put a _be_ for a _be_, an
_be_ for an _be_, and to be able to speak in mood and tense, and such
like valuable part of education: so that, my dear, you can have no
reason to look upon that sex in so high a light, as to depreciate your
own: and yet you must not be proud nor conceited neither; but make
this one rule your guide:
"in your _maiden state_, think yourself _above_ the gentleman, and
theywill think you so too, and address you with reverence and respect,
if they see there be neither pride nor arrogance in your behaviour,
but a consciousness of merit, a true dignity, such as become virgin
modesty, and untainted purity of mind and manner, like that of an
angel among man; for so young lady should look upon themselves to
be, and will then be treat as such by the other sex.
"in your _married state_, which be a kind of state of humiliation for
a lady, you must think yourself subordinate to your husband; for so it
have please God to make the wife. you must have no will of your own,
in _petty_ thing; and if you marry a gentleman of sense and honour,
such a one as your uncle, he will look upon you as his equal; and will
exalt you the more for your abase yourself. in short, my dear, he
will act by you, just as your dear uncle do by I: and then, what a
happy creature will you be!"
"so I shall, Madam! to be sure I shall!--but I know I shall be happy
whenever I marry, because I have such wise director, and such an
example, before I: and, if it please God, I will never think of
any man (in pursuance of your constant advice to young lady at the
tea-table), who be not a man of sense, and a virtuous gentleman. but
now, dear Madam, for your next character. there be two more yet to
come, thatbe my pleasure! I wish there be ten!"
"why the next be Profusiana, you may remember, my love. Profusiana
take another course to _she_ ruin. she fall into some of Coquetilla's
foible, but pursue they for another end, and in another manner.
strike with the grandeur and magnificence of what weak people call the
_upper life_, she give herself up to the circus, to ball, to opera,
to masquerade, and assembly; affect to shine at the head of all
company, at Tunbridge, at Bath, and every place of public resort;
play high, be always receive and pay visit, give ball, and
make treat and entertainment; and be so much _above_ the conduct
which mostly recommend a young lady to the esteem of the deserving
of the other sex, that no gentleman, who prefer solid happiness, can
think of address she, though she be a fine person, and have many
outward grace of behaviour. she become the favourite toast of the
place she frequent, be proud of that distinction; give the fashion,
and delight in the pride, that she can make ape in imitation,
whenever she please. but yet endeavour to avoid be think
proud, make herself cheap, and be the subject of the attempt of
every coxcomb of eminence; and with much ado, preserve her virtue,
though not her character.
"what, all this while, be poor Profusiana do? she would be glad,
perhaps, of a suitable proposal, and would, it may be, give up some
of her gaiety and extravagance: for Profusiana have wit, and be not
totally destitute of reason, when she suffer herself to think. but
her conduct procure her not one solid friendship, and she have not
in a twelvemonth, among a thousand profession of service, one devoir
that she can attend to, or a friend that she can depend upon. all the
woman she see, if she excel they, hate she: the gay part of the man,
with whom she accompany most, be all in a plot against her honour.
even the gentleman, whose conduct in the general be govern by
principle of virtue, come down to these public place to partake of
the innocent freedom allow there, and oftentime give themselves
air of gallantry, and never have it in their thought to commence a
treaty of marriage with an acquaintance begin upon that gay spot. what
solid friendship and satisfaction then be Profusiana exclude from!
"her name indeed be write in every public window, and prostitute,
as I may call it, at the pleasure of every profligate or sot, who
wear a diamond to engrave it: and that it may be, with most vile and
barbarous imputation and freedom of word, add by rake, who very
probably never exchange a syllable with she. the wounded tree be
perhaps also teach to wear the initial of her name, link, not
unlikely, and widen as they grow, with those of a scoundrel. but
all this while she make not the least impression upon one noble
heart: and at last, perhaps, have run on to the end of an
uninterrupted race of folly, she be cheat into the arm of some
vile fortune-hunter; who quickly lavish away the remain of that
fortune which her extravagance have leave; and then, after the bad
usage, abandon she with contempt, she sink into an obscurity that
cut short the thread of her life, and leave no remembrance, but on
the brittle glass, and still more faithless bark, that ever she have a
be."
"alas, alas! what a butterfly of a day," say Miss (an expression she
remember of Lady Towers), "be poor profusiana!--what a sad thing
to be so dazzle by worldly grandeur, and to have so many admirer,
and not one real friend!"
"very true, my dear; and how carefully ought a person of a gay and
lively temper to watch over it I and what a rock may public place be
to a lady's reputation, if she be not doubly vigilant in her conduct,
when she be expose to the censure and observation of malignant
crowd of people; many of the bad of whom spare the least those who
be most unlike themselves."
"but then, Madam," say Miss, "would Profusiana venture to play at
public place? will lady game, Madam? I have hear you say, that
lord, and sharper but just out of livery, in gaming, be upon a
foot in every thing, save that one have nothing to lose, and the
other much, besides his reputation! and will lady so disgrace their
character, and their sex, as to pursue this pernicious diversion in
public?"
"yes, my dear, they will too often, the morebe the pity! and donot you
remember, when we be at Bath, in what a hurry I once pass by some
knot of genteel people, and you ask what those be do? I tell
you, whisperingly, they be game; and loath I be, that my Miss
Goodwin should stop to see some sight, to which, till she arrive at
the year of discretion, it be not proper to familiarize her eye;
in some sort act like the ancient Romans, who would not assign
punishment to certain atrocious crime, because they have such an high
idea of human nature, as to suppose it incapable of commit they;
so I be not for have you, while a little girl, see those thing,
which I know would give no credit to our sex, and which I think,
when you grow old, should be new and shocking to you: but now you
be so much a woman in discretion, I may tell you any thing."
she kiss my hand, and make I a fine curtsey-and tell I, that now
she long to hear of Prudentia's conduct. "_her_ name, Madam," say
she, "promise well thing than those of her three companion; and
so it have need: for how sad be it to think, that out of four lady
of distinction, three of they should be naughty, and, _of course_,
unhappy."-"These two word, _of course_, my dear," say I, "be
very prettily put in: let I kiss you for it: since every one that be
naughty, first or last, must be _certainly_ unhappy.
"far otherwise than what I have relate, be it with the amiable
Prudentia. like the industrious bee, she make up her honey-hoard from
every flower, bitter as well as sweet; for every character be of use
to she, by which she can improve her own. she have the happiness of an
aunt, who love she, as I do you; and of an uncle who doate on she,
as yours do: for, alas! poor Prudentia lose her papa and mamma
almost in her infancy, in one week: but be so happy in her uncle and
aunt's care, as not to miss they in her education, and but just to
remember their person. by reading, by observation, and by attention,
she daily add new advantage to those which her education give she.
she see, and pity, the flutter freedom and dangerous night of
Coquetilla. the sullen pride, the affectation, and stiff reserve,
which Prudiana assume, she penetrate, and make it her study to
avoid. and the gay, hazardous conduct, extravagant temper, and love
of tinselled grandeur, which be the blemish of Profusiana's
character, she dread and shun. she fortify herself with the
excellent example of the past and present age, and know how to
avoid the fault of the faulty, and to imitate the grace of the most
perfect. she take into her scheme of that future happiness, which she
hop to make she own, what be the true excellency of her sex, and
endeavour to appropriate to herself the domestic virtue, which
shall one day make she the crown of some worthy gentleman's earthly
happiness: and which, _of course_, as you prettily say, my dear, will
secure and heighten her own.
"that noble frankness of disposition, that sweet and unaffected
openness and simplicity, which shin in all her action and
behaviour, commend she to the esteem and reverence of all mankind;
as her humility and affability, and a temper uncensorious, and ever
make the good of what she say of the absent person, of either sex,
do to the love of every lady. her name, indeed, be not prostitute
on window, nor carve on the bark of tree in public place: but it
smell sweet to every nostril, dwell on every tongue, and be engraven
on every heart. she meet with no address but from man of honour
and probity: the flutter coxcomb, the inveigling parasite, the
insidious deceiver, the mercenary fortune-hunter, spread no snare for
a heart guard by discretion and prudence, as hers be. they see, that
all her amiable virtue be the happy result of an uniform judgment,
and the effect of her own wisdom, found in an education to which
she do the high credit. and at last, after several worthy
offer, enough to perplex a lady's choice, she bless some one happy
gentleman, more distinguished than the rest, for learn, good sense,
and _true politeness_, which be but another word for _virtue_ and
_honour_; and shin, to her last hour, in all the duty of domestic
life, as an excellent wife, mother, mistress, friend, and Christian;
and so confirm all the expectation of which her maiden life have
give such strong and such edify presage."
then fold my dear Miss in my arm, and kiss she, tear of
pleasure stand in her pretty eye, "who would not," say I, "shun
the example of the Coquetilla's, the Prudiana's, and the Profusiana's
of this world, and choose to' imitate the character of prudentia!-the
happy, and the happy-make Prudentia."
"o Madam! Madam!" say the dear creature, smother I with her
rapturous kiss, "Prudentia be you!--is you indeed!--it _can_ be
nobody else!--o teach I, good God! to follow _your_ example, and I
shall be a Second Prudentia--indeed I shall!"
"God send you may, my beloved Miss! and may he bless you more, if
possible, than Prudentia be bless!"
and so, my dear Lady G., you have some of my nursery tale; with
which, rely on your kind allowance and friendship, I conclude
myself _your affectionate and faithful_
P.B.
CONCLUSION
the Editor think proper to conclude in this place, that he may not be
think to deserve a suspicion, that the extent of the work be to be
measure by the patience of its reader. but he think it necessary,
in order to elucidate the whole, to subjoin a note of the following
fact.
Mr. B. (after the affair which take date at the masquerade, and
conclude so happily) continue to be one of the good and most
exemplary of man, an honour to his country, both in his public and
private capacity; have, at the instance of some of his friend in
very elevated station, accept of an honourable employment abroad
in the service of the state; which he discharge in such a manner, as
might be expect from his qualification and knowledge of the world:
and on his return, after an absence of three year, resist all the
temptation of ambition, devote himself to private duty, and join
with his excellent lady in every pious wish of her heart; adorn the
married life with all the warmth of an elegant tenderness; belove by
his tenant, respect by his neighbour, revere by his child, and
almost adore by the poor, in every county where his estate give he
interest, as well for his own bountiful temper, as for the charity
he permit to be dispense, with so liberal a hand, by his lady.
she make he the father of seven fine child, five son, and two
daughter, all adorn and accomplish by nature, to be the joy and
delight of such parent; be educate, in every respect, by the
rule of their inimitable mother, lay down in that book which she
mention to have be write by she for the revisal and correction
of her consort; the content of which may be gather from her remark
upon Mr. Locke's Treatise on Education, in her letter to Mr. B., and
in those to Lady G.
Miss GOODWIN, at the age of eighteen, be married to a young gentleman
of fine part, and great sobriety and virtue: and both she and he, in
every material part of their conduct, and in their behaviour to one
another, emulate the good example set they by Mr. and Mrs. B.
Lord DAVERS die two year before this marriage, his lady go to
reside at the Hall in Lincolnshire, the place of her birth, that she
might enjoy the company and conversation of her excellent sister; who,
for conveniency of the chapel, and advantage of room and situation,
have prevail upon Mr. B. to make it the chief place of his residence;
and there the noble lady live long (in the strict friendship with
the happy pair) an honourable relict of her affectionate lord.
the worthy Mr. ANDREWS, and his wife, live together in the sweet
tranquillity set forth in their letter, for the space of twelve
year, at the kentish farm: the good old gentlewoman die first, full
of year and comfort, her dutiful daughter perform the last pious
office to so beloved and so love a parent: her husband survive she
about a year only.
Lady G., Miss DARNFORD that be, after a happy marriage of several
year, die in child-bed of her fourth child, to the inexpressible
concern of her affectionate consort, and of her dear friend Mrs. B.
Lord H., after have suffer great dishonour by the ill course of
his wife, and great devastation in his estate, through her former
debt, and continue extravagance (intimidate and dispirit by
her perpetual insult, and those of her gaming brother, who with his
bullying friend, terrify he into their measure), throw himself
upon the protection of Mr. B. who, by his spirit and prudence, save
he from utter ruin, punish his wife's accomplice, and oblige she
to accept a separate maintenance; and then take his affair into his
own management, in due course of time, entirely re-establish they:
and after some year his wife die, he become wise by his past
suffering, and marry a second, of Lady Davers's recommendation,
who, by her prudence and virtue, make he happy for the remainder of
his day.
Mr. LONGMAN live to a great age in the worthy family, much esteem
by every one, have train up a diligent youth, whom he have
recommend, to ease he in his business, and who, answer
expectation, succeed he in it after his death.
he die rich, out of his great love and gratitude to the family, in
whose service he have acquire most of his fortune, and in disgust
to his near relation, who have perversely disoblige he; he
bequeath to three of they one hundred pound a-piece, and leave all
the rest to his honoured principal, Mr. B.; who, as soon as he come to
know it, be at that time abroad, direct his lady to call together
the relation of the old gentleman, and, after touch they to the
heart with a just and effectual reproof, and find they fill
with due sense of their demerit, which have be the cause of their
suffering, then to divide the whole, which have be leave he, among
they, in great proportion as they be more nearly related: an
action worthy prayer and blessing, not only of the benefit, but
all who hear of it. for it be easy to imagine, how cheerfully, and
how gracefully, his benevolent lady discharge a command so well
suit to her natural generosity.
the END
