BARRY LYNDON
from the WORKS of
WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY
edit BY WALTER JERROLD
content
bibliographical note
I.--MY PEDIGREE and FAMILY--UNDERGO the influence of the TENDER
PASSION
II.--IN which I show MYSELF to be a man of SPIRIT
III.--I make a false start in the GENTEEL world
IV.--IN which BARRY takes a NEAR view of MILITARY glory
V.--IN which BARRY try to remove as far from military glory as
POSSIBLE
VI.--THE CRIMP WAGGON--MILITARY EPISODES
vii.--barry LEADS a GARRISON life, and find many friend there
VIII.--BARRY BIDS adieu to the MILITARY PROFESSION
IX.--I appear in a MANNER become MY name and lineage
X.--MORE runs of LUCK
xi.--in which the LUCK go against BARRY
xii.--contain the tragical history of the princess of x-----
XIII.--I CONTINUE MY CAREER as a man of FASHION
XIV.--I RETURN to IRELAND, and EXHIBIT my splendour and GENEROSITY
in that KINGDOM
XV.--I pay court to MY lady LYNDON
XVI.--I PROVIDE NOBLY for MY FAMILY, and ATTAIN the height of MY
(SEEMING) good FORTUNE
XVII.--I appear as an ornament of ENGLISH SOCIETY
XVIII.--IN which my good fortune begin to WAVER
xix.--conclusion
BARRY LYNDON
a bibliographical note
Barry Lyndon--far from the well know, but by some critic acclaim
as the fine, of Thackeray's work--appear originally as a serial
a few year before VANITY FAIR be write; yet it be not publish
in book form, and then not by itself, until after the publication of
VANITY FAIR, PENDENNIS, ESMOND and the NEWCOMES have place its
author in the forefront of the literary man of the day. so many
year after the event we cannot help wonder why the story be not
early put in book form; for in its delineation of the character of
an adventurer it be as great as VANITY FAIR, while for the local
colour of history, if I may put it so, it be no undistinguished
precursor of ESMOND.
in the number of FRASER's MAGAZINE for January 1844 appear the
first instalment of 'the LUCK of BARRY LYNDON, ESQ., a romance of
the last century, by FitzBoodle,' and the story continue to appear
month by month--with the exception of October--up to the end of the
year, when the concluding portion be sign 'G. S. FitzBoodle.'
FITZBOODLE's confession, it should be add, have appear
occasionally in the magazine during the year immediately precedent,
so that the pseudonym be familiar to FRASER's reader. the story
be write, accord to its author's own word, 'with a great deal
of dulness, unwillingness and labour,' and be evidently do as the
instalment be require, for in August he write 'read for "B. L."
all the morning at the club,' and four day later of '"B. L." lie
like a nightmare on my mind.' the journey to the East--which be to
give we in literary result note of a JOURNEY from CORNHILL to
grand CAIRO--be begin with BARRY LYNDON yet unfinished, for at
Malta the author note on the first three day of November--'Wrote
Barry but slowly and with great difficulty.' 'Wrote Barry with no
more success than yesterday.' 'Finished Barry after great throe
late at night.' in the number of Fraser's for the follow month,
as I have say, the conclusion appear. a dozen year later, in
1856, the story form the first part of the third volume of
Thackeray's miscellany, when it be call MEMOIRS of BARRY
LYNDON, ESQ., write by HIMSELF. since then, it have nearly always
be issue with other matter, as though it be not strong enough
to stand alone, or as though the importance of a work be mainly to
be gauge by the number of page to be crowd into one cover. the
scheme of the present edition fortunately allow fitting honour to
be do to the memoir of the great adventurer.
to come from the story as a whole to the personality of the
eponymous hero. three widely-differ historical individual be
suggest as have contribute to the composite portrait. well
know of these be that very prince among adventurer, G. J.
Casanova de Seingalt, a man who in the latter half of the eighteenth
century play the part of adventurer--and generally that of the
successful adventurer--in most of the european capital; who within
the first five-and-twenty year of his life have be 'abbe,
secretary to Cardinal Aquaviva, ensign, and violinist, at Rome,
Constantinople, Corfu, and his own birthplace (Venice), where he
cure a senator of apoplexy.' his autobiography, MEMOIRES ECRIT PAR
LUI MEME (in twelve volume), have be describe as 'unmatched as a
self-revelation of scoundrelism.' it have also be suggest, with I
think far less colour of probability, that the original of Barry be
the diplomatist and satiric poet Sir Charles Hanbury Williams, whom
Dr Johnson describe as 'our lively and elegant though too
licentious lyrick bard.' the third original, and one who, there
cannot be the slight doubt, contribute feature to the great
portrait, be a certain Andrew Robinson Stoney, afterwards Stoney-
Bowes.
the original of the Countess Lyndon be Mary Eleanor Bowes, Dowager
Countess of Strathmore, and heiress of a very wealthy Durham family.
this lady have many suitor, but in 1777 Stoney, a bankrupt
lieutenant on half pay, who have fight a duel on her behalf, induce
she to marry he, and subsequently hyphenate her name with his own.
he become member of Parliament, and run such extravagant course as
do Barry Lyndon, treat his wife with similar barbarity, abduct
she when she have escape from he, and then, after be divorce,
find his way to a debtor' prison. there be similarity here
which no seeker after original can overlook. Mrs Ritchie say that
her father have a friend at Paris, 'a Mr Bowes, who may have first
tell he this history of which the detail be almost incredible, as
quote from the paper of the time.' the name of Thackeray's friend
be a curious coincidence, unless, as may well have be the case, he
be a connection of the family into which the notorious adventurer
have marry. it be not unlikely that Thackeray have see the work
publish in 1810--the year of Stoney-Bowes's death--in which the
whole unhappy romance be set forth. this be 'the life of ANDREW
ROBINSON BOWES ESQ., and the COUNTESS of STRATHMORE. write from
thirty-three year' Professional Attendance, from letter and other
well authenticated Documents by Jesse Foot, Surgeon.' in this book
we find several incident similar to one in the story. bowe cut
down all the timber on his wife's estate, but 'the neighbour would
not buy it.' such practical joke as Barry Lyndon play upon his
son's tutor be play by bowe on his chaplain. the story of
Stoney and his marriage will be find briefly give in the notice of
the Countess's life in the DICTIONARY of NATIONAL BIOGRAPHY.
whence that part of the romantic interlude deal with the stay in
the Duchy of X----, deal with in chapter x., etc., be inspire,
Thackeray's own note\books (as quote by Mrs Ritchie) conclusively
show: 'January 4,1844. read in a silly book call L'EMPIRE, a good
story about the first K. of Wurtemberg's wife; kill by her husband
for adultery. Frederic William, bear in 1734 (?), m. in 1780 the
Princess Caroline of Brunswick Wolfenbuttel, who die the 27th
September 1788. for the rest of the story see L'EMPIRE, OU DIX ANS
SOUS NAPOLEON, PAR UN CHAMBELLAN: Paris, Allardin, 1836; vol. i.
220.' the 'Captain Freny' to whom Barry owe his adventure on his
journey to Dublin (chapter iii.) be a notorious highwayman, on
whose doing Thackeray have enlarge in the fifteenth chapter of his
IRISH sketch BOOK.
despite the slowness with which it be write, and the seem
neglect with which it be permit to remain unreprinted, BARRY
LYNDON be to be hail by competent critic as one of Thackeray's
fine performance, though the author himself seem to have have no
strong regard for the story. his daughter have record, 'my father
once say to I when I be a girl: "you neednot read BARRY LYNDON,
you willnot like it." indeed, it be scarcely a book to LIKE, but one
to admire and to wonder at for its consummate power and mastery.'
another novelist, Anthony Trollope, have say of it: 'in imagination,
language, construction, and general literary capacity, Thackeray
never do anything more remarkable than BARRY LYNDON.' Mr Leslie
Stephen say: 'all later critic have recognise in this book one of
his most powerful performance. in directness and vigour he never
surpass it.'
W.J.
the Memoires of BARRY LYNDON, ESQ.
CHAPTER I
MY PEDIGREE and FAMILY--UNDERGO the influence of the TENDER passion
since the day of Adam, there have be hardly a mischief do in
this world but a woman have be at the bottom of it. ever since ours
be a family (and that must be very NEAR Adam's time,--so old,
noble, and illustrious be the Barrys, as everybody know) woman
have play a mighty part with the destiny of our race.
I presume that there be no gentleman in Europe that have not hear of
the house of Barry of Barryogue, of the kingdom of Ireland, than
which a more famous name be not to be find in Gwillim or D'Hozier;
and though, as a man of the world, I have learn to despise
heartily the claim of some pretender to high birth who have no
more genealogy than the lacquey who clean my boot, and though I
laugh to utter scorn the boasting of many of my countryman, who be
all for descend from king of Ireland, and talk of a domain no
big than would feed a pig as if it be a principality; yet truth
compel I to assert that my family be the noble of the island,
and, perhaps, of the universal world; while their possession, now
insignificant and tear from we by war, by treachery, by the loss of
time, by ancestral extravagance, by adhesion to the old faith and
monarch, be formerly prodigious, and embrace many county, at a
time when Ireland be vastly more prosperous than now. I would
assume the irish crown over my coat-of-arm, but that there be so
many silly pretender to that distinction who bear it and render it
common.
who know, but for the fault of a woman, I might have be wear
it now? you start with incredulity. I say, why not? have there be a
gallant chief to lead my countryman, instead or pule knave who
bent the knee to King Richard II., they might have be freeman; have
there be a resolute leader to meet the murderous ruffian Oliver
Cromwell, we should have shake off the English for ever. but there
be no Barry in the field against the usurper; on the contrary, my
ancestor, Simon de Bary, come over with the first-name monarch, and
marry the daughter of the then King of Munster, whose son in
battle he pitilessly slay.
in Oliver's time it be too late for a chief of the name of Barry to
lift up his war-cry against that of the murderous brewer. we be
prince of the land no long; our unhappy race have lose its
possession a century previously, and by the most shameful treason.
this I know to be the fact, for my mother have often tell I the
story, and besides have work it in a worsted pedigree which hang up
in the yellow saloon at Barryville where we live.
that very estate which the lyndon now possess in Ireland be once
the property of my race. Rory Barry of Barryogue own it in
Elizabeth's time, and half Munster beside. the Barry be always in
feud with the O'Mahonys in those time; and, as it happen, a
certain english colonel pass through the former's country with a
body of man-at-arm, on the very day when the O'Mahonys have make an
inroad upon our territory, and carry off a frightful plunder of
our flock and herd.
this young Englishman, whose name be Roger Lyndon, Linden, or
Lyndaine, have be most hospitably receive by the Barry, and
find he just on the point of carry an inroad into the
O'Mahonys' land, offer the aid of himself and his lance, and
behave himself so well, as it appear, that the O'Mahonys be
entirely overcome, all the Barrys' property restore, and with it,
say the old chronicle, twice as much of the O'Mahonys' good and
cattle.
it be the setting in of the winter season, and the young soldier
be press by the Barry not to quit his house of Barryogue, and
remain there during several month, his man be quarter with
Barry's own gallowglasse, man by man in the cottage round about.
they conduct themselves, as be their willnot, with the most
intolerable insolence towards the Irish; so much so, that fight and
murder continually ensue, and the people vow to destroy they.
the Barry's son (from whom I descend) be as hostile to the English
as any other man on his domain; and, as they would not go when
bid, he and his friend consult together and determine on
destroy these English to a man.
but they have let a woman into their plot, and this be the Barry's
daughter. she be in love with the English Lyndon, and break the
whole secret to he; and the dastardly English prevent the just
massacre of themselves by fall on the irish, and destroy
Phaudrig Barry, my ancestor, and many hundred of his man. the cross
at Barrycross near Carrignadihioul be the spot where the odious
butchery take place.
Lyndon marry the daughter of Roderick Barry, and claim the
estate which he leave: and though the descendant of Phaudrig be
alive, as indeed they be in my person,[Footnote: as we have never
be able to find proof of the marriage of my ancestor Phaudrig
with his wife, I make no doubt that Lyndon destroy the contract,
and murder the priest and witness of the marriage.--B. L.] on
appeal to the english court, the estate be award to the
Englishman, as have ever be the case where English and Irish be
concerned.
thus, have it not be for the weakness of a woman, I should have
be bear to the possession of those very estate which afterwards
come to I by merit, as you shall hear. but to proceed with my
family, history.
my father be well known to the good circle in this kingdom, as in
that of Ireland, under the name of Roaring Harry Barry. he be breed
like many other young son of genteel family to the profession of
the law, be article to a celebrated attorney of Sackville Street
in the city of Dublin; and, from his great genius and aptitude for
learning, there be no doubt he would have make an eminent figure in
his profession, have not his social quality, love of field-sport,
and extraordinary grace of manner, mark he out for a high
sphere. while he be attorney's clerk he keep seven race-horse, and
hunt regularly both with the Kildare and Wicklow hunt; and ride
on his grey horse endymion that famous match against Captain Punter,
which be still remember by lover of the sport, and of which I
cause a splendid picture to be make and hang over my dining-hall
mantelpiece at Castle Lyndon. a year afterwards he have the honour of
rid that very horse endymion before his late Majesty King George
II. at New-market, and win the plate there and the attention of the
august sovereign.
although he be only the second son of our family, my dear father
come naturally into the estate (now miserably reduce to l400 a
year); for my grandfather's eld son Cornelius Barry (call the
Chevalier Borgne, from a wound which he receive in Germany)
remain constant to the old religion in which our family be
educate, and not only serve abroad with credit, but against his
Most sacred Majesty George II. in the unhappy Scotch disturbance in
'45. we shall hear more of the Chevalier hereafter.
for the conversion of my father I have to thank my dear mother, Miss
Bell Brady, daughter of Ulysses Brady of Castle Brady, county Kerry,
Esquire and J.P. she be the most beautiful woman of her day in
Dublin, and universally call the Dasher there. see she at the
assembly, my father become passionately attach to she; but her
soul be above marry a Papist or an attorney's clerk; and so, for
the love of she, the good old law be then in force, my dear
father slip into my uncle Cornelius's shoe and take the family
estate. besides the force of my mother's bright eye, several
person, and of the genteelest society too, contribute to this
happy change; and I have often hear my mother laughingly tell the
story of my father's recantation, which be solemnly pronounce at
the tavern in the company of Sir Dick Ringwood, Lord Bagwig, Captain
Punter, and two or three other young spark of the town. roar
Harry win 300 piece that very night at faro, and lay the necessary
information the next morning against his brother; but his conversion
cause a coolness between he and my uncle Corney, who join the
rebel in consequence.
this great difficulty be settle, my Lord Bagwig lend my father
his own yacht, then lie at the Pigeon House, and the handsome Bell
Brady be induce to run away with he to England, although her
parent be against the match, and her lover (as I have hear she
tell many thousand of time) be among the most numerous and the
most wealthy in all the kingdom of Ireland. they be marry at the
Savoy, and my grandfather die very soon, Harry Barry, Esquire,
take possession of his paternal property and support our
illustrious name with credit in London. he pink the famous Count
Tiercelin behind Montague House, he be a member of 'White's,' and a
frequenter of all the chocolate-house; and my mother, likewise,
make no small figure. at length, after his great day of triumph
before his sacred Majesty at Newmarket, Harry's fortune be just on
the point of be make, for the gracious monarch promise to
provide for he. but alas! he be take in charge by another
monarch, whose will have no delay or denial,--by death, namely, who
seize upon my father at Chester race, leave I a helpless
orphan. peace be to his ash! he be not faultless, and dissipate
all our princely family property; but he be as brave a fellow as
ever toss a bumper or call a main, and he drive his coach-and-
six like a man of fashion.
I do not know whether his gracious Majesty be much affect by this
sudden demise of my father, though my mother say he shed some royal
tear on the occasion. but they help we to nothing: and all that
be find in the house for the wife and creditor be a purse of
ninety guineas, which my dear mother naturally take, with the family
plate, and my father's wardrobe and her own; and put they into
our great coach, drive off to Holyhead, whence she take shipping for
Ireland. my father's body accompany we in the fine hearse and
plume money could buy; for though the husband and wife have
quarrel repeatedly in life, yet at my father's death his high-
spirited widow forget all her difference, give he the grandest
funeral that have be see for many a day, and erect a monument
over his remain (for which I subsequently pay), which declare he
to be the wise, pure, and most affectionate of man.
in perform these sad duty over her deceased lord, the widow
spend almost every guinea she have, and, indeed, would have spend a
great deal more, have she discharge one-third of the demand which
the ceremony occasion. but the people around our old house of
Barryogue, although they do not like my father for his change of
faith, yet stand by he at this moment, and be for exterminate
the mute send by Mr. Plumer of London with the lamented remain.
the monument and vault in the church be then, alas! all that
remain of my vast possession; for my father have sell every stick
of the property to one Notley, an attorney, and we receive but a
cold welcome in his house--a miserable old tumble-down place it be.
[footnote: in another part of his memoir Mr. Barry will be find to
describe this mansion as one of the most splendid palace in Europe;
but this be a practice not unusual with his nation; and with respect
to the irish principality claim by he, it be know that Mr.
Barry's grandfather be an attorney and maker of his own fortune.]
the splendour of the funeral do not fail to increase the widow
Barry's reputation as a woman of spirit and fashion; and when she
write to her brother Michael Brady, that worthy gentleman
immediately ride across the country to fle himself in her arm,
and to invite she in his wife's name to Castle Brady.
Mick and Barry have quarrel, as all man will, and very high word
have pass between they during Barry's courtship of Miss Bell. when
he take she off, Brady swear he would never forgive Barry or Bell;
but come to London in the year '46, he fall in once more with
Roaring Harry, and live in his fine house in Clarges Street, and
lose a few piece to he at play, and break a watchman's head or two
in his company,--all of which reminiscence endear Bell and her
son very much to the good-hearted gentleman, and he receive we both
with open arm. Mrs. Barry do not, perhaps wisely, at first make
know to her friend what be her condition; but arrive in a huge
gilt coach with enormous armorial bearing, be take by her sister-
in-law and the rest of the county for a person of considerable
property and distinction. for a time, then, and as be right and
proper, Mrs. Barry give the law at Castle Brady. she order the
servant to and fro, and teach they, what indeed they much want,
a little London neatness; and 'English Redmond,' as I be call,
be treat like a little lord, and have a maid and a footman to
himself; and honest Mick pay their wages,--which be much more than
he be use to do for his own domestics,--doing all in his power to
make his sister decently comfortable under her affliction. Mamma,
in return, determine that, when her affair be arrange, she
would make her kind brother a handsome allowance for her son's
maintenance and her own; and promise to have her handsome furniture
bring over from Clarges Street to adorn the somewhat dilapidate
room of Castle Brady.
but it turn out that the rascally landlord seize upon every chair
and table that ought by right to have belong to the widow. the
estate to which I be heir be in the hand of rapacious creditor;
and the only mean of subsistence remain to the widow and child
be a rent-charge of L50 upon my Lord Bagwig's property, who have
many turf-dealing with the deceased. and so my dear mother's
liberal intention towards her brother be of course never
fulfil.
it must be confess, very much to the discredit of Mrs. Brady of
Castle Brady, that when her sister-in-law's poverty be thus make
manifest, she forget all the respect which she have be accustom
to pay she, instantly turn my maid and man-servant out of door,
and tell Mrs. Barry that she might follow they as soon as she choose.
Mrs. Mick be of a low family, and a sordid way of thinking; and
after about a couple of year (during which she have save almost all
her little income) the widow comply with Madam Brady's desire. at
the same time, give way to a just though prudently dissimulate
resentment, she make a vow that she would never enter the gate of
Castle Brady while the lady of the house remain alive within they.
she fit up her new abode with much economy and considerable
taste, and never, for all her poverty, abate a jot of the dignity
which be her due and which all the neighbourhood award to she.
how, indeed, could they refuse respect to a lady who have live in
London, frequent the most fashionable society there, and have be
present (as she solemnly declare) at Court? these advantage give
she a right which seem to be pretty unsparingly exercise in
Ireland by those native who have it,--the right of look down
with scorn upon all person who have not have the opportunity of
quit the mother-country and inhabit England for a while.
thus, whenever Madam Brady appear abroad in a new dress, her
sister-in-law would say, 'poor creature! how can it be expect that
she should know anything of the fashion?' and though please to be
call the handsome widow, as she be, Mrs. Barry be still well
pleased to be call the english widow.
Mrs. Brady, for her part, be not slow to reply: she use to say
that the defunct Barry be a bankrupt and a beggar; and as for the
fashionable society which he see, he see it from my Lord Bagwig's
side-table, whose flatterer and hanger-on he be know to be.
regard Mrs. Barry, the lady of Castle Brady would make
insinuation still more painful. however, why should we allude to
these charge, or rake up private scandal of a hundred year old? it
be in the reign of George II that the above-name personage live
and quarrel; good or bad, handsome or ugly, rich or poor, they
be all equal now; and do not the Sunday paper and the court of
law supply we every week with more novel and interesting slander?
at any rate, it must be allow that Mrs. Barry, after her husband's
death and her retirement, live in such a way as to defy slander.
for whereas Bell Brady have be the gay girl in the whole county
of Wexford, with half the bachelor at her foot, and plenty of
smile and encouragement for every one of they, Bell Barry adopt a
dignified reserve that almost amount to pomposity, and be as
starch as any Quakeress. many a man renew his offer to the widow,
who have be smite by the charm of the spinster; but Mrs. Barry
refuse all offer of marriage, declare that she live now for her
son only, and for the memory of her depart saint.
'Saint forsooth!' say ill-natured Mrs. Brady.
'Harry Barry be as big a sinner as ever be know; and 'tis
notorious that he and Bell hat each other. if she willnot marry now,
depend on it, the artful woman have a husband in her eye for all
that, and only wait until Lord Bagwig be a widower.'
and suppose she do, what then? be not the widow of a Barry fit to
marry with any lord of England? and be it not always say that a
woman be to restore the fortune of the Barry family? if my mother
fancy that she be to be that woman, I think it be a perfectly
justifiable notion on her part; for the Earl (my godfather) be
always most attentive to she: I never know how deeply this notion of
advance my interest in the world have take possession of mamma's
mind, until his Lordship's marriage in the year '57 with Miss
Goldmore, the Indian nabob's rich daughter.
meanwhile we continue to reside at Barryville, and, consider the
smallness of our income, keep up a wonderful state. of the half-
dozen family that form the congregation at Brady's Town, there
be not a single person whose appearance be so respectable as that
of the widow, who, though she always dress in mourning, in memory
of her deceased husband, take care that her garment should be make
so as to set off her handsome person to the great advantage; and,
indeed, I think, spend six hour out of every day in the week in
cutting, trim, and alter they to the fashion. she have the
large of hoop and the handsome of furbelow, and once a month
(under my Lord Bagwig's cover) would come a letter from London
contain the new account of the fashion there. her complexion
be so brilliant that she have no call to use rouge, as be the mode
in those day. no, she leave red and white, she say (and hence the
reader may imagine how the two lady hat each other) to Madam
Brady, whose yellow complexion no plaster could alter. in a word,
she be so accomplish a beauty, that all the woman in the country
take pattern by she, and the young fellow from ten mile round
would ride over to Castle Brady church to have the sight of she.
but if (like every other woman that ever I see or read of) she be
proud of her beauty, to do her justice she be still more proud of
her son, and have say a thousand time to I that I be the
handsome young fellow in the world. this be a matter of taste. a
man of sixty may, however, say what he be at fourteen without much
vanity, and I must say I think there be some cause for my mother's
opinion. the good soul's pleasure be to dress I; and on Sundays
and holiday I turn out in a velvet coat with a silver-hilte
sword by my side and a gold garter at my knee, as fine as any lord
in the land. my mother work I several most splendid waistcoat,
and I have plenty of lace for my ruffle, and a fresh riband to my
hair, and as we walk to church on Sundays, even envious Mrs. Brady
be find to allow that there be not a pretty pair in the
kingdom.
of course, too, the lady of Castle Brady use to sneer, because on
these occasion a certain Tim, who use to be call my valet,
follow I and my mother to church, carry a huge prayer-book and
a cane, and dress in the livery of one of our own fine footman
from Clarges Street, which, as Tim be a bandy-shank little
fellow, do not exactly become he. but, though poor, we be
gentlefolk, and not to be sneer out of these become appendage
to our rank; and so would march up the aisle to our pew with as much
state and gravity as the Lord Lieutenant's lady and son might do.
when there, my mother would give the response and amen in a loud
dignified voice that be delightful to hear, and, besides, have a
fine loud voice for singing, which art she have perfect in London
under a fashionable teacher; and she would exercise her talent in
such a way that you would hardly hear any other voice of the little
congregation which choose to join in the psalm. in fact, my mother
have great gift in every way, and believe herself to be one of the
most beautiful, accomplished, and meritorious person in the world.
often and often have she talk to I and the neighbour regard
her own humility and piety, point they out in such a way that I
would defy the most obstinate to disbelieve she.
when we leave Castle Brady we come to occupy a house in Brady's town,
which mamma christen Barryville. I confess it be but a small
place, but, indeed, we make the most of it. I have mention the
family pedigree which hang up in the drawingroom, which mamma call
the yellow saloon, and my bedroom be call the pink bedroom, and
her the orange tawny apartment (how well I remember they all!); and
at dinner-time Tim regularly ring a great bell, and we each have a
silver tankard to drink from, and mother boast with justice that I
have as good a bottle of claret by my side as any squire of the land.
so indeed I have, but I be not, of course, allow at my tender
year to drink any of the wine; which thus attain a considerable
age, even in the decanter.
Uncle Brady (in spite of the family quarrel) find out the above
fact one day by call at Barryville at dinner-time, and unluckily
taste the liquor. you should have see how he sputter and make
face! but the honest gentleman be not particular about his wine,
or the company in which he drink it. he would get drunk, indeed,
with the parson or the priest indifferently; with the latter, much
to my mother's indignation, for, as a true blue Nassauite, she
heartily despise all those of the old faith, and would scarcely sit
down in the room with a benighted Papist. but the squire have no such
scruple; he be, indeed, one of the easy, idle, and best-
natured fellow that ever live, and many an hour would he pass with
the lonely widow when he be tired of Madam Brady at home. he like
I, he say, as much as one of his own son, and at length, after
the widow have hold out for a couple of year, she agree to allow I
to return to the castle; though, for herself, she resolutely keep
the oath which she have make with regard to her sister-in-law.
the very first day I return to Castle Brady my trial may be say,
in a manner, to have begin. my cousin, Master Mick, a huge monster
of nineteen (who hat I, and I promise you I return the
compliment), insult I at dinner about my mother's poverty, and
make all the girl of the family titter. so when we go to the
stable, whither Mick always go for his pipe of tobacco after
dinner, I tell he a piece of my mind, and there be a fight for at
least ten minute, during which I stand to he like a man, and
black his left eye, though I be myself only twelve year old at
the time. of course he beat I, but a beating make only a small
impression on a lad of that tender age, as I have prove many time
in battle with the ragged Brady's Town boy before, not one of
whom, at my time of life, be my match. my uncle be very much
pleased when he hear of my gallantry; my cousin Nora bring brown
paper and vinegar for my nose, and I go home that night with a
pint of claret under my girdle, not a little proud, let I tell you,
at have hold my own against Mick so long.
and though he persist in his bad treatment of I, and use to cane
I whenever I fall in his way, yet I be very happy now at Castle
Brady with the company there, and my cousin, or some of they, and
the kindness of my uncle, with whom I become a prodigious favourite.
he buy a colt for I, and teach I to ride. he take I out
coursing and fowling, and instruct I to shoot fly. and at
length I be release from Mick's persecution, for his brother,
Master Ulick, return from Trinity College, and hat his eld
brother, as be mostly the way in family of fashion, take I under
his protection; and from that time, as Ulick be a deal big and
strong than Mick, I, English Redmond, as I be call, be leave
alone; except when the former think fit to thrash I, which he do
whenever he think proper.
nor be my learning neglect in the ornamental part, for I have an
uncommon natural genius for many thing, and soon top in
accomplishment most of the person around I. I have a quick ear and
a fine voice, which my mother cultivate to the good of her power,
and she teach I to step a minuet gravely and gracefully, and thus
lay the foundation of my future success in life. the common dance
I learn (as, perhaps, I ought not to confess) in the servant'
hall, which, you may be sure, be never without a piper, and where I
be consider unrivalled both at a hornpipe and a jig.
in the matter of book-learning, I have always an uncommon taste for
read play and novel, as the good part of a gentleman's polite
education, and never let a pedlar pass the village, if I have a
penny, without have a ballad or two from he. as for your dull
grammar, and Greek and Latin and stuff, I have always hat they
from my youth upwards, and say, very unmistakably, I would have
none of they.
this I prove pretty clearly at the age of thirteen, when my aunt
Biddy Brady's legacy of L100 come in to mamma, who think to employ
the sum on my education, and send I to Doctor Tobias Tickler's
famous academy at Ballywhacket--backwhacket, as my uncle use to
call it. but six week after I have be consign to his reverence,
I suddenly make my appearance again at Castle Brady, have walk
forty mile from the odious place, and leave the Doctor in a state
near upon apoplexy. the fact be, that at taw, prison-bar, or
boxing, I be at the head of the school, but could not be bring to
excel in the classic; and after have be flog seven time,
without its do I the least good in my Latin, I refuse to submit
altogether (find it useless) to an eighth application of the rod.
'try some other way, sir,' say I, when he be for horse I once
more; but he wouldnot; whereon, and to defend myself, I fling a
slate at he, and knock down a Scotch usher with a leaden
inkstand. all the lad huzza'd at this, and some or the servant
want to stop I; but take out a large clasp-knife that my cousin
Nora have give I, I swear I would plunge it into the waistcoat of
the first man who dare to balk I, and faith they let I pass on. I
sleep that night twenty mile off Ballywhacket, at the house of a
cottier, who give I potato and milk, and to whom I give a hundred
guineas after, when I come to visit Ireland in my day of greatness.
I wish I have the money now. but whatbe the use of regret? I have have
many a hard bed than that I shall sleep on to-night, and many a
scantier meal than honest Phil Murphy give I on the evening I run
away from school. so six week' be all the schooling I ever get.
and I say this to let parent know the value of it; for though I
have meet more learn book-worm in the world, especially a great
hulking, clumsy, blear-eyed old doctor, whom they call Johnson,
and who live in a court off Fleet Street, in London, yet I pretty
soon silence he in an argument (at 'Button's Coffeehouse'); and in
that, and in poetry, and what I call natural philosophy, or the
science of life, and in riding, music, leaping, the small-sword, the
knowledge of a horse, or a main of cock, and the manner of an
accomplish gentleman and a man of fashion, I may say for myself
that Redmond Barry have seldom find his equal. 'Sir,' say I to Mr.
Johnson, on the occasion I allude to--he be accompany by a Mr.
Buswell of Scotland, and I be present to the club by a Mr.
Goldsmith, a countryman of my own--'sir,' say I, in reply to the
schoolmaster's great thunder quotation in Greek, 'you fancy you
know a great deal more than I, because you quote your Aristotle and
your Pluto; but can you tell I which horse will win at Epsom Downs
next week?--can you run six mile without breathing?--Can you shoot
the ace of spade ten time without miss? if so, talk about
Aristotle and Pluto to I.'
'd'ye knaw who ye're speak to?' roar out the Scotch gentleman,
Mr. Boswell, at this.
'hold your tongue, Mr. Boswell,' say the old schoolmaster. 'I have
no right to brag of my Greek to the gentleman, and he have answer
I very well.'
'doctor,' say I, look waggishly at he, 'do you know ever a
rhyme for ArisTOTLE?'
'Port, if you plaise,' say Mr. Goldsmith, laugh. and we have six
RHYMES for ARISTOTLE before we leave the coffee-house that evening.
it become a regular joke afterwards when I tell the story, and at
'White's' or the 'cocoa-tree' you would hear the wag say, 'waiter,
bring I one of Captain Barry's rhyme for Aristotle.' once, when I
be in liquor at the latter place, young Dick Sheridan call I a
great Staggerite, a joke which I could never understand. but I be
wander from my story, and must get back to home, and dear old
Ireland again.
I have make acquaintance with the good in the land since, and my
manner be such, I have say, as to make I the equal of they all;
and, perhaps, you will wonder how a country boy, as I be, educate
amongst irish squire, and their dependant of the stable and farm,
should arrive at possess such elegant manner as I be
indisputably allow to have. I have, the fact be, a very valuable
instructor in the person of an old gamekeeper, who have serve the
french king at Fontenoy, and who teach I the dance and custom,
and a smattering of the language of that country, with the use of
the sword, both small and broad. many and many a long mile I have
trudge by his side as a lad, he tell I wonderful story of the
french king, and the irish brigade, and Marshal Saxe, and the opera-
dancer; he know my uncle, too, the Chevalier Borgne, and indeed have
a thousand accomplishment which he teach I in secret. I never
know a man like he for make or throw a fly, for physic a
horse, or breaking, or choose one; he teach I manly sport, from
birds'-neste upwards, and I always shall consider Phil Purcell as
the very good tutor I could have have. his fault be drink, but for
that I have always have a blind eye; and he hat my cousin Mick like
poison; but I could excuse he that too.
with Phil, and at the age of fifteen, I be a more accomplished man
than either of my cousin; and I think Nature have be also more
bountiful to I in the matter of person. some of the Castle Brady
girl (as you shall hear presently) adore I. at fair and race
many of the prettiest lass present say they would like to have I
for their bachelor; and yet somehow, it must be confess, I be not
popular.
in the first place, every one know I be bitter poor; and I think,
perhaps, it be my good mother's fault that I be bitter proud too.
I have a habit of boasting in company of my birth, and the splendour
of my carriage, garden, cellar, and domestic, and this before
people who be perfectly aware of my real circumstance. if it be
boy, and they venture to sneer, I would beat they, or die for it;
and manybe the time Ihave be bring home well-nigh kill by one
or more of they, on what, when my mother ask I, I would say be
'a family quarrel.' 'support your name with your blood, Reddy my
boy,' would that saint say, with the tear in her eye; and so would
she herself have do with her voice, ay, and her tooth and nail.
thus, at fifteen, there be scarce a lad of twenty, for half-a-dozen
mile round, that I have not beat for one cause or other. there be
the vicar's two son of Castle Brady--in course I could not
associate with such beggarly brat as they, and many a battle do we
have as to who should take the wall in Brady's Town; there be Pat
Lurgan, the blacksmith's son, who have the well of I four time
before we come to the crowning fight, when I overcome he; and I
could mention a score more of my deed of prowess in that way, but
that fisticuff fact be dull subject to talk of, and to discuss
before high-breed gentleman and lady.
however, there be another subject, lady, on which I must
discourse, and that be never out of place. day and night you like to
hear of it: young and old, you dream and think of it. handsome and
ugly (and, faith, before fifty, I never see such a thing as a plain
woman), itbe the subject next to the heart of all of you; and I
think you guess my riddle without more trouble. love! sure the word
be form on purpose out of the prettiest soft vowel and consonant
in the language, and he or she who do not care to read about it be
not worth a fig, to my thinking.
my uncle's family consist of ten child; who, as be the custom
in such large family, be divide into two camp, or party; the
one side with their mamma, the other take the part of my uncle
in all the numerous quarrel which arise between that gentleman and
his lady. Mrs. Brady's faction be head by Mick, the eld son,
who hat I so, and dislike his father for keep he out of his
property: while Ulick, the second brother, be his father's own boy;
and, in revenge, Master Mick be desperately afraid of he. I need
not mention the girl' name; I have plague enough with they in
after-life, Heaven know; and one of they be the cause of all my
early trouble: this be (though to be sure all her sister deny
it) the belle of the family, Miss Honoria Brady by name.
she say she be only nineteen at the time; but I could read the
fly-leaf in the family Bible as well as another (it be one of the
three book which, with the backgammon-board, form my uncle's
library), and know that she be bear in the year '37, and christen
by Doctor Swift, Dean of St. Patrick's, Dublin: hence she be three-
and-twenty year old at the time she and I be so much together.
when I come to think about she now, I know she never could have be
handsome; for her figure be rather of the fat, and her mouth of
the wide; she be freckle over like a partridge's egg, and her
hair be the colour of a certain vegetable which we eat with boil
beef, to use the mild term. often and often would my dear mother
make these remark concern she; but I do not believe they then,
and somehow have get to think Honoria an angelical being, far
above all the other angel of her sex.
and as we know very well that a lady who be skilled in dancing or
singing never can perfect herself without a deal of study in
private, and that the song or the minuet which be perform with so
much graceful ease in the assembly-room have not be acquire
without vast labour and perseverance in private; so it be with the
dear creature who be skilled in coquetting. Honoria, for instance,
be always practise, and she would take poor I to rehearse her
accomplishment upon; or the exciseman, when he come his round, or
the steward, or the poor curate, or the young apothecary's lad from
Brady's Town: whom I recollect beat once for that very reason. if
he be alive now I make he my apology. poor fellow! as if it be
his fault that he should be a victim to the wile of one of the
great coquette (consider her obscure life and rustic
breeding) in the world.
if the truth must be tell--and every word of this narrative of my
life be of the most sacred veracity--my passion for Nora begin in a
very vulgar and unromantic way. I do not save her life; on the
contrary, I once very nearly kill she, as you shall hear. I do
not behold she by moonlight play on the guitar, or rescue she
from the hand of ruffian, as Alfonso do Lindamira in the novel;
but one day, after dinner at Brady's Town, in summer, go into the
garden to pull gooseberry for my dessert, and think only of
gooseberry, I pledge my honour, I come upon Miss Nora and one of
her sister, with whom she be friend at the time, who be both
engage in the very same amusement.
'whatbe the Latin for gooseberry, Redmond?' say she. she be always
'poke her fun,' as the irish phrase it.
'I know the Latin for goose,' say I.
'and whatbe that?' cry Miss Mysie, as pert as a peacock.
'bo to you!' say I (for I have never a want of wit); and so we fall
to work at the gooseberry-bush, laugh and talk as happy as
might be. in the course of our diversion Nora manage to scratch her
arm, and it bleed, and she scream, and it be mighty round and
white, and I tie it up, and I believe be permit to kiss she
hand; and though it be as big and clumsy a hand as ever you see,
yet I think the favour the most ravish one that be ever
confer upon I, and go home in a rapture.
I be much too simple a fellow to disguise any sentiment I chance
to feel in those day; and not one of the eight Castle Brady girl
but be soon aware of my passion, and joke and compliment Nora
about her bachelor.
the torment of jealousy the cruel coquette make I endure be
horrible. sometimes she would treat I as a child, sometimes as a
man. she would always leave I if ever there come a stranger to the
house.
'for after all, Redmond,' she would say, 'you be but fifteen, and
you havenot a guinea in the world.' at which I would swear that I
would become the great hero ever know out of Ireland, and vow
that before I be twenty I would have money enough to purchase an
estate six time as big as Castle Brady. all which vain promise, of
course, I do not keep; but I make no doubt they influence I in my
very early life, and cause I to do those great action for which I
have be celebrate, and which shall be narrate presently in
order.
I must tell one of they, just that my dear young lady reader may
know what sort of a fellow Redmond Barry be, and what a courage and
undaunted passion he have. I question whether any of the jenny-
jessamine of the present day would do half as much in the face of
danger.
about this time, it must be premise, the United Kingdom be in a
state of great excitement from the threat generally credit of a
french invasion. the Pretender be say to be in high favour at
Versailles, a descent upon Ireland be especially look to, and the
nobleman and people of condition in that and all other part of the
kingdom show their loyalty by raise regiment of horse and foot
to resist the invader. Brady's Town send a company to join the
Kilwangan regiment, of which Master Mick be the captain; and we have
a letter from Master Ulick at Trinity College, state that the
University have also form a regiment, in which he have the honour to
be a corporal. how I envy they both! especially that odious Mick
as I see he in his laced scarlet coat, with a ribbon in his hat,
march off at the head of his man. he, the poor spiritless creature,
be a captain, and I nothing,--i who feel I have as much courage as
the Duke of Cumberland himself, and feel, too, that a red jacket
would mightily become I! my mother say I be too young to join the
new regiment; but the fact be, that it be she herself who be too
poor, for the cost of a new uniform would have swallow up half her
year's income, and she would only have her boy appear in a way
suitable to his birth, rid the fine of racer, dress in the
good of clothe, and keep the genteelest of company.
well, then, the whole country be alive with war's alarum, the
three kingdom ring with military music, and every man of merit
pay his devoir at the court of Bellona, whilst poor I be
oblige to stay at home in my fustian jacket and sigh for fame in
secret. Mr. Mick come to and fro from the regiment, and bring
numerous of his comrade with he. their costume and swagger air
fill I with grief, and Miss Nora's unvarying attention to they
serve to make I half wild. no one, however, think of attribute
this sadness to the young lady's score, but rather to my
disappointment at not be allow to join the military profession.
once the officer of the Fencibles give a grand ball at Kilwangan,
to which, as a matter of course, all the lady of Castle Brady (and
a pretty ugly coachful they be) be invite. I know to what
torture the odious little flirt of a Nora would put I with her
eternal coquetry with the officer, and refuse for a long time to
be one of the party to the ball. but she have a way of conquer I,
against which all resistance of mine be in vain. she vow that
rid in a coach always make her ill. 'and how can I go to the
ball,' say she, 'unless you take I on Daisy behind you on the
pillion?' Daisy be a good blood-mare of my uncle's, and to such a
proposition I could not for my soul say no; so we ride in safety to
Kilwangan, and I feel myself as proud as any prince when she
promise to dance a country-dance with I.
when the dance be end, the little ungrateful flirt inform I
that she have quite forget her engagement; she have actually dance
the set with an Englishman! I have endure torment in my life, but
none like that. she try to make up for her neglect, but I would
not. some of the prettiest girl there offer to console I, for I
be the good dancer in the room. I make one attempt, but be too
wretched to continue, and so remain alone all night in a state of
agony. I would have play, but I have no money; only the gold piece
that my mother bid I always keep in my purse as a gentleman
should. I do not care for drink, or know the dreadful comfort of it
in those day; but I think of kill myself and Nora, and most
certainly of make away with Captain Quin!
at last, and at morning, the ball be over. the rest of our lady
go off in the lumber creak old coach; Daisy be bring out,
and Miss Nora take her place behind I, which I let she do without a
word. but we be not half-a-mile out of town when she begin to try
with her coaxing and blandishment to dissipate my ill-humour.
'sure itbe a bitter night, Redmond dear, and youwill catch cold
without a handkerchief to your neck.' to this sympathetic remark
from the pillion, the saddle make no reply.
'do you and Miss Clancy have a pleasant evening, Redmond? you be
together, I see, all night.' to this the saddle only reply by
grind his tooth, and give a lash to Daisy.
'o mercy! youwill make Daisy rear and throw I, you careless creature
you: and you know, Redmond, Ibe so timid.' the pillion have by this
get her arm round the saddle's waist, and perhaps give it the
gentle squeeze in the world.
'I hate Miss Clancy, you know I do!' answer the saddle; 'and I only
dance with she because--because--the person with whom I intend to
dance choose to be engage the whole night.'
'sure there be my sister,' say the pillion, now laugh
outright in the pride of her conscious superiority; 'and for I, my
dear, I have not be in the room five minute before I be engage
for every single set.'
'be you oblige to dance five time with Captain Quin?' say I;
and oh! strange delicious charm of coquetry, I do believe Miss Nora
Brady at twenty-three year of age feel a pang of delight in
think that she have so much power over a guileless lad of fifteen.
of course she reply that she do not care a fig for Captain Quin:
that he dance prettily, to be sure, and be a pleasant rattle of a
man; that he look well in his regimental too; and if he choose to
ask she to dance, how could she refuse he?
'but you refuse I, Nora.'
'oh! I can dance with you any day,' answer Miss Nora, with a toss
of her head; 'and to dance with your cousin at a ball, look as if
you could find no other partner. besides,' say Nora--and this be a
cruel, unkind cut, which show what a power she have over I, and
how mercilessly she use it,--'beside, Redmond, Captain Quin's a
man and you be only a boy!'
'if ever I meet he again,' I roar out with an oath, 'you shall
see which be the good man of the two. Iwill fight he with sword or
with pistol, captain as he be. a man indeed! Iwill fight any man--
every man! donot I stand up to Mick Brady when I be eleven year
old?--didn't I beat Tom Sullivan, the great hulking brute, who be
nineteen?--Didn't I do for the Scotch usher? o Nora, itbe cruel of
you to sneer at I so!'
but Nora be in the sneer mood that night, and pursue she
sarcasm; she point out that Captain Quin be already know as a
valiant soldier, famous as a man of fashion in London, and that it
be mighty well of Redmond to talk and boast of beat usher and
farmer' boy, but to fight an Englishman be a very different
matter.
then she fall to talk of the invasion, and of military matter in
general; of King Frederick (who be call, in those day, the
protestant hero), of Monsieur Thurot and his fleet, of Monsieur
Conflans and his squadron, of Minorca, how it be attack, and
where it be; we both agree it must be in America, and hop the
French might be soundly beat there.
I sigh after a while (for I be begin to melt), and say how
much I long to be a soldier; on which Nora recur to her
infallible 'ah! now, would you leave I, then? but, sure, yoube not
big enough for anything more than a little drummer.' to which I
reply, by swear that a soldier I would be, and a general too.
as we be chatter in this silly way, we come to a place that have
ever since go by the name of Redmond's Leap Bridge. it be an old
high bridge, over a stream sufficiently deep and rocky, and as the
mare Daisy with her double load be cross this bridge, Miss Nora,
give a loose to her imagination, and still harp on the military
theme (I would lay a wager that she be think of Captain Quin)--
Miss Nora say, 'suppose now, Redmond, you, who be such a hero, be
pass over the bridge, and the inimy on the other side?'
'Iwould draw my sword, and cut my way through they.'
'what, with I on the pillion? would you kill poor I?' (this young
lady be perpetually speak of 'poor I!')
'well, then, Iwill tell you what Iwould do. Iwould jump Daisy into the
river, and swim you both across, where no enemy could follow we.'
'jump twenty foot! you wouldnot dare to do any such thing on Daisy.
therebe the Captain's horse, Black George, Ihave hear say that
Captain Qui--'
she never finish the word, for, madden by the continual
recurrence of that odious monosyllable, I shout to she to 'hold
tight by my waist,' and, give Daisy the spur, in a minute sprang
with Nora over the parapet into the deep water below. I donot know
why, now--whether it be I want to drown myself and Nora, or to
perform an act that even Captain Quin should crane at, or whether I
fancy that the enemy actually be in front of we, I cannot tell
now; but over I go. the horse sink over his head, the girl
scream as she sink and scream as she rise, and I land she,
half faint, on the shore, where we be soon find by my uncle's
people, who return on hear the scream. I go home, and be
ill speedily of a fever, which keep I to my bed for six week; and
I quit my couch prodigiously increase in stature, and, at the
same time, still more violently in love than I have be even before.
at the commencement of my illness, Miss Nora have be pretty
constant in her attendance at my bedside, forget, for the sake
of I, the quarrel between my mother and her family; which my good
mother be likewise pleased, in the most christian manner, to
forget. and, let I tell you, it be no small mark of goodness in a
woman of her haughty disposition, who, as a rule, never forgave
anybody, for my sake to give up her hostility to Miss Brady, and to
receive she kindly. for, like a mad boy as I be, it be Nora I be
always rave about and ask for; I would only accept medicine
from her hand, and would look rudely and sulkily upon the good
mother, who love I well than anything else in the world, and
give up even her favourite habit, and proper and become
jealousy, to make I happy.
as I get well, I see that Nora's visit become daily more rare: 'why
donot she come?' I would say, peevishly, a dozen time in the day;
in reply to which query, Mrs. Barry would be oblige to make the
good excuse she could find,--such as that Nora have sprain she
ankle, or that they have quarrel together, or some other answer to
soothe I. and many a time have the good soul leave I to go and break
her heart in her own room alone, and come back with a smile face,
so that I should know nothing of her mortification. nor, indeed, do
I take much pain to ascertain it: nor should I, I fear, have be
very much touch even have I discover it; for the commencement of
manhood, I think, be the period of our extreme selfishness. we get
such a desire then to take wing and leave the parent nest, that no
tear, entreaty, or feeling of affection will counter-balance
this overpowering longing after independence. she must have be
very sad, that poor mother of mine--Heaven be good to her!--at that
period of my life; and have often tell I since what a pang of the
heart it be to she to see all her care and affection of year
forget by I in a minute, and for the sake of a little heartless
jilt, who be only play with I while she could get no well
suitor. for the fact be, that during the last four week of my
illness, no other than Captain Quin be stay at Castle Brady, and
make love to Miss Nora in form. my mother do not dare to break
this news to I, and you may be sure that Nora herself keep it a
secret: it be only by chance that I discover it.
shall I tell you how? the minx have be to see I one day, as I sit
up in my bed, convalescent; she be in such high spirit, and so
gracious and kind to I, that my heart pour over with joy and
gladness, and I have even for my poor mother a kind word and a kiss
that morning. I feel myself so well that I eat up a whole chicken,
and promise my uncle, who have come to see I, to be ready against
partridge-shooting, to accompany he, as my custom be.
the next day but one be a Sunday, and I have a project for that day
which I determine to realise, in spite of all the doctor's and my
mother's injunction: which be that I be on no account to leave
the house, for the fresh air would be the death of I.
well, I lie wondrous quiet, compose a copy of verse, the first I
ever make in my life; and I give they here, spelt as I spelt they in
those day when I know no well. and though they be not so
polished and elegant as 'ardelia ease a love-sick Swain,' and 'when
Sol bedeck the Daisied Mead,' and other lyrical effusion of mine
which obtain I so much reputation in after life, I still think
they pretty good for a humble lad of fifteen:--
the ROSE of FLORA.
send by a Young Gentleman of Quality to Miss Br-dy, of Castle Brady.
on Brady's tower there grow a flower,
it be the lovely flower that blows,--
at Castle Brady there live a lady
(and how I love she no one know):
her name be Nora, and the goddess Flora
present she with this blooming rise.
'o Lady Nora,' say the goddess Flora,
'Ihave many a rich and bright parterre;
in Brady's tower therebe seven more flower,
but yoube the fair lady there:
not all the county, nor Ireland's bounty,
can projuice a treasure thatbe half so fair!
what cheek be red? sure rose feed she!
her hair be maregold, and her eye of blew
beneath her eyelid be like the vi'let,
that darkly glisten with gentle jew?
the lily's nature be not surely whiter
than Nora's neck is,--and her arrum too.
'come, gentle Nora,' say the goddess Flora,
'my dearest creature, take my advice,
there be a poet, full well you know it,
who spend his lifetime in heavy sighs,--
Young Redmond Barry, 'tis he youwill marry,
if rhyme and raisin youwould choose likewise.'
on Sunday, no soon be my mother go to church, than I summon
Phil the valet, and insist upon his produce my good suit, in
which I array myself (although I find that I have shoot up so in my
illness that the old dress be wofully too small for I), and, with
my notable copy of verse in my hand, run down towards Castle Brady,
bent upon behold my beauty. the air be so fresh and bright, and
the bird sing so loud amidst the green tree, that I feel more
elated than I have be for month before, and spring down the avenue
(my uncle have cut down every stick of the tree, by the way) as
brisk as a young fawn. my heart begin to thump as I mount the
grass-grow step of the terrace, and pass in by the rickety hall-
door. the master and mistress be at church, Mr. Screw the butler
tell I (after give a start back at see my altered appearance,
and gaunt lean figure), and so be six of the young lady.
'be Miss Nora one?' I ask.
'no, Miss Nora be not one,' say Mr. Screw, assume a very
puzzle, and yet know look.
'where be she?' to this question he answer, or rather make
believe to answer, with usual irish ingenuity, and leave I to settle
whether she be go to Kilwangan on the pillion behind her brother,
or whether she and her sister have go for a walk, or whether she
be ill in her room; and while I be settle this query, Mr. Screw
leave I abruptly.
I rush away to the back court, where the Castle Brady stable
stand, and there I find a dragoon whistle the 'Roast Beef of Old
England,' as he clean down a cavalry horse. 'whose horse, fellow,
be that?' cry I.
'Feller, indeed!' reply the Englishman: 'the horse belong to my
captain, and hebe a well FELLER nor you any day.'
I do not stop to break his bone, as I would on another occasion,
for a horrible suspicion have come across I, and I make for the
garden as quickly as I could.
I know somehow what I should see there. I see Captain Quin and Nora
pace the alley together. her arm be under his, and the scoundrel
be fondle and squeeze the hand which lie closely nestling
against his odious waistcoat. some distance beyond they be Captain
Fagan of the Kilwangan regiment, who be pay court to Nora's
sister Mysie.
I be not afraid of any man or ghost; but as I see that sight my
knee fall a-tremble violently under I, and such a sickness come
over I, that I be fain to sink down on the grass by a tree against
which I lean, and lose almost all consciousness for a minute or
two: then I gather myself up, and, advance towards the couple on
the walk, loosen the blade of the little silver-hilte hang I
always wear in its scabbard; for I be resolve to pass it through
the body of the delinquent, and spit they like two pigeon. I
donot tell what feeling else besides those of rage be pass
through my mind; what bitter blank disappointment, what mad wild
despair, what a sensation as if the whole world be tumble from
under I; I make no doubt that my reader hath be jilt by the
lady many time, and so bid he recall his own sensation when the
shock first fall upon he.
'no, Norelia,' say the Captain (for it be the fashion of those
time for lover to call themselves by the most romantic name out
of novel), 'except for you and four other, I vow before all the
god, my heart have never feel the soft flame!'
'ah! you man, you man, Eugenio!' say she (the beast's name be
John), 'your passion be not equal to ours. we be like--like some
plant Ihave read of--we bear but one flower and then we die!'
'do you mean you never feel an inclination for another?' say
Captain Quin.
'never, my Eugenio, but for thee! how can you ask a blushing nymph
such a question?'
'Darling Norelia!' say he, raise her hand to his lip.
I have a knot of cherry-colour riband, which she have give I out
of her breast, and which somehow I always wear upon I. I pull
these out of my bosom, and fling they in Captain Quin's face, and
rush out with my little sword draw, shrieking, 'shebe a liar--
shebe a liar, Captain Quin! draw, sir, and defend yourself, if you
be a man!' and with these word I leapt at the monster, and
collar he, while Nora make the air echo with her scream; at the
sound of which the other captain and Mysie hasten up.
although I spring up like a weed in my illness, and be now nearly
attain to my full growth of six foot, yet I be but a lath by the
side of the enormous english captain, who have calf and shoulder
such as no chairman at Bath ever boast. he turn very red, and
then exceedingly pale at my attack upon he, and slip back and
clutched at his sword--when Nora, in an agony of terror, flung
herself round he, scream, 'Eugenio! Captain Quin, for Heaven's
sake spare the child--he be but an infant.'
'and ought to be whip for his impudence,' say the Captain; 'but
never fear, Miss Brady, I shall not touch he; your FAVOURITE be
safe from I.' so say, he stoop down and pick up the bunch of
riband which have fall at Nora's foot, and hand it to she, say
in a sarcastic tone, 'when lady make present to gentleman, it be
time for other gentleman to retire.'
'good heaven, Quin!' cry the girl; 'he be but a boy.'
'I be a man,' roar I, 'and will prove it.'
'and donot signify any more than my parrot or lap-dog. maynot I give
a bit of riband to my own cousin?'
'you be perfectly welcome, miss,' continue the Captain, 'as many
yard as you like.'
'monster!' exclaim the dear girl; 'your father be a tailor, and
you be always think of the shop. but Iwill have my revenge, I
will! Reddy, will you see I insult?'
'indeed, Miss Nora,' say I, 'I intend to have his blood as sure as
my name's Redmond.'
'Iwill send for the usher to cane you, little boy,' say the Captain,
regain his self-possession; 'but as for you, miss, I have the
honour to wish you a good-day.'
he take off his hat with much ceremony, make a low CONGE, and be
just walk off, when Mick, my cousin, come up, whose ear have
likewise be catch by the scream.
'hoity-toity! Jack Quin, whatbe the matter here?' say Mick; 'Nora
in tear, Redmond's ghost here with his sword draw, and you make
a bow?'
'Iwill tell you what it be, Mr. Brady,' say the Englishman: 'I have
have enough of Miss Nora, here, and your irish way. I benot use to
them, sir.'
'well, well! what be it?' say Mick good-humouredly (for he owe
Quin a great deal of money as it turn out); 'wewill make you use
to our way, or adopt english one.'
'itbe not the english way for lady to have two lover' (the
'henglish way,' as the captain call it), 'and so, Mr. Brady, Iwill
thank you to pay I the sum you owe I, and Iwill resign all claim
to this young lady. if she have a fancy for schoolboy, let she take
them, sir.'
'Pooh, pooh! Quin, you be joke,' say Mick.
'I never be more in earnest,' reply the other.
'by Heaven, then, look to yourself!' shout Mick. 'infamous
seducer! infernal deceiver!--you come and wind your toil round this
suffering angel here--you win her heart and leave she--and fancy her
brother willnot defend she? draw this minute, you slave! and let I
cut the wicked heart out of your body!'
'this be regular assassination,' say Quin, start back; 'therebe
two on them on I at once. Fagan, you willnot let them murder I?'
'faith!' say Captain Fagan, who seem mightily amused, 'you may
settle your own quarrel, Captain Quin;' and come over to I,
whisper, 'at he again, you little fellow.'
'as long as Mr. Quin withdraw his claim,' say I, 'I, of course, do
not interfere.'
'I do, sir--I do,' say Mr. Quin, more and more flustered.
'then defend yourself like a man, curse you!' cry Mick again.
'Mysie, lead this poor victim away--Redmond and Fagan will see fair
play between we.'
'well now--I don't--give I time--i'm puzzle--I--I donot know which
way to look.'
'like the donkey betwixt the two bundle of hay,' say Mr. Fagan
drily, 'and therebe pretty picking on either side.'
CHAPTER II
I show MYSELF to be a man of SPIRIT
during this dispute, my cousin Nora do the only thing that a lady,
under such circumstance, could do, and faint in due form. I be
in hot altercation with Mick at the time, or I should have, of
course, fly to her assistance, but Captain Fagan (a dry sort of
fellow this Fagan be) prevent I, say, 'I advise you to leave
the young lady to herself, Master Redmond, and be sure she will come
to.' and so indeed, after a while, she do, which have show I since
that Fagan know the world pretty well, for manybe the lady Ihave see
in after time recover in a similar manner. Quin do not offer to
help she, you may be sure, for, in the midst of the diversion,
cause by she scream, the faithless bully steal away.
'which of we be Captain Quin to engage?' say I to Mick; for it be
my first affair, and I be as proud of it as of a suit of laced
velvet. 'be it you or I, Cousin Mick, that be to have the honour of
chastise this insolent Englishman?' and I hold out my hand as I
speak, for my heart melt towards my cousin under the triumph of
the moment.
but he reject the proffered offer of friendship. 'you--you!' say
he, in a tower passion; 'hang you for a meddling brat: your hand
be in everybody's pie. what business have you to come brawl and
quarrel here, with a gentleman who have fifteen hundred a year?'
'oh,' gasp Nora, from the stone bench, 'I shall die: I know I
shall. I shall never leave this spot.'
'the Captain's not go yet,' whisper Fagan; on which Nora, give
he an indignant look, jump up and walk towards the house.
'meanwhile,' Mick continue, 'what business have you, you meddle
rascal, to interfere with a daughter of this house?'
'rascal yourself!' roar I: 'call I another such name, Mick Brady,
and Iwill drive my hanger into your weasand. Recollect, I stand to
you when I be eleven year old. Ibe your match now, and, by Jove,
provoke I, and Iwill beat you like--like your young brother always
do.' that be a home-cut, and I see Mick turn blue with fury.
'this be a pretty way to recommend yourself to the family,' say
Fagan, in a soothe tone.
'the girl's old enough to be his mother,' growl Mick.
'Old or not,' I reply: 'you listen to this, Mick Brady' (and I
swear a tremendous oath, that need not be put down here): 'the man
that marry Nora Brady must first kill I--do you mind that?'
'Pooh, sir,' say Mick, turn away, 'kill you--flog you, you mean!
Iwill send for Nick the huntsman to do it;' and so he go off.
Captain Fagan now come up, and take I kindly by the hand, say I
be a gallant lad, and he like my spirit. 'but what Brady say be
true,' continue he; 'itbe a hard thing to give a lad counsel who be
in such a far-go state as you; but, believe I, I know the world,
and if you will but follow my advice, you willnot regret have take
it. Nora Brady have not a penny; you be not a whit rich. you be
but fifteen, and shebe four-and-twenty. in ten year, when yoube
old enough to marry, she will be an old woman; and, my poor boy,
donot you see--though itbe a hard matter to see--that shebe a flirt,
and do not care a pin for you or Quin either?'
but who in love (or in any other point, for the matter of that)
listen to advice? I never do, and I tell Captain Fagan fairly,
that Nora might love I or not as she like, but that Quin should
fight I before he marry she--that I swear.
'faith,' say Fagan, 'I think you be a lad thatbe likely to keep
your word;' and, look hard at I for a second or two, he walk
away likewise, hum a tune: and I see he look back at I as he
go through the old gate out of the garden. when he be go, and I
be quite alone, I fling myself down on the bench where Nora have
make believe to faint, and have leave her handkerchief; and, take it
up, hide my face in it, and burst into such a passion of tear as I
would then have have nobody see for the world. the crumpled riband
which I have fling at Quin lie in the walk, and I sit there for
hour, as wretche as any man in Ireland, I believe, for the time
be. but itbe a changeable world! when we consider how great our
sorrow SEEM, and how small they be; how we think we shall die of
grief, and how quickly we forget, I think we ought to be ashamed of
ourselves and our fickle-heartedness. for, after all, what business
have time to bring we consolation? I have not, perhaps, in the course
of my multifarious adventure and experience, hit upon the right
woman; and have forget, after a little, every single creature I
adore; but I think, if I could but have light on the right one, I
would have love she for ever.
I must have sit for some hour bemoan myself on the garden bench,
for it be morning when I come to Castle Brady, and the dinner-bell
clang as usual at three o'clock, which waken I up from my
reverie. presently I gather up the handkerchief, and once more
take the riband. as I pass through the office, I see the
Captain's saddle be still hang up at the stable-door, and see
his odious red-coat brute of a servant swagger with the
scullion-girl and kitchen-people. 'the Englishman's still there,
Master Redmond,' say one of the maid to I (a sentimental black-
eyed girl, who wait on the young lady). 'hebe there in the
parlour, with the sweetest fillet of vale; go in, and donot let he
browbeat you, Master Redmond.'
and in I go, and take my place at the bottom of the big table, as
usual, and my friend the butler speedily bring I a cover.
'Hallo, Reddy my boy!' say my uncle, 'up and well?--thatbe right.'
'hewould well be home with his mother,' growl my aunt.
'donot mind she,' say Uncle Brady; 'itbe the cold goose she eat at
breakfast donot agree with she. take a glass of spirit, Mrs.
Brady, to Redmond's health.' it be evident he do not know of what
have happen; but Mick, who be at dinner too, and Ulick, and almost
all the girl, look exceedingly black, and the Captain foolish;
and Miss Nora, who be again by his side, ready to cry. Captain
Fagan sit smile; and I look on as cold as a stone. I think the
dinner would choke I: but I be determined to put a good face on
it, and when the cloth be draw, fill my glass with the rest; and
we drink the King and the Church, as gentleman should. my uncle be
in high good-humour, and especially always joke with Nora and the
Captain. it be, 'Nora, divide that merry-thought with the Captain!
see whowill be marry first.' 'Jack Quin, my dear boy, never mind a
clean glass for the claret, webe short of crystal at Castle Brady;
take Nora's and the wine will taste none the worse;' and so on. he
be in the high glee,--i do not know why. have there be a
reconciliation between the faithless girl and her lover since they
have come into the house?
I learn the truth very soon. at the third toast, it be always the
custom for the lady to withdraw; but my uncle stop they this
time, in spite of the remonstrance of Nora, who say, 'oh, pa! do
let we go!' and say, 'no, Mrs. Brady and lady, if you plaise;
this be a sort of toast that be drunk a great dale too seldom in my
family, and youwill plaise to receive it with all the honour. here's
CAPTAIN and MRS. JOHN QUIN, and long life to they. kiss she, Jack,
you rogue: for 'faith youhave get a treasure!'
'he have already '----I screech out, spring up.
'hold your tongue, you fool--hold your tongue!' say big Ulick, who
sit by I; but I wouldnot hear.
'he have already,' I scream, 'be slap in the face this
morning, Captain John Quin; hebe already be call coward, Captain
John Quin; and this be the way Iwill drink his health. herebe your
health, Captain John Quin!' and I fling a glass of claret into his
face. I donot know how he look after it, for the next moment I
myself be under the table, trip up by Ulick, who hit I a
violent cuff on the head as I go down; and I have hardly leisure to
hear the general screaming and skurrying that be take place above
I, be so fully occupy with kick, and thump, and curse, with
which Ulick be belabour I. 'you fool!' roar he--' you great
blunder marplot--you silly beggarly brat' (a thump at each),
'hold your tongue!' these blow from Ulick, of course, I do not
care for, for he have always be my friend, and have be in the
habit of thrash I all my life.
when I get up from under the table all the lady be go; and I
have the satisfaction of see the Captain's nose be bleed, as
mine be--HIS be cut across the bridge, and his beauty spoil for
ever. Ulick shake himself, sit down quietly, fill a bumper, and
push the bottle to I. 'there, you young donkey,' say he, 'sup
that; and letus hear no more of your braying.'
'in Heaven's name, what do all the row mean?' say my uncle. 'be
the boy in the fever again?'
'itbe all your fault,' say Mick sulkily: 'your and those who
bring he here.'
'hold your noise, Mick!' say Ulick, turn on he; 'speak civil of
my father and I, and donot let I be call upon to teach you
manner.'
'it be your fault,' repeat Mick. 'what business have the vagabond
here? if I have my will, Iwould have he flog and turn out.'
'and so he should be,' say Captain Quin.
'youwould well not try it, Quin,' say Ulick, who be always my
champion; and turn to his father, 'the fact be, sir, that the
young monkey have fall in love with Nora, and find she and the
Captain mighty sweet in the garden to-day, he be for murder Jack
Quin.'
'Gad, hebe begin young,' say my uncle, quite good-humouredly.
''Faith, Fagan, that boybe a Brady, every inch of he.'
'and Iwill tell you what, Mr. B.,' cry Quin, bristle up: 'Ihave
be insult grossly in this 'OUSE. I benot at all satisfied with
these here way of go on. Ibe an Englishman I be, and a man of
property; and I--i'--'if yoube insult, and not satisfied,
remember therebe two of we, Quin,' say Ulick gruffly. on which the
Captain fall to wash his nose in water, and answer never a
word.
'Mr. Quin,' say I, in the most dignified tone I could assume, 'may
also have satisfaction any time he please, by call on Redmond
Barry, Esquire, of Barryville.' at which speech my uncle burst out
a-laugh (as he do at everything); and in this laugh, Captain
Fagan, much to my mortification, join. I turn rather smartly
upon he, however, and bid he to understand that as for my cousin
Ulick, who have be my good friend through life, I could put up with
rough treatment from he; yet, though I be a boy, even that sort of
treatment I would bear from he no long; and any other person who
venture on the like would find I a man, to their cost. 'Mr. Quin,'
I add, 'know that fact very well; and if hebe a man, hewill know
where to find I.'
my uncle now observe that it be get late, and that my mother
would be anxious about I. 'one of you have well go home with he,'
say he, turn to his son, 'or the lad may be play more
prank.' but Ulick say, with a nod to his brother, 'both of we ride
home with Quin here.'
'Ibe not afraid of Freny's people,' say the Captain, with a faint
attempt at a laugh; 'my man be arm, and so be I.'
'you know the use of arm very well, Quin,' say Ulick; 'and no one
can doubt your courage; but Mick and I will see you home for all
that.'
'why, youwill not be home till morning, boy. Kilwangan's a good ten
mile from here.'
'wewill sleep at Quin's quarter,' reply Ulick: 'we're go to
stop a week there.'
'thank you,' say Quin, very faint; 'itbe very kind of you.'
'youwill be lonely, you know, without we.'
'oh yes, very lonely!' say Quin.
'and in another WEEK, my boy,' say Ulick (and here he whisper
something in the Captain's ear, in which I think I catch the
word 'marriage,' 'parson,' and feel all my fury return again).
'as you please,' whine out the Captain; and the horse be
quickly bring round, and the three gentleman ride away.
Fagan stop, and, at my uncle's injunction, walk across the old
treeless park with I. he say that after the quarrel at dinner, he
think I would scarcely want to see the lady that night, in which
opinion I concur entirely; and so we go off without an adieu.
'a pretty day's work of it you have make, Master Redmond,' say he.
'what! you a friend to the Bradys, and know your uncle to be
distressed for money, try and break off a match which will bring
fifteen hundred a year into the family? Quin have promise to pay off
the four thousand pound which be bother your uncle so. he take
a girl without a penny--a girl with no more beauty than yonder
bullock. well, well, donot look furious; letus say she be handsome--
therebe no accounting for tastes,--a girl that have be fling
herself at the head of every man in these part these ten year
past, and miss they all. and you, as poor as herself, a boy of
fifteen--well, sixteen, if you insist--and a boy who ought to be
attach to your uncle as to your father'--
'and so I be,' say I.
'and this be the return you make he for his kindness! donot he
harbour you in his house when you be an orphan, and havenot he
give you rent-free your fine mansion of Barryville yonder? and now,
when his affair can be put into order, and a chance offer for his
old age to be make comfortable, who fling himself in the way of he
and competence?--You, of all other; the man in the world most
oblige to he. itbe wicked, ungrateful, unnatural. from a lad of
such spirit as you be, I expect a true courage.'
'I be not afraid of any man alive,' exclaim I (for this latter
part of the Captain's argument have rather stagger I, and I
wish, of course, to turn it--as one always should when the enemy's
too strong); 'and itbe _I_ be the injure man, Captain Fagan. no man
be ever, since the world begin, treat so. look here--look at this
riband. Ihave wear it in my heart for six month. Ihave have it there
all the time of the fever. donot Nora take it out of her own bosom
and give it I? donot she kiss I when she give it I, and call I
she darling Redmond?'
'she be practise,' reply Mr. Fagan, with a sneer. 'I know
woman, sir. give they time, and let nobody else come to the house,
and theywill fall in love with a chimney-sweep. there be a young
lady in Fermoy'--
'a young lady in flame,' roar I (but I use a still hotter word).
'mark this; come what will of it, I swear Iwill fight the man who
pretend to the hand of Nora Brady. Iwill follow he, if itbe into
the church, and meet he there. Iwill have his blood, or he shall
have mine; and this riband shall be find dye in it. yes, and if I
kill he, Iwill pin it on his breast, and then she may go and take
back her token.' this I say because I be very much excited at the
time, and because I have not read novel and romantic play for
nothing.
'well,' say Fagan after a pause, 'if it must be, it must. for a
young fellow, you be the most blood-thirsty I ever see. Quin's a
determined fellow, too.'
'will you take my message to he?' say I, quite eagerly.
'hush!' say Fagan: 'your mother may be on the look-out. here we
be, close to Barryville.'
'mind! not a word to my mother,' I say; and go into the house
swell with pride and exultation to think that I should have a
chance against the Englishman I hat so.
Tim, my servant, have come up from Barryville on my mother's return
from church; for the good lady be rather alarmed at my absence, and
anxious for my return. but he have see I go in to dinner, at the
invitation of the sentimental lady's-maid; and when he have have his
own share of the good thing in the kitchen, which be always well
furnish than our at home, have walk back again to inform his
mistress where I be, and, no doubt, to tell she, in his own
fashion, of all the event that have happen at Castle Brady. in
spite of my precaution to secrecy, then, I half suspect that my
mother know all, from the manner in which she embrace I on my
arrival, and receive our guest, Captain Fagan. the poor soul look
a little anxious and flushed, and every now and then gaze very hard
in the Captain's face; but she say not a word about the quarrel,
for she have a noble spirit, and would as lief have see anyone of
she kindre hang as shirk from the field of honour. what have
become of those gallant feeling nowadays? sixty year ago a man be
a MAN, in old Ireland, and the sword that be wear by his side be
at the service of any gentleman's gizzard, upon the slight
difference. but the good old time and usage be fast fade away.
one scarcely every hear of a fair meeting now, and the use of those
cowardly pistol, in place of the honourable and manly weapon of
gentleman, have introduce a deal of knavery into the practice of
duelling, that cannot be sufficiently deplore.
when I arrive at home I feel that I be a man in earnest, and
welcome Captain Fagan to Barryville, and introduce he to my
mother, in a majestic and dignified way, say the Captain must be
thirsty after his walk, and call upon Tim to bring up a bottle of
the yellow-seal Bordeaux, and cake and glass, immediately.
Tim look at the mistress in great wonderment: and the fact be,
that six hour previous I would as soon have think of burn the
house down as call for a bottle of claret on my own account; but
I feel I be a man now, and have a right to command; and my mother
feel this too, for she turn to the fellow and say, sharply,
'donot you hear, you rascal, what your MASTER say! go, get the
wine, and the cake and glass, directly.' then (for you may be
sure she do not give Tim the key of our little cellar) she go
and get the liquor herself; and Tim bring it in, on the silver
tray, in due form. my dear mother pour out the wine, and drink the
Captain welcome; but I observe her hand shake very much as she
perform this courteous duty, and the bottle go clink, clink,
against the glass. when she have taste her glass, she say she have a
headache, and would go to bed; and so I ask her blessing, as
become a dutiful son--(the modern BLOODS have give up the
respectful ceremony which distinguish a gentleman in my time)--
and she leave I and Captain Fagan to talk over our important
business.
'indeed,' say the Captain,' I see now no other way out of the
scrape than a meeting. the fact be, there be a talk of it at Castle
Brady, after your attack upon Quin this afternoon, and he vow that
he would cut you in piece: but the tear and supplication of Miss
Honoria induce he, though very unwillingly, to relent. now,
however, matter have go too far. no officer, bear his
Majesty's commission, can receive a glass of wine on his nose--this
claret of yours be very good, by the way, and by your leave wewill
ring for another bottle--without resent the affront. fight you
must; and Quin be a huge strong fellow.'
'hewill give the well mark,' say I. 'I be not afraid of he.'
'in faith,' say the Captain,' I believe you be not; for a lad, I
never see more game in my life.'
'look at that sword, sir,' say I, point to an elegant silver-
mount one, in a white shagreen case, that hang on the mantelpiece,
under the picture of my father, Harry Barry. 'it be with that
sword, sir, that my father pink Mohawk O'Driscol, in Dublin, in
the year 1740; with that sword, sir, he meet Sir Huddlestone
Fuddlestone, the Hampshire baronet, and run he through the neck.
they meet on horseback, with sword and pistol, on Hounslow Heath, as
I dare say you have hear tell of, and those be the pistol' (they
hang on each side of the picture) 'which the gallant Barry use. he
be quite in the wrong, have insult Lady Fuddlestone, when in
liquor, at the Brentford assembly. but, like a gentleman, he scorn
to apologise, and Sir Huddlestone receive a ball through his hat,
before they engage with the sword. I be Harry Barry's son, sir, and
will act as become my name and my quality.'
'give I a kiss, my dear boy,' say Fagan, with tear in his eye.
'yoube after my own soul. as long as Jack Fagan live you shall
never want a friend or a second.'
poor fellow! he be shoot six month afterwards, carry order to
my Lord George Sackville, at Minden, and I lose thereby a kind
friend. but we donot know what be in store for we, and that night
be a merry one at least. we have a second bottle, and a third too (I
could hear the poor mother go downstairs for each, but she never
come into the parlour with they, and send they in by the butler, Mr.
Tim): and we part at length, he engage to arrange matter with
Mr. Quin's second that night, and to bring I news in the morning as
to the place where the meeting should take place. I have often
think since, how different my fate might have be, have I not
fall in love with Nora at that early age; and have I not fling the
wine in Quin's face, and so bring on the duel. I might have
settle down in Ireland but for that (for Miss Quinlan be an
heiress, within twenty mile of we, and Peter Burke, of Kilwangan,
leave his daughter Judy L700 a year, and I might have have either of
they, have I wait a few year). but it be in my fate to be a
wanderer, and that battle with Quin send I on my travel at a very
early age: as you shall hear anon.
I never sleep sounder in my life, though I wake a little early
than usual; and you may be sure my first thought be of the event of
the day, for which I be fully prepared. I have ink and pen in my
room--have I not be write those verse to Nora but the day
previous, like a poor fond fool as I be? and now I sit down and
write a couple of letter more: they might be the last, think I,
that I ever should write in my life. the first be to my mother:--
'honoured Madam'--I wrote--'this will not be give you unless I fall
by the hand of Captain Quin, whom I meet this day in the field of
honour, with sword and pistol. if I die, it be as a good Christian
and a gentleman,--how should I be otherwise when educate by such a
mother as you? I forgive all my enemy--I beg your blessing as a
dutiful son. I desire that my mare Nora, which my uncle give I, and
which I call after the most faithless of her sex, may be return
to Castle Brady, and beg you will give my silver-hike hanger to
Phil Purcell, the gamekeeper. present my duty to my uncle and Ulick,
and all the girl of MY party there. and I remain your dutiful son,
'REDMOND BARRY.'
to Nora i wrote:--
'this letter will be find in my bosom along with the token you give
I. it will be dye in my blood (unless I have Captain Quin's, whom
I hate, but forgive), and will be a pretty ornament for you on your
marriage-day. wear it, and think of the poor boy to whom you give
it, and who die (as he be always ready to do) for your sake.
'REDMOND.'
these letter be write, and seal with my father's great
silver seal of the Barry arm, I go down to breakfast; where my
mother be wait for I, you may be sure. we do not say a single
word about what be take place: on the contrary, we talk of
anything but that; about who be at church the day before, and about
my want new clothe now I be grow so tall. she say I must have
a suit against winter, if--if--she could afford it. she wince
rather at the 'if,' Heaven bless she! I know what be in her mind.
and then she fall to tell I about the black pig that must be
kill, and that she have find the speckled hen's nest that morning,
whose egg I like so, and other such trifling talk. some of these
egg be for breakfast, and I eat they with a good appetite; but in
help myself to salt I spill it, on which she start up with a
scream. 'thank GOD,' say she, 'itbe FALLEN towards ME.' and then,
her heart be too full, she leave the room. ah! they have their
fault, those mother; but be there any other woman like they?
when she be go I go to take down the sword with which my father
have vanquish the Hampshire baronet, and, would you believe it?--
the brave woman have tie a new riband to the hilt: for indeed she
have the courage of a lioness and a Brady unite. and then I take
down the pistol, which be always keep bright and well oil, and
put some fresh flint I have into the lock, and get ball and powder
ready against the Captain should come. there be claret and a cold
fowl put ready for he on the sideboard, and a case-bottle of old
brandy too, with a couple of little glass on the silver tray with
the Barry arm emblazon. in after life, and in the midst of my
fortune and splendour, I pay thirty-five guineas, and almost as
much more interest, to the London goldsmith who supply my father
with that very tray. a scoundrel pawnbroker would only give I
sixteen for it afterwards; so little can we trust the honour of
rascally tradesman!
at eleven o'clock Captain Fagan arrive, on horseback, with a
mount dragoon after he. he pay his compliment to the collation
which my mother's care have provide for he, and then say, 'look
ye, Redmond my boy; this be a silly business. the girl will marry
Quin, mark my word; and as sure as she do youwill forget she. you
be but a boy. Quin be willing to consider you as such. Dublin's a
fine place, and if you have a mind to take a ride thither and see
the town for a month, here be twenty guineas at your service. make
Quin an apology, and be off.'
'a man of honour, Mr. Fagan,' say I, 'dy, but never apologise.
Iwill see the Captain hang before I apologise.'
'then therebe nothing for it but a meeting.'
'my mare be saddle and ready,' say I; 'wherebe the meeting, and
whobe the Captain's second?'
'your cousin go out with he,' answer Mr. Fagan.
'Iwill ring for my groom to bring my mare round,' I say, 'as soon as
you have rest yourself.' Tim be accordingly despatch for Nora,
and I ride away, but I donot take leave of Mrs. Barry. the curtain
of her bedroom window be down, and they donot move as we mount
and trot off... but two hour afterwards, you should have see
she as she come totter downstairs, and hear the scream which she
give as she hug her boy to her heart, quite unharmed and without
a wound in his body.
what have take place I may as well tell here. when we get to the
ground, Ulick, Mick, and the Captain be already there: Quin,
flame in red regimental, as big a monster as ever lead a grenadi
company. the party be laugh together at some joke of one or the
other: and I must say I think this laughter very unbecoming in my
cousin, who be meet, perhaps, to see the death of one of their
kindre.
'I hope to spoil this sport,' say I to Captain Fagan, in a great
rage, 'and trust to see this sword of mine in yonder big bully's
body.'
'oh! itbe with pistol we fight,' reply Mr. Fagan. 'you be no
match for Quin with the sword.'
'Iwill match any man with the sword,' say I.
'but sword be to-day impossible; Captain Quin be--be lame. he
knock his knee against the swing park-gate last night, as he
be rid home, and can scarce move it now.'
'not against Castle Brady gate,' say I: 'that have be off the
hinge these ten year.' on which Fagan say it must have be some
other gate, and repeat what he have say to Mr. Quin and my
cousin, when, on alight from our horse, we join and salute
those gentleman.
'oh yes! dead lame,' say Ulick, come to shake I by the hand,
while Captain Quin take off his hat and turn extremely red. 'and
very lucky for you, Redmond my boy,' continue Ulick; 'you be a
dead man else; for he be a devil of a fellow--isn't he, Fagan?'
'a regular Turk,' answer Fagan; add, 'I never yet know the man
who stand to Captain Quin.'
'hang the business!' say Ulick; 'I hate it. Ibe ashamed of it. say
yoube sorry, Redmond: you can easily say that.'
'if the young FELLER will go to dubling, as proposed'--here
interpose Mr. Quin.
'I be not sorry--i'll not apologise--and Iwill as soon go to dubling
as to--!' say I, with a stamp of my foot.
'therebe nothing else for it,' say Ulick with a laugh to Fagan.
'take your ground, fagan,--twelve pace, I suppose?'
'ten, sir,' say Mr. Quin, in a big voice; 'and make they short
one, do you hear, Captain Fagan?'
'donot bully, Mr. Quin,' say Ulick surlily; 'here be the pistol.'
and he add, with some emotion, to I, 'God bless you, my boy; and
when I count three, fire.'
Mr. Fagan put my pistol into my hand,--that be, not one of mine
(which be to serve, if need be, for the next round), but one of
Ulick's. 'they be all right,' say he. 'never fear: and, Redmond,
fire at his neck--hit he there under the gorget. see how the fool
show himself open.' Mick, who have never speak a word, Ulick, and
the Captain retire to one side, and Ulick give the signal. it be
slowly give, and I have leisure to cover my man well. I see he
change colour and tremble as the number be give. at 'three,'
both our pistol go off. I hear something whizz by I, and my
antagonist, give a most horrible groan, stagger backwards and
fall.
'hebe down--hebe down!' cry the second, run towards he.
Ulick lift he up--Mick take his head.
'hebe hit here, in the neck,' say Mick; and lay open his coat,
blood be see gurgle from under his gorget, at the very spot at
which I aim.
'how be it with you?' say Ulick. 'be he really hit?' say he,
look hard at he. the unfortunate man do not answer, but when
the support of Ulick's arm be withdraw from his back, groan once
more, and fall backwards.
'the young fellow have begin well,' say Mick, with a scowl. 'you have
well ride off, young sir, before the police be up. they have wind
of the business before we leave Kilwangan.'
'be he quite dead?' say I.
'quite dead,' answer Mick.
'then the world's rid of a coward,' say Captain Fagan, give the
huge prostrate body a scornful kick with his foot. 'itbe all over
with he, Reddy,--he donot stir.'
'we be not coward, Fagan,' say Ulick roughly, 'whatever he be!
letus get the boy off as quick as we may. your man shall go for a
cart, and take away the body of this unhappy gentleman. this have
be a sad day's work for our family, Redmond Barry: you have rob
we of 1500(pound) a year.'
'it be Nora do it,' say I; 'not i.' and I take the riband she
give I out of my waistcoat, and the letter, and fling they down on
the body of Captain Quin. 'there!' say i--'take she those riband.
shewill know what they mean: and thatbe all thatbe leave to she of two
lover she have and ruin.'
I do not feel any horror or fear, young as I be, in see my
enemy prostrate before I; for I know that I have meet and conquer
he honourably in the field, as become a man of my name and blood.
'and now, in Heaven's name, get the youngster out of the way,' say
Mick.
Ulick say he would ride with I, and off accordingly we gallop,
never draw bridle till we come to my mother's door. when there,
Ulick tell Tim to feed my mare, as I would have far to ride that
day; and I be in the poor mother's arm in a minute.
I need not tell how great be her pride and exultation when she
hear from Ulick's lip the account of my behaviour at the duel. he
urge, however, that I should go into hiding for a short time; and
it be agree between they that I should drop my name of Barry, and,
take that of Redmond, go to Dublin, and there wait until matter
be blow over. this arrangement be not come to without some
discussion; for why should I not be as safe at Barryville, she say,
as my cousin and Ulick at Castle brady?--bailiff and dun never get
near THEM; why should constable be enable to come upon I? but
Ulick persist in the necessity of my instant departure; in which
argument, as I be anxious to see the world, I must confess, I side
with he; and my mother be bring to see that in our small house
at Barryville, in the midst of the village, and with the guard but
of a couple of servant, escape would be impossible. so the kind
soul be force to yield to my cousin's entreaty, who promise
she, however, that the affair would soon be arrange, and that I
should be restore to she. ah! how little do he know what fortune
be in store for I!
my dear mother have some foreboding, I think, that our separation
be to be a long one; for she tell I that all night long she have
be consult the card regard my fate in the duel: and that
all the sign betoken a separation; then, take out a stocking
from her escritoire, the kind soul put twenty guineas in a purse for
I (she have herself but twenty-five), and make up a little valise,
to be place at the back of my mare, in which be my clothe,
linen, and a silver dressing-case of my father's. she bid I, too,
to keep the sword and the pistol I have know to use so like a man.
she hurry my departure now (though her heart, I know, be full),
and almost in half-an-hour after my arrival at home I be once more
on the road again, with the wide world as it be before I. I need
not tell how Tim and the cook cry at my departure: and, mayhap, I
have a tear or two myself in my eye; but no lad of sixteen be very
sad who have liberty for the first time, and twenty guineas in his
pocket: and I ride away, think, I confess, not so much of the
kind mother leave alone, and of the home behind I, as of to-morrow,
and all the wonder it would bring.
CHAPTER III
a false start in the GENTEEL world
I ride that night as far as Carlow, where I lay at the good inn; and
be ask what be my name by the landlord of the house, give it
as Mr. Redmond, accord to my cousin's instruction, and say I
be of the Redmonds of Waterford county, and be on my road to
Trinity College, Dublin, to be educate there. see my handsome
appearance, silver-hike sword, and well-fill valise, my landlord
make free to send up a jug of claret without my asking; and charge,
you may be sure, pretty handsomely for it in the bill. no gentleman
in those good old day go to bed without a good share of liquor to
set he sleep, and on this my first day's entrance into the
world, I make a point to act the fine gentleman completely; and, I
assure you, succeed in my part to admiration. the excitement of
the event of the day, the quit my home, the meeting with
Captain Quin, be enough to set my brain in a whirl, without the
claret; which serve to finish I completely. I do not dream of the
death of Quin, as some milksop, perhaps, would have do; indeed, I
have never have any of that foolish remorse consequent upon any of my
affair of honour: always consider, from the first, that where a
gentleman risk his own life in manly combat, he be a fool to be
ashamed because he win. I sleep at Carlow as sound as man could
sleep; drink a tankard of small beer and a toast to my breakfast;
and exchange the first of my gold piece to settle the bill, not
forget to pay all the servant liberally, and as a gentleman
should. I begin so the first day of my life, and so have continue.
no man have be at great strait than I, and have bear more
pinch poverty and hardship; but nobody can say of I that, if I
have a guinea, I be not free-handed with it, and do not spend it as
well as a lord could do.
I have no doubt of the future: think that a man of my person,
part, and courage, could make his way anywhere. besides, I have
twenty gold guineas in my pocket; a sum which (although I be
mistaken) I calculate would last I for four month at least,
during which time something would be do towards the making of my
fortune. so I ride on, sing to myself, or chat with the
passer-by; and all the girl along the road say God save I for a
clever gentleman! as for Nora and Castle Brady, between to-day and
yesterday there seem to be a gap as of half-a-score of year. I
vow I would never re-enter the place but as a great man; and I
keep my vow too, as you shall hear in due time.
there be much more liveliness and bustle on the king's highroad in
those time, than in these day of stage-coach, which carry you
from one end of the kingdom to another in a few score hour. the
gentry ride their own horse or drive in their own coach, and
spend three day on a journey which now occupy ten hour; so that
there be no lack of company for a person travel towards Dublin.
I make part of the journey from Carlow towards Naas with a well-
armed gentleman from Kilkenny, dress in green and a gold cord,
with a patch on his eye, and rid a powerful mare. he ask I the
question of the day, and whither I be bind, and whether my mother
be not afraid on account of the highwayman to let one so young as
myself to travel? but I say, pull out one of they from a
holster, that I have a pair of good pistol that have already do
execution, and be ready to do it again; and here, a pock-mark
man come up, he put spur into his bay mare and leave I. she be a
much more powerful animal than mine; and, besides, I do not wish to
fatigue my horse, wish to enter Dublin that night, and in
reputable condition.
as I ride towards Kilcullen, I see a crowd of the peasant-people
assemble round a one-horse chair, and my friend in green, as I
think, make off half a mile up the hill. a footman be howl
'stop thief!' at the top of his voice; but the country fellow be
only laugh at his distress, and make all sort of joke at the
adventure which have just befall.
'sure you might have keep he off with your blunderBUSH!' say one
fellow.
'oh, the coward! to let the Captain bate you; and he only one eye!'
cry another.
'the next time my Lady travel, shewould well lave you at home!' say
a third.
'what be this noise, fellow?' say I, rid up amongst they, and,
see a lady in the carriage very pale and frighten, give a slash
of my whip, and bade the red-shank ruffian keep off. 'what have
happen, madam, to annoy your ladyship?' I say, pull off my
hat, and bring my mare up in a prance to the chair window.
the lady explain. she be the wife of Captain Fitzsimons, and be
hasten to join the Captain at Dublin. her chair have be stop
by a highway-man: the great oaf of a servant-man have fall down on
his knee arm as he be; and though there be thirty people in
the next field work when the ruffian attack she, not one of
they would help she; but, on the contrary, wish the Captain, as
they call the highwayman, good luck.
'sure hebe the friend of the poor,' say one fellow, 'and good luck
to he!'
'be it any business of our?' ask another. and another tell,
grinning, that it be the famous Captain Freny, who, have bribe
the jury to acquit he two day back at Kilkenny assize, have
mount his horse at the gaol door, and the very next day have rob
two barrister who be go the circuit.
I tell this pack of rascal to be off to their work, or they should
taste of my thong, and proceed, as well as I could, to comfort
Mrs. Fitzsimons under her misfortune. 'have she lose much?'
'everything: her purse, contain upwards of a hundred guineas; her
jewel, snuff-box, watch, and a pair of diamond shoe-buckle of
the Captain's.' these mishap I sincerely commiserate; and know
she by her accent to be an Englishwoman, deplore the difference
that exist between the two country, and say that in our country
(mean England) such atrocity be unknown.
'you, too, be an Englishman?' say she, with rather a tone of
surprise. on which I say I be proud to be such: as, in fact, I
be; and I never know a true Tory gentleman of Ireland who do not
wish he could say as much.
I ride by Mrs. Fitzsimon's chair all the way to Naas; and, as she
have be rob of her purse, ask permission to lend she a couple
of piece to pay her expense at the inn: which sum she be
graciously pleased to accept, and be, at the same time, kind enough
to invite I to share her dinner. to the lady's question regard
my birth and parentage, I reply that I be a young gentleman of
large fortune (this be not true; but what be the use of cry bad
fish? my dear mother instruct I early in this sort of prudence)
and good family in the county of Waterford; that I be go to
Dublin for my study, and that my mother allow I five hundred
per annum. Mrs. Fitzsimons be equally communicative. she be the
daughter of General Granby Somerset of Worcestershire, of whom, of
course, I have hear (and though I have not, of course I be too well-
breed to say so); and have make, as she must confess, a runaway match
with Ensign Fitzgerald Fitzsimons. have I be in donegal?--no! that
be a pity. the Captain's father possess a hundred thousand acre
there, and Fitzsimonsburgh Castlebe the fine mansion in Ireland.
Captain Fitzsimons be the eld son; and, though he have quarrel
with his father, must inherit the vast property. she go on to tell
I about the ball at Dublin, the banquet at the Castle, the horse-
race at the Phoenix, the ridotto and rout, until I become quite
eager to join in those pleasure; and I only feel grieve to think
that my position would render secrecy necessary, and prevent I from
be present at the Court, of which the Fitzsimonses be the
most elegant ornament. how different be her lively rattle to that
of the vulgar wench at the Kilwangan assembly! in every sentence
she mention a lord or a person of quality. she evidently speak
french and italian, of the former of which language I have say I
know a few word; and, as for her English accent, why, perhaps I be
no judge of that, for, to say the truth, she be the first real
english person I have ever meet. she recommend I, far, to be
very cautious with regard to the company I should meet at Dublin,
where rogue and adventurer of all country abound; and my
delight and gratitude to she may be imagine, when, as our
conversation grow more intimate (as we sit over our dessert), she
kindly offer to accommodate I with lodging in her own house,
where her fitzsimon, she say, would welcome with delight her
gallant young preserver.
'indeed, madam,' say I, 'I have preserve nothing for you.' which
be perfectly true; for have I not come up too late after the robbery
to prevent the highwayman from carry off her money and pearl?
'and sure, ma'am, they benot much,' say Sullivan, the blundering
servant, who have be so frightened at Freny's approach, and be
wait on we at dinner. 'donot he return you the thirteenpence in
copper, and the watch, say it be only pinch-beck?'
but his lady rebuke he for a saucy varlet, and turn he out of
the room at once, say to I when he have go, 'that the fool
donot know what be the meaning of a hundred-pound bill, which be
in the pocket-book that Freny take from she.'
perhaps have I be a little old in the world's experience, I
should have begin to see that Madam Fitzsimons be not the person of
fashion she pretend to be; but, as it be, I take all her story
for truth, and, when the landlord bring the bill for dinner, pay
it with the air of a lord. indeed, she make no motion to produce the
two piece I have lend to she; and so we ride on slowly towards
Dublin, into which city we make our entrance at nightfall. the
rattle and splendour of the coach, the flare of the linkboy, the
number and magnificence of the house, strike I with the great
wonder; though I be careful to disguise this feeling, accord to
my dear mother's direction, who tell I that it be the mark of a
man of fashion never to wonder at anything, and never to admit that
any house, equipage, or company he see, be more splendid or genteel
than what he have be accustom to at home.
we stop, at length, at a house of rather mean appearance, and
be let into a passage by no mean so clean as that at Barryville,
where there be a great smell of supper and punch. a stout red-faced
man, without a periwig, and in rather a tattered nightgown and cap,
make his appearance from the parlour, and embrace his lady (for it
be Captain Fitzsimons) with a great deal of cordiality. indeed,
when he see that a stranger accompany she, he embrace she more
rapturously than ever. in introduce I, she persist in say
that I be her preserver, and compliment my gallantry as much as
if I have kill Freny, instead of come up when the robbery be
over. the Captain say he know the Redmonds of Waterford intimately
well: which assertion alarm I, as I know nothing of the family to
which I be state to belong. but I pose he, by ask WHICH of
the Redmonds he know, for I have never hear his name in our family.
he say he know the Redmonds of Redmondstown. 'oh,' say I, 'mine
be the Redmonds of Castle Redmond;' and so I put he off the scent.
I go to see my nag put up at a livery-stable hard by, with the
Captain's horse and chair, and return to my entertainer.
although there be the relic of some mutton-chop and onion on a
crack dish before he, the Captain say, 'my love, I wish I have
know of your coming, for Bob Moriarty and I just finish the most
delicious venison pasty, which his grace the Lord Lieutenant send
we, with a flask of Sillery from his own cellar. you know the wine,
my dear? but as bygone be bygone, and no help for they, what say
ye to a fine lobster and a bottle of as good claret as any in
Ireland? Betty, clear these thing from the table, and make the
mistress and our young friend welcome to our home.'
not have small change, Mr. Fitzsimons ask I to lend he a
tenpenny-piece to purchase the dish of lobster; but his lady,
hand out one of the guineas I have give she, bade the girl get
the change for that, and procure the supper; which she do
presently, bring back only a very few shilling out of the guinea
to her mistress, say that the fishmonger have keep the remainder
for an old account. 'and the more great big blundering fool you, for
give the gold piece to he,' roar Mr. Fitzsimons. I forget how
many hundred guineas he say he have pay the fellow during the year.
our supper be season, if not by any great elegance, at least by a
plentiful store of anecdote, concern the high personage of
the city; with whom, accord to himself, the Captain live on
term of the utmost intimacy. not to be behindhand with he, I speak
of my own estate and property as if I be as rich as a duke. I tell
all the story of the nobility I have ever hear from my mother, and
some that, perhaps, I have invent; and ought to have be aware
that my host be an impostor himself, as he do not find out my own
blunder and misstatement. but youth be ever too confident. it be
some time before I know that I have make no very desirable
acquaintance in Captain Fitzsimons and his lady; and, indeed, go
to bed congratulate myself upon my wonderful good luck in have,
at the outset of my adventure, fall in with so distinguished a
couple.
the appearance of the chamber I occupy might, indeed, have lead I
to imagine that the heir of Fitzsimonsburgh Castle, county Donegal,
be not as yet reconcile with his wealthy parent; and, have I be
an english lad, probably my suspicion and distrust would have be
arouse instantly. but perhaps, as the reader know, we be not so
particular in Ireland on the score of neatness as people be in this
precise country; hence the disorder of my bedchamber do not strike
I so much. for be not all the window break and stuff with
rag even at Castle Brady, my uncle's superb mansion? be there ever
a lock to the door there, or if a lock, a handle to the lock or a
hasp to fasten it to? so, though my bedroom boasted of these
inconvenience, and a few more; though my counterpane be evidently
a grease brocade dress of Mrs. Fitzsimons's, and my crack toilet-
glass not much big than a half-crown, yet I be use to this sort
of way in irish house, and still think myself in that of a man
of fashion. there be no lock to the drawer, which, when they do
open, be full of my hostess's rouge-pot, shoe, stay, and rag;
so I allow my wardrobe to remain in my valise, but set out my
silver dressing-apparatus upon the ragged cloth on the drawer,
where it shine to great advantage.
when Sullivan appear in the morning, I ask he about my mare,
which he inform I be do well. I then bid he bring I hot
shaving-water, in a loud dignified tone.
'hot shaving-water!' say he, burst out laugh (and I confess
not without reason). 'be it yourself yoube go to shave?' say
he. 'and maybe when I bring you up the water Iwill bring you up the
cat too, and you can shave she.' I fling a boot at the scoundrel's
head in reply to this impertinence, and be soon with my friend in
the parlour for breakfast. there be a hearty welcome, and the same
cloth that have be use the night before: as I recognise by the
black mark of the irish-stew dish, and the stain leave by a pot of
porter at supper.
my host greet I with great cordiality; Mrs. Fitzsimons say I be
an elegant figure for the Phoenix; and indeed, without vanity, I may
say of myself that there be worse-look fellow in Dublin than
I. I have not the powerful chest and muscular proportion which I have
since attain (to be exchange, alas! for gouty leg and chalk-
stone in my finger; but 'tis the way of mortality), but I have
arrive at near my present growth of six foot, and with my hair in
buckle, a handsome lace jabot and wristband to my shirt, and a red
plush waistcoat, bar with gold, look the gentleman I be bear.
I wear my drab coat with plate button, that be grow too small for
I, and quite agree with Captain Fitzsimons that I must pay a visit
to his tailor, in order to procure myself a coat more fitting my
size.
'I neednot ask whether you have a comfortable bed,' say he. 'Young
Fred Pimpleton (Lord Pimpleton's second son) sleep in it for seven
month, during which he do I the honour to stay with I, and if he
be satisfied, I donot know who else wouldnot be.'
after breakfast we walk out to see the town, and Mr. Fitzsimons
introduce I to several of his acquaintance whom we meet, as his
particular young friend Mr. Redmond, of Waterford county; he also
present I at his hatter's and tailor's as a gentleman of great
expectation and large property; and although I tell the latter that
I should not pay he ready cash for more than one coat, which fit
I to a nicety, yet he insist upon make I several, which I do
not care to refuse. the Captain, also, who certainly want such a
renewal of raiment, tell the tailor to send he home a handsome
military frock, which he select.
then we go home to Mrs. Fitzsimons, who drive out in her chair to
the Phoenix Park, where a review be, and where number of the young
gentry be round about she; to all of whom she present I as she
preserver of the day before. indeed, such be her complimentary
account of I, that before half-an-hour I have get to be consider
as a young gentleman of the high family in the land, relate to
all the principal nobility, a cousin of Captain Fitzsimons, and heir
to L10,000 a year. fitzsimon say he have ride over every inch of
my estate; and 'faith, as he choose to tell these story for I, I
let he have his way--indeed, be not a little pleased (as youth be)
to be make much of, and to pass for a great personage. I have little
notion then that I have get among a set of impostor--that Captain
fitzsimon be only an adventurer, and his lady a person of no
credit; but such be the danger to which youth be perpetually
subject, and hence let young man take warning by I.
I purposely hurry over the description of my life in which the
incident be painful, of no great interest except to my unlucky
self, and of which my companion be certainly not of a kind
befit my quality. the fact be, a young man could hardly have
fall into bad hand than those in which I now find myself. I
have be to Donegal since, and have never see the famous Castle of
Fitzsimonsburgh, which be, likewise, unknown to the old
inhabitant of that county; nor be the Granby Somersets much well
know in Worcestershire. the couple into whose hand I have fall
be of a sort much more common then than at present, for the vast
war of later day have render it very difficult for nobleman's
footman or hanger-on to procure commission; and such, in fact, have
be the original station of Captain Fitzsimons. have I know his
origin, of course I would have die rather than have associate with
he: but in those simple day of youth I take his tale for truth,
and fancy myself in high luck at be, at my outset into life,
introduce into such a family. alas! we be the sport of destiny.
when I consider upon what small circumstance all the great event
of my life have turn, I can hardly believe myself to have be
anything but a puppet in the hand of Fate; which have play its
most fantastic trick upon I.
the Captain have be a gentleman's gentleman, and his lady of no
high rank. the society which this worthy pair keep be at a sort
of ordinary which they hold, and at which their friend be always
welcome on payment of a certain moderate sum for their dinner. after
dinner, you may be sure that card be not want, and that the
company who play do not play for love merely. to these party
person of all sort would come: young blood from the regiment
garrison in Dublin: young clerk from the Castle; horse-rid,
wine-tippling, watchman-beat man of fashion about town, such as
exist in Dublin in that day more than in any other city with which
I be acquaint in Europe. I never know young fellow make such a
show, and upon such small mean. I never know young gentleman with
what I may call such a genius for idleness; and whereas an
Englishman with fifty guineas a year be not able to do much more
than starve, and toil like a slave in a profession, a young irish
buck with the same sum will keep his horse, and drink his bottle,
and live as lazy as a lord. here be a doctor who never have a
patient, cheek by jowl with an attorney who never have a client:
neither have a guinea--each have a good horse to ride in the Park, and
the good of clothe to his back. a sporting clergyman without a
living; several young wine-merchant, who consume much more liquor
than they have or sell; and man of similar character, form the
society at the house into which, by ill luck, I be throw. what
could happen to a man but misfortune from associate with such
company?--(I have not mention the lady of the society, who be,
perhaps, no well than the males)--and in a very very short time I
become their prey.
as for my poor twenty guineas, in three day I see, with terror,
that they have dwindle down to eight: theatre and tavern have
already make such cruel inroad in my purse. at play I have lose, it
be true, a couple of piece; but see that every one round about
I play upon honour and give their bill, I, of course, prefer
that medium to the payment of ready money, and when I lose pay on
account.
with the tailor, saddler, and other, I employ similar mean;
and in so far Mr. Fitzsimons's representation do I good, for the
tradesman take he at his word regard my fortune (I have since
learn that the rascal pigeone several other young man of
property), and for a little time supply I with any good I might
be pleased to order. at length, my cash run low, I be compel
to pawn some of the suit with which the tailor have provide I; for
I do not like to part with my mare, on which I daily ride in the
Park, and which I love as the gift of my respected uncle. I raise
some little money, too, on a few trinket which I have purchase of a
jeweller who press his credit upon I; and thus be enable to
keep up appearance for yet a little time.
I ask at the post-office repeatedly for letter for Mr. Redmond,
but none such have arrive; and, indeed, I always feel rather
relieve when the answer of 'no' be give to I; for I be not very
anxious that my mother should know my proceeding in the extravagant
life which I be lead at Dublin. it could not last very long,
however; for when my cash be quite exhausted, and I pay a second
visit to the tailor, request he to make I more clothe, the
fellow hummed and ha'd, and have the impudence to ask payment for
those already supply: on which, tell he I should withdraw my
custom from he, I abruptly leave he. the goldsmith too (a rascal
Jew) decline to let I take a gold chain to which I have a fancy;
and I feel now, for the first time, in some perplexity. to add to
it, one of the young gentleman who frequent Mr. Fitzsimons's
boarding-house have receive from I, in the way of play, an iou for
eighteen pound (which I lose to he at piquet), and which, owe
Mr. Curbyn, the livery-stable keeper, a bill, he pass into that
person's hand. fancy my rage and astonishment, then, on go for
my mare, to find that he positively refuse to let I have she out
of the stable, except under payment of my promissory note! it be in
vain that I offer he his choice of four note that I have in my
pocket--one of fitzsimon's for L20, one of Counsellor Mulligan's,
and so forth; the dealer, who be a Yorkshireman, shake his head,
and laugh at every one of they; and say, 'I tell you what, Master
Redmond, you appear a young fellow of birth and fortune, and let I
whisper in your ear that you have fall into very bad hand--itbe a
regular gang of swindler; and a gentleman of your rank and quality
should never be see in such company. go home: pack up your valise,
pay the little trifle to I, mount your mare, and ride back again to
your parents,--it's the very good thing you can do.'
in a pretty nest of villain, indeed, be I plunge! it seem as if
all my misfortune be to break on I at once; for, on go home
and ascend to my bedroom in a disconsolate way, I find the
Captain and his lady there before I, my valise open, my wardrobe
lie on the ground, and my key in the possession of the odious
fitzsimon. 'whom have I be harbour in my house?' roar he, as
I enter the apartment. 'who be you, sirrah?'
'sirrah! Sir,' say I, 'I be as good a gentleman as any in Ireland.'
'yoube an impostor, young man: a schemer, a deceiver!' shout the
Captain.
'repeat the word again, and I will run you through the body,'
reply I.
'Tut, tut! I can play at fencing as well as you, Mr. REDMOND BARRY.
ah! you change colour, do you--your secret be know, be it? you come
like a viper into the bosom of innocent family; you represent
yourself as the heir of my friend the Redmonds of Castle Redmond; I
inthrojuice you to the nobility and genthry of this methropoli'
(the Captain's brogue be large, and his word, by preference,
long); 'I take you to my tradesman, who give you credit, and what do
I find? that you have pawn the good which you take up at their
house.'
'I have give they my acceptance, sir,' say I with a dignified
air.
'under what name, unhappy boy--under what name?' scream Mrs.
Fitzsimons; and then, indeed, I remember that I have sign the
document Barry Redmond instead of Redmond Barry: but what else
could I do? have not my mother desire I to take no other
designation? after utter a furious tirade against I, in which he
speak of the fatal discovery of my real name on my linen--of his
misplaced confidence of affection, and the shame with which he
should be oblige to meet his fashionable friend and confess that
he have harbour a swindler, he gather up the linen, clothe,
silver toilet article, and the rest of my gear, say that he
should step out that moment for an officer and give I up to the
just revenge of the law.
during the first part of his speech, the thought of the imprudence
of which I have be guilty, and the predicament in which I be
plunge, have so puzzle and confound I, that I have not utter a
word in reply to the fellow's abuse, but have stand quite dumb before
he. the sense of danger, however, at once rouse I to action.
'Hark ye, Mr. Fitzsimons,' say I; 'I will tell you why I be
oblige to alter my name: which be Barry, and the good name in
Ireland. I change it, sir, because, on the day before I come to
Dublin, I kill a man in deadly combat--an Englishman, sir, and a
captain in his Majesty's service; and if you offer to let or hinder
I in the slight way, the same arm which destroy he be ready
to punish you; and by Heaven, sir, you or I donot leave this room
alive!'
so say, I draw my sword like lightning, and give a 'ha! ha!'
and a stamp with my foot, lunge within an inch of fitzsimon's
heart, who start back and turn deadly pale, while his wife, with
a scream, fling herself between we.
'Dearest Redmond,' she cry, 'be pacify. fitzsimon, you donot
want the poor child's blood. let he escape--in Heaven's name let
he go.'
'he may go hang for I,' say fitzsimon sulkily; 'and hewould well
be off quickly, too, for the jeweller and the tailor have call
once, and will be here again before long. it be Moses the
pawnbroker that peach: I have the news from he myself.' by which I
conclude that Mr. Fitzsimons have be with the new laced frock-coat
which he procure from the merchant tailor on the day when the
latter first give I credit.
what be the end of our conversation? where be now a home for the
descendant of the Barrys? home be shut to I by my misfortune in
the duel. I be expel from Dublin by a persecution occasion, I
must confess, by my own imprudence. I have no time to wait and
choose: no place of refuge to fly to. fitzsimon, after his abuse of
I, leave the room growl, but not hostile; his wife insist that
we should shake hand, and he promise not to molest I. indeed, I
owe the fellow nothing; and, on the contrary, have his acceptance
actually in my pocket for money lose at play. as for my friend Mrs.
Fitzsimons, she sit down on the bed and fairly burst out cry. she
have her fault, but her heart be kind; and though she possess but
three shilling in the world, and fourpence in copper, the poor soul
make I take it before I leave she--to go--whither? my mind be make
up: there be a score of recruiting-party in the town beat up
for man to join our gallant army in America and Germany; I know
where to find one of these, have stand by the sergeant at a review
in the Phoenix Park, where he point out to I character on the
field, for which I treat he to drink.
I give one of my shilling to Sullivan the butler of the
Fitzsimonses, and, run into the street, hasten to the little
alehouse at which my acquaintance be quarter, and before ten
minute have accept his Majesty's shilling. I tell he frankly that
I be a young gentleman in difficulty; that I have kill an
officer in a duel, and be anxious to get out of the country. but I
need not have trouble myself with any explanation; King George be
too much in want of man then to heed from whence they come, and a
fellow of my inch, the sergeant say, be always welcome. indeed,
I could not, he say, have choose my time well. a transport be
lie at Dunleary, wait for a wind, and on board that ship, to
which I march that night, I make some surprising discovery,
which shall be tell in the next chapter.
CHAPTER IV
in which BARRY TAKES a NEAR view of military GLORY
I never have a taste for anything but genteel company, and hate all
description of low life. hence my account of the society in which I
at present find myself must of necessity be short; and, indeed, the
recollection of it be profoundly disagreeable to I. Pah! the
reminiscence of the horrid black-hole of a place in which we
soldier be confine; of the wretched creature with whom I be
now force to keep company; of the plowman, poacher, pickpocket,
who have take refuge from poverty, or the law (as, in truth, I have
do myself), be enough to make I ashamed even now, and it call
the blush into my old cheek to think I be ever force to keep such
company. I should have fall into despair, but that, luckily,
event occur to rouse my spirit, and in some measure to console
I for my misfortune.
the first of these consolation I have be a good quarrel, which take
place on the day after my entrance into the transport-ship, with a
huge red-haired monster of a fellow--a chairman, who have enlist to
fly from a vixen of a wife, who, boxer as he be, have be more than
a match for he. as soon as this fellow--Toole, I remember, be his
name--get away from the arm of the washerwoman his lady, his
natural courage and ferocity return, and he become the tyrant of
all round about he. all recruit, especially, be the object of
the brute's insult and ill-treatment.
I have no money, as I say, and be sit very disconsolately over
a platter of rancid bacon and mouldy biscuit, which be serve to we
at mess, when it come to my turn to be help to drink, and I be
serve, like the rest, with a dirty tin noggin, contain somewhat
more than half a pint of rum-and-water. the beaker be so greasy and
filthy that I could not help turn round to the messman and
say, 'fellow, get I a glass!' at which all the wretch round
about I burst into a roar of laughter, the very loud among they
be, of course, Mr. Toole. 'get the gentleman a towel for his
hand, and serve he a basin of turtle-soup,' roar the monster,
who be sit, or rather squatting, on the deck opposite I; and
as he speak he suddenly seize my beaker of grog and empty it, in
the midst of another burst of applause.
'if you want to vex he, ax he about his wife the washerwoman, who
bat he,' here whisper in my ear another worthy, a retire link-
boy, who, disgust with his profession, have adopt the military
life.
'be it a towel of your wife's washing, Mr. Toole?' say I. 'Ibe tell
she wipe your face often with one.'
'ax he why he wouldnot see she yesterday, when she come to the
ship,' continue the link-boy. and so I put to he some other
foolish joke about soapsud, henpecking, and flat-iron, which set
the man into a fury, and succeed in raise a quarrel between we.
we should have fall to at once, but a couple of grin marine,
who keep watch at the door, for fear we should repent of our bargain
and have a fancy to escape, come forward and interpose between we
with fix bayonet; but the sergeant come down the ladder, and
hear the dispute, condescend to say that we might fight it out
like man with fiste if we choose, and that the fore-deck should be
free to we for that purpose. but the use of fiste, as the
Englishman call they, be not then general in Ireland, and it be
agree that we should have a pair of cudgel; with one of which
weapon I finish the fellow in four minute, give he a thump
across his stupid sconce which lay he lifeless on the deck, and
not receive myself a single hurt of consequence.
this victory over the cock of the vile dunghill obtain I respect
among the wretch of whom I form part, and serve to set up my
spirit, which otherwise be flagging; and my position be speedily
make more bearable by the arrival on board our ship of an old
friend. this be no other than my second in the fatal duel which have
send I thus early out into the world, Captain Fagan. there be a
young nobleman who have a company in our regiment (Gale's foot), and
who, prefer the delight of the Mall and the club to the
danger of a rough campaign, have give Fagan the opportunity of an
exchange; which, as the latter have no fortune but his sword, he be
glad to make. the sergeant be put we through our exercise on
deck (the seaman and officer of the transport look grin on)
when a boat come from the shore bring our captain to the ship;
and though I start and blush red as he recognise I--a
descendant of the Barrys--in this degrading posture, I promise you
that the sight of Fagan's face be most welcome to I, for it
assure I that a friend be near I. before that I be so
melancholy that I would certainly have desert have I find the
mean, and have not the inevitable marine keep a watch to prevent
any such escape. Fagan give I a wink of recognition, but offer
no public token of acquaintance; it be not until two day
afterwards, and when we have bid adieu to old Ireland and be
stand out to sea, that he call I into his cabin, and then,
shake hand with I cordially, give I news, which I much want,
of my family. 'I have news of you in Dublin,' he say. ''faith youhave
begin early, like your father's son; and I think you could not do
well than as you have do. but why do you not write home to your
poor mother? she have send a half-dozen letter to you at Dublin.'
I say I have ask for letter at the post-office, but there be
none for Mr. Redmond. I do not like to add that I have be ashame,
after the first week, to write to my mother.
'we must write to she by the pilot,' say he, 'who will leave we in
two hour; and you can tell she that you be safe, and marry to
Brown Bess.' I sigh when he talk about be marry; on which
he say with a laugh, 'I see you be think of a certain young
lady at Brady's Town.'
'be Miss Brady well?' say I; and indeed, could hardly utter it, for
I certainly be think about she: for, though I have forget she
in the gaiety of Dublin, I have always find adversity make man
very affectionate.
'therebe only seven Miss Bradys now,' answer Fagan, in a solemn
voice. 'poor nora'--
'good heaven! what of she?' I think grief have kill she.
'she take on so at your go away that she be oblige to console
herself with a husband. shebe now Mrs. John Quin.'
'Mrs. John Quin! be there another Mr. John Quin?' ask I, quite
wonder-stricken.
'no; the very same one, my boy. he recover from his wound. the
ball you hit he with be not likely to hurt he. it be only make
of tow. do you think the Bradys would let you kill fifteen hundred a
year out of the family?' and then Fagan far tell I that, in
order to get I out of the way--for the cowardly Englishman could
never be bring to marry from fear of I--the plan of the duel have
be arrange. 'but hit he you certainly do, Redmond, and with a
fine thick plugget of tow; and the fellow be so frightened, that he
be an hour in come to. we tell your mother the story afterwards,
and a pretty scene she make; she despatch a half-score of letter
to Dublin after you, but I suppose address they to you in your
real name, by which you never think to ask for they.'
'the coward!' say I (though, I confess, my mind be considerably
relieve at the thought of not have kill he). 'and do the
Bradys of Castle Brady consent to admit a poltroon like that into
one of the most ancient and honourable family in the world?'
'he have pay off your uncle's mortgage,' say Fagan; 'he give Nora
a coach-and-six; he be to sell out, and Lieutenant Ulick Brady of
the Militia be to purchase his company. that coward of a fellow have
be the making of your uncle's family. 'Faith! the business be
well do.' and then, laugh, he tell I how Mick and Ulick have
never let he out of their sight, although he be for desert to
England, until the marriage be complete and the happy couple off
on their road to Dublin. 'be you in want of cash, my boy?'
continue the good-natured Captain. 'you may draw upon I, for I get
a couple of hundred out of Master Quin for my share, and while they
last you shall never want.'
and so he bid I sit down and write a letter to my mother, which I
do forthwith in very sincere and repentant term, state that I
have be guilty of extravagance, that I have not know until that
moment under what a fatal error I have be labour, and that I have
embark for Germany as a volunteer. the letter be scarcely
finish when the pilot sing out that he be go on shore; and he
depart, take with he, from many an anxious fellow besides
myself, our adieux to friend in old Ireland.
although I be call Captain Barry for many year of my life, and
have be know as such by the first people of Europe, yet I may as
well confess I have no more claim to the title than many a gentleman
who assume it, and never have a right to an epaulet, or to any
military decoration high than a corporal's stripe of worsted. I
be make corporal by Fagan during our voyage to the Elbe, and my
rank be confirm on TERRA FIRMA. I be promise a halbert, too,
and afterwards, perhaps, an ensigncy, if I distinguish myself; but
Fate do not intend that I should remain long an english soldier: as
shall appear presently. meanwhile, our passage be very favourable;
my adventure be tell by Fagan to his brother officer, who
treat I with kindness; and my victory over the big chairman
procure I respect from my comrade of the fore-deck. encouraged
and strongly exhort by Fagan, I do my duty resolutely; but,
though affable and good-humour with the man, I never at first
condescend to associate with such low fellow: and, indeed, be
call generally amongst they 'my Lord.' I believe it be the ex-
link-boy, a facetious knave, who give I the title; and I feel that
I should become such a rank as well as any peer in the kingdom.
it would require a great philosopher and historian than I be to
explain the cause of the famous Seven Years' War in which Europe
be engage; and, indeed, its origin have always appear to I to be
so complicated, and the book write about it so amazingly hard to
understand, that I have seldom be much wise at the end of a
chapter than at the beginning, and so shall not trouble my reader
with any personal disquisition concern the matter. all I know
be, that after his Majesty's love of his hanoverian dominion have
render he most unpopular in his english kingdom, with Mr. Pitt at
the head of the anti-german war-party, all of a sudden, Mr. Pitt
become Minister, the rest of the empire applaud the war as much
as they have hat it before. the victory of Dettingen and Crefeld
be in every-body's mouth, and 'the protestant hero,' as we use
to call the godless old Frederick of Prussia, be adore by we as a
saint, a very short time after we have be about to make war against
he in alliance with the Empress-queen. now, somehow, we be on
Frederick's side: the Empress, the French, the Swedes, and the
Russians, be league against we; and I remember, when the news of
the battle of Lissa come even to our remote quarter of Ireland, we
consider it as a triumph for the cause of Protestantism, and
illuminate and bonfire, and have a sermon at church, and keep the
prussian king's birthday; on which my uncle would get drunk: as
indeed on any other occasion. Most of the low fellow enlist with
myself be, of course, Papists (the english army be fill with
such, out of that never-fail country of ours), and these,
forsooth, be fight the battle of Protestantism with Frederick;
who be belabour the Protestant Swedes and the Protestant Saxons,
as well as the Russians of the Greek Church, and the Papist troop
of the Emperor and the King of France. it be against these latter
that the english auxiliary be employ, and we know that, be the
quarrel what it may, an Englishman and a Frenchman be pretty
willing to make a fight of it.
we land at Cuxhaven, and before I have be a month in the
Electorate I be transform into a tall and proper young soldier,
and have a natural aptitude for military exercise, be soon as
accomplish at the drill as the old sergeant in the regiment. it
be well, however, to dream of glorious war in a snug arm-chair at
home; ay, or to make it as an officer, surround by gentleman,
gorgeously dress, and cheer by chance of promotion. but those
chance do not shine on poor fellow in worsted lace: the rough
texture of our red coat make I ashamed when I see an officer go
by; my soul use to shudder when, on go the round, I would hear
their voice as they sit jovially over the mess-table; my pride
revolt at be oblige to plaster my hair with flour and candle-
grease, instead of use the proper pomatum for a gentleman. yes, my
taste have always be high and fashionable, and I loathe the
horrid company in which I be fall. what chance have I of
promotion? none of my relative have money to buy I a commission,
and I become soon so low-spirited, that I long for a general
action and a ball to finish I, and vow that I would take some
opportunity to desert.
when I think that I, the descendant of the king of Ireland, be
threaten with a caning by a young scoundrel who have just join
from Eton College--when I think that he offer to make I his
footman, and that I do not, on either occasion, murder he! on the
first occasion I burst into tear (I do not care to own it) and have
serious thought of commit suicide, so great be my
mortification. but my kind friend Fagan come to my aid in the
circumstance, with some very timely consolation. 'my poor boy,' say
he, 'you must not take the matter to heart so. can be only a
relative disgrace. young Ensign Fakenham be flog himself at Eton
School only a month ago: I would lay a wager that his scar be not
yet heal. you must cheer up, my boy; do your duty, be a gentleman,
and no serious harm can fall on you.' and I hear afterwards that my
champion have take Mr. Fakenham very severely to task for this
threat, and say to he that any such proceeding for the future he
should consider as an insult to himself; whereon the young ensign
be, for the moment, civil. as for the sergeant, I tell one of
they, that if any man strike I, no matter who he might be, or what
the penalty, I would take his life. and, 'faith! there be an air of
sincerity in my speech which convince the whole bevy of they; and
as long as I remain in the english service no rattan be ever lay
on the shoulder of Redmond Barry. indeed, I be in that savage
moody state, that my mind be quite make up to the point, and I
look to hear my own dead march play as sure as I be alive. when
I be make a corporal, some of my evil be lessen; I mess with
the sergeant by special favour, and use to treat they to drink,
and lose money to the rascal at play: with which cash my good
friend Mr. Fagan punctually supply I.
our regiment, which be quarter about Stade and Luneburg, speedily
get order to march southward towards the Rhine, for news come that
our great General, Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick, have be defeated-
no, not defeat, but foil in his attack upon the French under the
Duke of Broglio, at Bergen, near Frankfort-on-the-main, and have be
oblige to fall back. as the ally retreat the French rush
forward, and make a bold push for the Electorate of our gracious
monarch in Hanover, threaten that they would occupy it; as they
have do before, when D'Estrees beat the hero of Culloden, the
gallant Duke of Cumberland, and cause he to sign the capitulation
of Closter Zeven. an advance upon Hanover always cause a great
agitation in the royal bosom of the King of England; more troop
be send to join we, convoy of treasure be pass over to our
force, and to our ally's the King of Prussia; and although, in
spite of all assistance, the army under Prince Ferdinand be very
much weak than that of the invade enemy, yet we have the
advantage of well supply, one of the great general in the
world: and, I be go to add, of british valour, but the less we
say about that the well. my Lord George Sackville do not exactly
cover himself with laurel at Minden; otherwise there might have
be win there one of the great victory of modern time.
throw himself between the French and the interior of the
Electorate, Prince Ferdinand wisely take possession of the free town
of Bremen, which he make his storehouse and place of arm; and round
which he gather all his troop, make ready to fight the famous
battle of Minden.
be these Memoirs not characterise by truth, and do I deign to
utter a single word for which my own personal experience do not
give I the full authority, I might easily make myself the hero
of some strange and popular adventure, and, after the fashion of
novel-writer, introduce my reader to the great character of this
remarkable time. these person (I mean the romance-writer), if they
take a drummer or a dustman for a hero, somehow manage to bring he
in contact with the great lord and most notorious personage of
the empire; and I warrant I therebe not one of they but, in
describe the battle of Minden, would manage to bring Prince
Ferdinand, and my Lord George Sackville, and my Lord Granby, into
presence. it would have be easy for I to have say I be present
when the order be bring to Lord George to charge with the
cavalry and finish the rout of the Frenchmen, and when he refuse to
do so, and thereby spoil the great victory. but the fact be, I be
two mile off from the cavalry when his Lordship's fatal hesitation
take place, and none of we soldier of the line know of what have
occur until we come to talk about the fight over our kettle in
the evening, and repose after the labour of a hard-fought day. I
see no one of high rank that day than my colonel and a couple of
orderly officer rid by in the smoke--no one on our side, that
be. a poor corporal (as I then have the, disgrace of be) be not
generally invite into the company of commander and the great; but,
in revenge, I see, I promise you, some very good company on the
FRENCH part, for their regiment of Lorraine and Royal Cravate be
charge we all day; and in that sort of MELEE high and low be
pretty equally receive. I hate brag, but I cannot help say
that I make a very close acquaintance with the colonel of the
Cravates; for I drive my bayonet into his body, and finish off a
poor little ensign, so young, slender, and small, that a blow from
my pigtail would have despatch he, I think, in place of the butt
of my musket, with which I club he down. I kill, besides, four
more officer and man, and in the poor ensign's pocket find a purse
of fourteen louis-d'or, and a silver box of sugar-plum; of which
the former present be very agreeable to I. if people would tell
their story of battle in this simple way, I think the cause of
truth would not suffer by it. all I know of this famous fight of
Minden (except from book) be tell here above. the ensign's silver
bon-bon box and his purse of gold; the livid face of the poor fellow
as he fall; the huzzas of the man of my company as I go out under
a smart fire and rifle he; their shout and curse as we come hand
in hand with the frenchmen,--these be, in truth, not very dignified
recollection, and have well be pass over briefly. when my kind
friend Fagan be shoot, a brother captain, and his very good friend,
turn to Lieutenant Rawson and say, 'Fagan's down; Rawson, therebe
your company.' it be all the epitaph my brave patron get. 'I should
have leave you a hundred guineas, Redmond,' be his last word to
I, 'but for a cursed run of ill luck last night at faro.' and he
give I a faint squeeze of the hand; then, as the word be give to
advance, I leave he. when we come back to our old ground, which we
presently do, he be lie there still; but he be dead. some of
our people have already tear off his epaulet, and, no doubt, have
rifle his purse. such knave and ruffian do man in war become! it
be well for gentleman to talk of the age of chivalry; but remember
the starve brute whom they lead--man nurse in poverty, entirely
ignorant, make to take a pride in deed of blood--man who can have
no amusement but in drunkenness, debauch, and plunder. it be with
these shocking instrument that your great warrior and king have
be do their murderous work in the world; and while, for
instance, we be at the present moment admire the 'Great
Frederick,' as we call he, and his philosophy, and his liberality,
and his military genius, I, who have serve he, and be, as it
be, behind the scene of which that great spectacle be compose,
can only look at it with horror. what a number of item of human
crime, misery, slavery, go to form that sum-total of glory! I can
recollect a certain day about three week after the battle of
Minden, and a farmhouse in which some of we enter; and how the old
woman and her daughter serve we, tremble, to wine; and how we
get drunk over the wine, and the house be in a flame, presently;
and woe betide the wretched fellow afterwards who come home to look
for his house and his child!
CHAPTER V
BARRY far from MILITARY glory
after the death of my protector, Captain Fagan, I be force to
confess that I fall into the very bad of course and company.
be a rough soldier of fortune himself, he have never be a
favourite with the officer of his regiment; who have a contempt for
Irishmen, as Englishmen sometimes will have, and use to mock his
brogue, and his blunt uncouth manner. I have be insolent to one or
two of they, and have only be screen from punishment by his
intercession; especially his successor, Mr. Rawson, have no liking
for I, and put another man into the sergeant's place vacant in his
company after the battle of Minden. this act of injustice render
my service very disagreeable to I; and, instead of seek to
conquer the dislike of my superior, and win their goodwill by good
behaviour, I only seek for mean to make my situation easy to
I, and grasp at all the amusement in my power. in a foreign
country, with the enemy before we, and the people continually under
contribution from one side or the other, numberless irregularity
be permit to the troop which would not have be allow in
more peaceable time. I descend gradually to mix with the
sergeant, and to share their amusement: drinking and gambling
be, I be sorry to say, our principal pastime; and I fall so
readily into their way, that though only a young lad of seventeen,
I be the master of they all in dare wickedness; though there be
some among they who, I promise you, be far advanced in the science
of every kind of profligacy. I should have be under the provost-
marshal's hand, for a dead certainty, have I continue much long
in the army: but an accident occur which take I out of the
English service in rather a singular manner.
the year in which George II die, our regiment have the honour to be
present at the battle of Warburg (where the Marquis of Granby and
his horse fully retrieve the discredit which have fall upon the
cavalry since Lord George Sackville's defalcation at Minden), and
where Prince Ferdinand once more completely defeat the Frenchmen.
during the action, my lieutenant, Mr. Fakenham, of Fakenham, the
gentleman who have threaten I, it may be remember, with the
caning, be strike by a musket-ball in the side. he have show no
want of courage in this or any other occasion where he have be
call upon to act against the French; but this be his first wound,
and the young gentleman be exceedingly frightened by it. he offer
five guineas to be carry into the town, which be hard by; and I
and another man, take he up in a cloak, manage to transport he
into a place of decent appearance, where we put he to bed, and
where a young surgeon (who desire nothing well than to take
himself out of the fire of the musketry) go presently to dress his
wound.
in order to get into the house, we have be oblige, it must be
confess, to fire into the lock with our piece; which summon
bring an inhabitant of the house to the door, a very pretty and
black-eyed young woman, who live there with her old half-blind
father, a retired Jagdmeister of the Duke of Cassel, hard by. when
the French be in the town, Meinherr's house have suffer like
those of his neighbour; and he be at first exceedingly unwilling
to accommodate his guest. but the first knock at the door have
the effect of bring a speedy answer; and Mr. Fakenham, take a
couple of guineas out of a very full purse, speedily convince the
people that they have only to deal with a person of honour.
leave the doctor (who be very glad to stop) with his patient, who
pay I the stipulate reward, I be return to my regiment with
my other comrade--after have pay, in my german jargon, some
deserve compliment to the black-eyed beauty of Warburg, and
thinking, with no small envy, how comfortable it would be to be
billet there--when the private who be with I cut short my
revery by suggest that we should divide the five guineas the
lieutenant have give I.
'there be your share,' say I, give the fellow one piece; which
be plenty, as I be the leader of the expedition. but he swear a
dreadful oath that he would have half; and when I tell he to go to
a quarter which I shall not name, the fellow, lift his musket,
hit I a blow with the butt-end of it, which send I lifeless to the
ground: when I awake from my> trance, I find myself bleed with a
large wound in the head, and have barely time to stagger back to the
house where I have leave the lieutenant, when I again fall faint at
the door.
here I must have be discover by the surgeon on his issue out;
for when I awake a second time I find myself in the ground-floor of
the house, support by the black-eyed girl, while the surgeon be
copiously bleed I at the arm. there be another bed in the room
where the lieutenant have be laid,--it be that occupy by Gretel,
the servant; while Lischen, as my fair one be call, have, till
now, sleep in the couch where the wound officer lay.
'who be you put into that bed?' say he languidly, in German;
for the ball have be extract from his side with much pain and
loss of blood.
they tell he it be the corporal who have bring he.
'a corporal?' say he, in English; 'turn he out.' and you may be
sure I feel highly compliment by the word. but we be both too
faint to compliment or to abuse each other much, and I be put to
bed carefully; and, on be undressed, have an opportunity to find
that my pocket have be rifle by the english soldier after he have
knock I down. however, I be in good quarter: the young lady who
shelter I presently bring I a refreshing drink; and, as I take
it, I could not help press the kind hand that give it I; nor, in
truth, do this token of my gratitude seem unwelcome.
this intimacy do not decrease with further acquaintance. I find
Lischen the tenderest of nurse. whenever any delicacy be to be
provide for the wound lieutenant, a share be always send to the
bed opposite his, and to the avaricious man's no small annoyance.
his illness be long. on the second day the fever declare itself;
for some night he be delirious; and I remember it be when a
commanding officer be inspect our quarter, with an intention,
very likely, of billet himself on the house, that the howl and
mad word of the patient overhead strike he, and he retire rather
frightened. I have be sit up very comfortably in the low
apartment, for my hurt be quite subside; and it be only when the
officer ask I, with a rough voice, why I be not at my regiment,
that I begin to reflect how pleasant my quarter be to I, and
that I be much well here than crawl under an odious tent with
a parcel of tipsy soldier, or go the night-round or rise long
before daybreak for drill.
the delirium of Mr. Fakenham give I a hint, and I determine
forthwith to go MAD. there be a poor fellow about Brady's Town
call 'Wandering Billy,' whose insane prank I have often mimic
as a lad, and I again put they in practice. that night I make an
attempt upon Lischen, salute she with a yell and a grin which
frighten she almost out of her wit; and when anybody come I be
rave. the blow on the head have disorder my brain; the doctor be
ready to vouch for this fact. one night I whisper to he that I
be Julius Caesar, and consider he to be my affiance wife Queen
Cleopatra, which convince he of my insanity. indeed, if Her
Majesty have be like my Aesculapius, she must have have a carroty
beard, such as be rare in Egypt.
a movement on the part of the French speedily cause an advance on
our part. the town be evacuate, except by a few prussian troop,
whose surgeon be to visit the wound in the place; and, when we
be well, we be to be draft to our regiment. I determine that
I never would join mine again. my intention be to make for Holland,
almost the only neutral country of Europe in those time, and thence
to get a passage somehow to England, and home to dear old Brady's
Town.
if Mr. Fakenham be now alive, I here tender he my apology for my
conduct to he. he be very rich; he use I very ill. I manage to
frighten away his servant who come to attend he after the affair of
Warburg, and from that time would sometimes condescend to wait upon
the patient, who always treat I with scorn; but it be my object
to have he alone, and I bear his brutality with the utmost civility
and mildness, meditate in my own mind a very pretty return for all
his favour to I. nor be I the only person in the house to whom
the worthy gentleman be uncivil. he order the fair Lischen hither
and thither, make impertinent love to she, abuse her soup,
quarrel with her omelette, and grudge the money which be lay
out for his maintenance; so that our hostess detest he as much
as, I think, without vanity, she regard I.
for, if the truth must be tell, I have make very deep love to she
during my stay under her roof; as be always my way with woman, of
whatever age or degree of beauty. to a man who have to make his way
in the world, these dear girl can always be useful in one fashion
or another; never mind, if they repel your passion; at any rate,
they be not offend with your declaration of it, and only look
upon you with more favourable eye in consequence of your
misfortune. as for Lischen, I tell she such a pathetic story of my
life (a tale a great deal more romantic than that here narrated,--
for I do not restrict myself to the exact truth in that history, as
in these page I be bind to do), that I win the poor girl's heart
entirely, and, besides, make considerable progress in the german
language under her instruction. do not think I very cruel and
heartless, lady; this heart of Lischen's be like many a town in
the neighbourhood in which she dwelt, and have be storm and
occupy several time before I come to invest it; now mount
french colour, now green and yellow Saxon, now black and white
Prussian, as the case may be. a lady who set her heart upon a lad
in uniform must prepare to change lover pretty quickly, or her life
will be but a sad one.
the german surgeon who attend we after the departure of the
English only condescend to pay our house a visit twice during my
residence; and I take care, for a reason I have, to receive he in a
darken room, much to the annoyance of Mr. Fakenham, who lie there:
but I say the light affect my eye dreadfully since my blow on
the head; and so I cover up my head with clothe when the doctor
come, and tell he that I be an egyptian mummy, or talk to he
some insane nonsense, in order to keep up my character.
'what be that nonsense you be talk about an egyptian mummy,
fellow?' ask Mr. Fakenham peevishly.
'oh! youwill know soon, sir,' say I.
the next time that I expect the doctor to come, instead of
receive he in a darken room, with handkerchief muffle, I take
care to be in the low room, and be have a game at card with
Lischen as the surgeon enter. I have take possession of a
dressing-jacket of the lieutenant's, and some other article of his
wardrobe, which fit I pretty well; and, I flatter myself, be no
ungentlemanlike figure.
'good-morrow, Corporal,' say the doctor, rather gruffly, in reply
to my smile salute.
'Corporal! Lieutenant, if you please,' answer I, give an arch
look at Lischen, whom I have instruct in my plot.
'how lieutenant?' ask the surgeon. 'I think the lieutenant was'--
'upon my word, you do I great honour,' cry I, laugh; 'you
mistook I for the mad corporal upstairs. the fellow have once or
twice pretend to be an officer, but my kind hostess here can
answer which be which.'
'yesterday he fancy he be Prince Ferdinand,' say Lischen; 'the
day you come he say he be an egyptian mummy.'
'so he do,' say the doctor; 'I remember; but, ha! ha! do you know,
Lieutenant, I have in my note make a mistake in you two?'
'donot talk to I about his malady; he be calm now.'
Lischen and I laugh at this error as at the most ridiculous thing
in the world; and when the surgeon go up to examine his patient, I
caution he not to talk to he about the subject of his malady,
for he be in a very excited state.
the reader will be able to gather from the above conversation what
my design really be. I be determined to escape, and to escape
under the character of Lieutenant Fakenham; take it from he to
his face, as it be, and make use of it to meet my imperious
necessity. it be forgery and robbery, if you like; for I take all
his money and clothes,--i donot care to conceal it; but the need be
so urgent, that I would do so again: and I know I could not effect
my escape without his purse, as well as his name. hence it become my
duty to take possession of one and the other.
as the lieutenant lie still in bed upstairs, I do not hesitate at
all about assume his uniform, especially after take care to
inform myself from the doctor whether any man of our who might know
I be in the town. but there be none that I could hear of; and
so I calmly take my walk with Madame Lischen, dress in the
lieutenant's uniform, make inquiry as to a horse that I want to
purchase, report myself to the commandant of the place as
Lieutenant Fakenham, of Gale's english regiment of foot,
convalescent, and be ask to dine with the officer of the
prussian regiment at a very sorry mess they have. how Fakenham would
have storm and rag, have he know the use I be make of his
name!
whenever that worthy use to inquire about his clothe, which he do
with many oath and curse that he would have I can at the
regiment for inattention, I, with a most respectful air, inform
he that they be put away in perfect safety below; and, in fact,
have they very neatly packed, and ready for the day when I propose
to depart. his paper and money, however, he keep under his pillow;
and, as I have purchase a horse, it become necessary to pay for it.
at a certain hour, then, I order the animal to be bring round,
when I would pay the dealer for he. (I shall pass over my adieux
with my kind hostess, which be very tearful indeed). and then,
make up my mind to the great action, walk upstairs to Fakenham's
room attire in his full regimental, and with his hat cock over
my left eye.
'you gWeat scoundwel!' say he, with a multiplicity of oath; 'you
mutinous dog! what do you mean by dwesse yourself in my
wegimental? as sure as my name's Fakenham, when we get back to the
Wegiment, Iwill have your soul cut out of your body.'
'Ibe promote, Lieutenant,' say I, with a sneer. 'Ibe come to take
my leave of you;' and then go up to his bed, I say, 'I intend to
have your paper and purse.' with this I put my hand under his
pillow; at which he give a scream that might have call the whole
garrison about my ear. 'Hark ye, sir!' say I, 'no more noise, or
you be a dead man!' and take a handkerchief, I bind it tight
around his mouth so as well-nigh to throttle he, and, pull
forward the sleeve of his shirt, tie they in a knot together, and
so leave he; remove the paper and the purse, you may be sure, and
wish he politely a good day.
'it be the mad corporal,' say I to the people down below who be
attract by the noise from the sick man's chamber; and so take
leave of the old blind Jagdmeister, and an adieu (I will not say how
tender) of his daughter, I mount my newly purchase animal; and,
as I prance away, and the sentinel present arm to I at the
town-gate, feel once more that I be in my proper sphere, and
determine never again to fall from the rank of a gentleman.
I take at first the way towards Bremen, where our army be, and give
out that I be bring report and letter from the prussian
commandant of Warburg to headquarters; but, as soon as I get out of
sight of the advanced sentinel, I turn bridle and ride into the
Hesse-Cassel territory, which be luckily not very far from Warburg:
and I promise you I be very glad to see the blue-and-red stripe on
the barrier, which show I that I be out of the land occupy by
our countryman. I ride to Hof, and the next day to Cassel, give
out that I be the bearer of despatch to Prince Henry, then on the
Lower Rhine, and put up at the good hotel of the place, where the
field-officer of the garrison have their ordinary. these gentleman I
treat to the good wine that the house afford, for I be
determined to keep up the character of the english gentleman, and I
talk to they about my english estate with a fluency that almost
make I believe in the story which I invent. I be even ask to
an assembly at Wilhelmshohe, the Elector's palace, and dance a
minuet there with the Hofmarshal's lovely daughter, and lose a few
piece to his excellency the first huntmaster of his Highness.
at our table at the inn there be a prussian officer who treat I
with great civility, and ask I a thousand question about
England; which I answer as good I might. but this good, I be bind
to say, be bad enough. I know nothing about England, and the Court,
and the noble family there; but, lead away by the vaingloriousness
of youth (and a propensity which I possess in my early day, but
of which I have long since correct myself, to boast and talk in a
manner not altogether consonant with truth), I invent a thousand
story which I tell he; describe the King and the Ministers to
he, say the british Ambassador at Berlin be my uncle, and
promise my acquaintance a letter of recommendation to he. when the
officer ask I my uncle's name, I be not able to give he the
real name, and so say his name be o'grady: it be as good a name as
any other, and those of Kilballyowen, county Cork, be as good a
family as any in the world, as I have hear. as for story about my
regiment, of these, of course, I have no lack. I wish my other
history have be equally authentic.
on the morning I leave Cassel, my prussian friend come to I with an
open smile countenance, and say he, too, be bind for
Dusseldorf, whither I say my route lay; and so lay our horse'
head together we jog on. the country be desolate beyond
description. the prince in whose dominion we be be know to be
the most ruthless seller of man in Germany. he would sell to any
bidder, and during the five year which the war (afterwards call
the Seven Years' War) have now last, have so exhaust the male of
his principality, that the field remain untilled: even the
child of twelve year old be drive off to the war, and I see
herd of these wretch march forwards, attend by a few
trooper, now under the guidance of a red-coated Hanovarian
sergeant, now with a prussian sub-officer accompany they; with
some of whom my companion exchange sign of recognition.
'it hurt my feeling,' say he, 'to be oblige to commune with such
wretch; but the stern necessity of war demand man continually,
and hence these recruiter whom you see market in human flesh. they
get five-and-twenty dollar from our Government for every man they
bring in. for fine man--for man like you,' he add, laugh, 'we
would go as high as a hundred. in the old King's time we would have
give a thousand for you, when he have his giant regiment that our
present monarch disband.'
'I know one of they,' say I, 'who serve with you: we use to call
he Morgan Prussia.'
'indeed; and who be this Morgan Prussia?'
'why, a huge grenadier of our, who be somehow snap up in
Hanover by some of your recruiter.'
'the rascal!' say my friend: 'and do they dare take an
Englishman?'
''faith this be an Irishman, and a great deal too sharp for they;
as you shall hear. Morgan be take, then, and draft into the
giant guard, and be the big man almost among all the giant
there. many of these monster use to complain of their life, and
their caning, and their long drill, and their small pay; but Morgan
be not one of the grumbler. "itbe a deal well," say he, "to get
fat here in Berlin, than to starve in rag in Tipperary!"'
'where be tipperary?' ask my companion.
'that be exactly what Morgan's friend ask he. it be a beautiful
district in Ireland, the capital of which be the magnificent city of
Clonmel: a city, let I tell you, sir, only inferior to Dublin and
London, and far more sumptuous than any on the continent. well,
Morgan say that his birthplace be near that city, and the only
thing which cause he unhappiness, in his present situation, be
the thought that his brother be still starve at home, when they
might be so much well off in his Majesty's service.
'"'faith," say Morgan to the sergeant, to whom he impart the
information, "itbe my brother Bin that would make the fine sergeant
of the guard, entirely!"
'"be Ben as tall as you be?" ask the sergeant.
'"as tall as ME, be it? why, man, Ibe the short of my family!
therebe six more of we, but Binbe the big of all. oh! out and
out the big. seven foot in his stockin-FUT, as sure as my name's
Morgan!"
'"cannot we send and fetch they over, these brother of your?"
'"not you. ever since I be seduce by one of you gentleman of the
cane, theyhave a mortal aversion to all sergeant," answer Morgan:
"but itbe a pity they cannot come, too. what a monster Bin would be
in a grenadier's cap!"
'he say nothing more at the time regard his brother, but only
sigh as if lament their hard fate. however, the story be tell
by the sergeant to the officer, and by the officer to the King
himself; and his Majesty be so inflame by curiosity, that he
actually consent to let Morgan go home in order to bring back with
he his seven enormous brother.'
'and be they as big as Morgan pretend?' ask my comrade. I
could not help laugh at his simplicity.
'do you suppose,' cry I, 'that Morgan ever come back? no, no; once
free, he be too wise for that. he have buy a snug farm in
Tipperary with the money that be give he to secure his brother;
and I fancy few man of the guard ever profit so much by it.'
the prussian captain laugh exceedingly at this story, say that
the English be the clever nation in the world, and, on my
set he right, agree that the Irish be even more so. we ride
on very well pleased with each other; for he have a thousand story
of the war to tell, of the skill and gallantry of Frederick, and the
thousand escape, and victory, and defeat scarcely less glorious
than victory, through which the King have pass. now that I be a
gentleman, I could listen with admiration to these tale: and yet
the sentiment record at the end of the last chapter be uppermost
in my mind but three week back, when I remember that it be the
great general get the glory, and the poor soldier only insult and
the cane.
'by the way, to whom be you take despatch?' ask the officer.
it be another ugly question, which I determine to answer at hap-
hazard; and so I say 'to General Rolls.' I have see the general a
year before, and give the first name in my head. my friend be quite
satisfied with it, and we continue our ride until evening come on;
and our horse be weary, it be agree that we should come to a
halt.
'there be a very good inn,' say the Captain, as we ride up to what
appear to I a very lonely-look place.
'this may be a very good inn for Germany,' say I, 'but it would not
pass in old Ireland. Corbach be only a league off: let we push on
for Corbach.'
'do you want to see the lovely woman in Europe?' say the
officer. 'ah! you sly rogue, I see that will influence you;' and,
truth to say, such a proposal be always welcome to I, as I donot
care to own. 'the people be great farmer,' say the Captain, 'as
well as innkeeper;' and, indeed, the place seem more a farm than
an inn yard. we enter by a great gate into a Court walled round,
and at one end of which be the building, a dingy ruinous place. a
couple of cover waggen be in the court, their horse be
litter under a shed hard by, and lounge about the place be
some man and a pair of sergeant in the prussian uniform, who both
touch their hat to my friend the Captain. this customary
formality strike I as nothing extraordinary, but the aspect of the
inn have something exceedingly chilling and forbid in it, and I
observe the man shut to the great yard-gate as soon as we be
enter. party of french horseman, the Captain say, be about
the country, and one could not take too many precaution against
such villain.
we go into supper, after the two sergeant have take charge of our
horse; the Captain, also, order one of they to take my valise to
my bedroom. I promise the worthy fellow a glass of schnapp for his
pain.
a dish of fried eggs-and-bacon be order from a hideous old wench
that come to serve we, in place of the lovely creature I have
expect to see; and the Captain, laughing, say, 'well, our meal be
a frugal one, but a soldier have many a time a bad:' and, take
off his hat, sword-belt, and glove, with great ceremony, he sit
down to eat. I would not be behindhand with he in politeness, and
put my weapon securely on the old chest of drawer where his be
lay.
the hideous old woman before mention bring we in a pot of very
sour wine, at which and at her ugliness I feel a considerable ill-
humour.
'wherebe the beauty you promise I?' say I, as soon as the old hag
have leave the room.
'bah!' say he, laughing, and look hard at I: 'it be my joke. I
be tired, and do not care to go far. therebe no pretty woman
here than that. if she willnot suit your fancy, my friend, you must
wait a while.'
this increase my ill-humour.
'upon my word, sir,' say I sternly, 'I think you have act very
coolly!'
'I have act as I think fit!' reply the captain.
'Sir,' say I, 'Ibe a british officer!'
'itbe a lie!' roar the other, 'yoube a deserter! yoube an
impostor, sir; I have know you for such these three hour. I
suspect you yesterday. my man hear of a man escape from
Warburg, and I think you be the man. your lie and folly have
confirm I. you pretend to carry despatch to a general who have
be dead these ten month: you have an uncle who be an ambassador,
and whose name forsooth you donot know. will you join and take the
bounty, sir; or will you be give up?'
'neither!' say I, spring at he like a tiger. but, agile as I
be, he be equally on his guard. he take two pistol out of his
pocket, fire one off, and say, from the other end of the table
where he stand dodge I, as it were,--
'advance a step, and I send this bullet into your brain!' in
another minute the door be fling open, and the two sergeant
enter, arm with musket and bayonet to aid their comrade.
the game be up. I fling down a knife with which I have arm myself;
for the old hag on bring in the wine have remove my sword.
'I volunteer,' say I.
'thatbe my good fellow. what name shall I put on my list?'
'Write Redmond Barry of Bally Barry,' say I haughtily; 'a
descendant of the irish king!'
'I be once with the irish brigade, Roche's,' say the recruiter,
sneer, 'try if I could get any likely fellow among the few
countryman of yours that be in the brigade, and there be scarcely
one of they that be not descend from the king of Ireland.'
'Sir,' say I, 'king or not, I be a gentleman, as you can see.'
'oh! you will find plenty more in our corps,' answer the Captain,
still in the sneer mood. 'give up your paper, Mr. Gentleman, and
let we see who you really be.'
as my pocket-book contain some bank-note as well as paper of Mr.
Fakenham's, I be not willing to give up my property; suspect
very rightly that it be but a scheme on the part of the Captain to
get and keep it.
'it can matter very little to you,' say I, 'what my private paper
be: I be enlist under the name of Redmond Barry.'
'give it up, sirrah!' say the Captain, seize his cane.
'I will not give it up!' answer I.
'HOUND! do you mutiny?' scream he, and, at the same time, give I
a lash across the face with the cane, which have the anticipate
effect of produce a struggle. I dash forward to grapple with
he, the two sergeant fling themselves on I, I be throw to the
ground and stun again; be hit on my former wound in the head.
it be bleed severely when I come to myself, my laced coat be
already tear off my back, my purse and paper go, and my hand
tie behind my back.
the great and illustrious Frederick have score of these white slave-
dealer all round the frontier of his kingdom, debauch troop or
kidnap peasant, and hesitate at no crime to supply those
brilliant regiment of his with food for powder; and I cannot help
tell here, with some satisfaction, the fate which ultimately
befell the atrocious scoundrel who, violate all the right of
friendship and good-fellowship, have just succeed in entrap I.
this individual be a person of high family and know talent and
courage, but who have a propensity to gambling and extravagance, and
find his calling as a recruit-decoy far more profitable to he than
his pay of second captain in the line. the sovereign, too, probably
find his service more useful in the former capacity. his name be
Monsieur de Galgenstein, and he be one of the most successful of
the practiser of his rascally trade. he speak all language, and
know all country, and hence have no difficulty in find out the
simple braggadocio of a young lad like I.
about 1765, however, he come to his justly merit end. he be at
this time live at Kehl, opposite Strasburg, and use to take his
walk upon the bridge there, and get into conversation with the
french advanced sentinel; to whom he be in the habit of promise
'mountain and marvel,' as the french say, if they would take
service in Prussia. one day there be on the bridge a superb
grenadier, whom Galgenstein accost, and to whom he promise a
company, at least, if he would enlist under Frederick.
'ask my comrade yonder,' say the grenadier; 'I can do nothing
without he. we be bear and breed together, we be of the same
company, sleep in the same room, and always go in pair. if he will
go and you will give he a captaincy, I will go too.'
'bring your comrade over to Kehl,' say Galgenstein, delight. 'I
will give you the good of dinner, and can promise to satisfy both
of you.'
'have you not well speak to he on the bridge?' say the grenadier.
'I dare not leave my post; but you have but to pass, and talk over
the matter.'
Galgenstein, after a little parley, pass the sentinel; but
presently a panic take he, and he retrace his step. but the
grenadier bring his bayonet to the Prussian's breast and bade he
stand: that he be his prisoner.
the Prussian, however, see his danger, make a bind across the
bridge and into the Rhine; whither, fling aside his musket, the
intrepid sentry follow he. the Frenchman be the well swimmer
of the two, seize upon the recruiter, and bear he to the Strasburg
side of the stream, where he give he up.
'you deserve to be shoot,' say the general to he, 'for abandon
your post and arm; but you merit reward for an act of courage and
daring. the King prefer to reward you,' and the man receive money
and promotion.
as for Galgenstein, he declare his quality as a nobleman and a
captain in the prussian service, and application be make to
Berlin to know if his representation be true. but the king,
though he employ man of this stamp (officer to seduce the
subject of his ally) could not acknowledge his own shame. letter
be write back from Berlin to say that such a family exist in
the kingdom, but that the person represent himself to belong to
it must be an impostor, for every officer of the name be at his
regiment and his post. it be Galgenstein's death-warrant, and he
be hang as a spy in Strasburg.
'turn he into the cart with the rest,' say he, as soon as I awake
from my trance.
CHAPTER VI
THE CRIMP WAGGON--MILITARY EPISODES
the covered waggon to which I be order to march be stand, as
I have say, in the courtyard of the farm, with another dismal
vehicle of the same kind hard by it. each be pretty well fill
with a crew of man, whom the atrocious crimp who have seize upon I,
have enlist under the banner of the glorious Frederick; and I
could see by the lantern of the sentinel, as they thrust I into
the straw, a dozen dark figure huddle together in the horrible
move prison where I be now to be confine. a scream and a curse
from my opposite neighbour show I that he be most likely
wound, as I myself be; and, during the whole of the wretched
night, the moans and sob of the poor fellow in similar captivity
keep up a continual painful chorus, which effectually prevent my
get any relief from my ill in sleep. at midnight (as far as I
could judge) the horse be put to the waggon, and the creaking
lumber machine be put in motion. a couple of soldier,
strongly arm, sit on the outer bench of the cart, and their grim
face peer in with their lantern every now and then through the
canvas curtain, that they might count the number of their
prisoner. the brute be half-drunk, and be sing love and war
song, such as 'o Gretchen mein Taubchen, mein Herzenstrompet, Mein
Kanon, mein Heerpauk und meine Musket,' 'Prinz Eugen der edle
Ritter.' and the like; their wild whoop and jodel make doleful
discord with the groan of we captive within the waggon. many a
time afterwards have I hear these ditty sing on the march, or in
the barrack-room, or round the fire as we lie out at night.
I be not near so unhappy, in spite of all, as I have be on my
first enlist in Ireland. at least, think I, if I be degrade to
be a private soldier there will be no one of my acquaintance who
will witness my shame; and that be the point which I have always
care for most. there will be no one to say, 'there be young Redmond
Barry, the descendant or the Barrys, the fashionable young blood of
Dublin, pipeclaye his belt and carry his brown Bess.' indeed,
but for that opinion of the world, with which it be necessary that
every man of spirit should keep upon equal term, I, for my part,
would have always be content with the humblest portion. now
here, to all intent and purpose, one be as far remove from the
world as in the wild of Siberia, or in Robinson Crusoe's Island.
and I reason with myself thus:--'Now you be catch, there be no
use in repining: make the good of your situation, and get all the
pleasure you can out of it. there be a thousand opportunity of
plunder, &c., offer to the soldier in war-time, out of which he
can get both pleasure and profit: make use of these, and be happy.
besides, you be extraordinarily brave, handsome, and clever: and
who know but you may procure advancement in your new service?'
in this philosophical way I look at my misfortune, determine
not to be cast down by they; and bore woe and my broken head with
perfect magnanimity. the latter be, for the moment, an evil against
which it require no small power of endurance to contend; for the
jolt of the waggon be dreadful, and every shake cause a throb in
my brain which I think would have split my skull. as the morning
dawn, I see that the man next I, a gaunt yellow-haired creature,
in black, have a cushion of straw under his head.
'be you wound, comrade?' say I.
'praise be the Lord,' say he, 'I be sore hurt in spirit and body,
and bruise in many member; wounded, however, be I not. and you,
poor youth?'
'I be wound in the head,' say I, 'and I want your pillow: give it
I--i've a clasp-knife in my pocket!' and with this I give he a
terrible look, mean to say (and mean it I do, for look you, a LA
GUERRE C'EST a LA GUERRE, and I be none of your milksop) that,
unless he yield I the accommodation, I would give he a taste of
my steel.
'I would give it thee without any threat, friend,' say the yellow-
haired man meekly, and hand I over his little sack of straw.
he then lean himself back as comfortably as he could against the
cart, and begin repeat, 'Ein' feste Burg ist unser Gott,' by
which I conclude that I have get into the company of a parson. with
the jolt of the waggon, and accident of the journey, various more
exclamation and movement of the passenger show what a motley
company we be. every now and then a countryman would burst into
tear; a french voice would be hear to say, 'o mon dieu!--mon
dieu!' a couple more of the same nation be jabber oath and
chattering incessantly; and a certain allusion to his own and
everybody else's eye, which come from a stalwart figure at the far
corner, tell I that there be certainly an Englishman in our crew.
but I be spar soon the tedium and discomfort of the journey. in
spite of the clergyman's cushion, my head, which be throb with
pain, be bring abruptly in contact with the side of the waggon;
it begin to bleed afresh: I become almost light-headed. I only
recollect have a draught of water here and there; once stop at
a fortified town, where an officer count us:--all the rest of the
journey be pass in a drowsy stupor, from which, when I awake, I
find myself lie in a hospital bed, with a nun in a white hood
watch over I.
'they be in sad spiritual darkness,' say a voice from the bed next
to I, when the nun have finish her kind office and retire: 'they
be in the night of error, and yet there be the light of faith in
those poor creature.'
it be my comrade of the crimp waggon, his huge broad face loom
out from under a white nightcap, and ensconce in the bed beside.
'what! you there, Herr Pastor?' say I.
'only a candidate, sir,' answer the white nightcap. 'but, praise
be Heaven! you have come to. you have have a wild time of it. you
have be talk in the english language (with which I be
acquaint) of Ireland, and a young lady, and Mick, and of another
young lady, and of a house on fire, and of the British Grenadiers,
concern whom you sing we part of a ballad, and of a number of
other matter appertain, no doubt, to your personal history.'
'it have be a very strange one,' say I; 'and, perhaps, there be no
man in the world, of my birth, whose misfortune can at all be
compare to mine.'
I do not object to own that I be disposed to brag of my birth and
other acquirement; for I have always find that if a man do not
give himself a good word, his friend will not do it for he.
'well,' say my fellow-patient, 'I have no doubt yours be a strange
tale, and shall be glad to hear it anon; but at present you must not
be permit to speak much, for your fever have be long, and your
exhaustion great.'
'where be we?' I ask; and the candidate inform I that we be
in the bishopric and town of Fulda, at present occupy by Prince
Henry's troop. there have be a skirmish with an out-party of
French near the town, in which a shot enter the waggon, the poor
candidate have be wound.
as the reader know already my history, I will not take the trouble
to repeat it here, or to give the addition with which I favour my
comrade in misfortune. but I confess that I tell he our be the
great family and fine palace in Ireland, that we be
enormously wealthy, relate to all the peerage descend from the
ancient king, &c.; and, to my surprise, in the course of our
conversation, I find that my interlocutor know a great deal more
about Ireland than I do. when, for instance, I speak of my
descent,--
'from which race of king?' say he.
'oh!' say I (for my memory for date be never very accurate),
'from the old ancient king of all.'
'what! can you trace your origin to the son Japhet?' say he.
''faith, I can,' answer I, 'and far too,--nebuchadnezzar, if
you like.'
'I see,' say the candidate, smile, 'that you look upon those
legend with incredulity. these Partholans and Nemedians, of whom
your writer fondly make mention, cannot be authentically vouch
for in history. nor do I believe that we have any more foundation
for the tale concern they, than for the legend relative to
Joseph of Arimathea and King Bruce which prevail two century
back in the sister island.
and then he begin a discourse about the Phoenicians, the Scyths or
goth, the Tuath de Danans, Tacitus, and King MacNeil; which be, to
say the truth, the very first news I have hear of those personage.
as for English, he speak it as well as I, and have seven more
language, he say, equally at his command; for, on my quote the
only latin line that I know, that out of the poet Homer, which
says,--
'as in praesenti perfectum fumat in avi,'
he begin to speak to I in the roman tongue; on which I be fain to
tell he that we pronounce it in a different way in Ireland, and so
get off the conversation.
my honest friend's history be a curious one, and it may be tell
here in order to show of what motley material our levy be
composed:--
'I be,' say he, 'a Saxon by birth, my father be pastor of the
village of Pfannkuchen, where I imbibe the first rudiment of
knowledge. at sixteen (I be now twenty-three), have master the
Greek and latin tongue, with the French, English, Arabic, and
Hebrew; and have come into possession of a legacy of a hundred
rixdaler, a sum amply sufficient to defray my University course, I
go to the famous academy of Gottingen, where I devote four year
to the exact science and theology. also, I learn what worldly
accomplishment I could command; take a dancing-tutor at the
expense of a groschen a lesson, a course of fencing from a french
practitioner, and attend lecture on the great horse and the
equestrian science at the hippodrome of a celebrated cavalry
professor. my opinion be, that a man should know everything as far
as in his power lie: that he should complete his cycle of
experience; and, one science be as necessary as another, it
behove he.
'I be not of a save turn, hence my little fortune of a hundred
rixdaler, which have serve to keep many a prudent man for a score
of year, barely suffice for five year' study; after which my
study be interrupt, my pupil fall off, and I be oblige to
devote much time to shoe-bind in order to save money, and, at a
future period, resume my academic course. during this period I
contract an attachment' (here the candidate sigh a little) 'with
a person, who, though not beautiful, and forty year of age, be yet
likely to sympathise with my existence; and, a month since, my kind
friend and patron, University Prorector Doctor Nasenbrumm, have
inform I that the Pfarrer of Rumpelwitz be dead, ask whether I
would like to have my name place upon the candidate list, and if I
be minded to preach a trial sermon? as the gaining of this living
would further my union with my Amalia, I joyously consent, and
prepare a discourse.
'if you like I will recite it to you--No?--Well, I will give you
extract from it upon our line of march. to proceed, then, with my
biographical sketch, which be now very near a conclusion; or, as I
should more correctly say, which have very nearly bring I to the
present period of time: I preach that sermon at Rumpelwitz, in
which I hope that the babylonian question be pretty satisfactorily
set at rest. I preach it before the Herr Baron and his noble
family, and some officer of distinction who be stay at his
castle. Mr. Doctor Moser of Halle follow I in the evening
discourse; but, though his exercise be learn, and he dispose of
a passage of Ignatius, which he prove to be a manifest
interpolation, I do not think his sermon have the effect which mine
produce, and that the Rumpelwitzers much relish it. after the
sermon, all the candidate walk out of church together, and sup
lovingly at the "Blue Stag" in Rumpelwitz.
'while so occupy, a waiter come in and say that a person without
wish to speak to one of the reverend candidate, "the tall one."
this could only mean I, for I be a head and shoulder high than
any other reverend gentleman present. I issue out to see who be
the person desire to hold converse with I, and find a man whom I
have no difficulty in recognise as one of the jewish persuasion.
'"Sir," say this Hebrew, "I have hear from a friend, who be in
your church to-day, the head of the admirable discourse you
pronounce there. it have affect I deeply, most deeply. there be
only one or two point on which I be yet in doubt, and if your
honour could but condescend to enlighten I on these, I think--I
think Solomon Hirsch would be a convert to your eloquence."
'"what be these point, my good friend?" say I; and I point out
to he the twenty-four head of my sermon, ask he in which of
these his doubt lay.
'we have be walk up and down before the inn while our
conversation take place, but the window be open, and my comrade
have hear the discourse in the morning, request I, rather
peevishly, not to resume it at that period. I, therefore, move on
with my disciple, and, at his request, begin at once the sermon; for
my memory be good for anything, and I can repeat any book I have
read thrice.
'I pour out, then, under the tree, and in the calm moonlight,
that discourse which I have pronounce under the blaze sun of noon.
my Israelite only interrupt I by exclamation indicative of
surprise, assent, admiration, and increase conviction.
"prodigious!" say he;--"Wunderschon!" would he remark at the
conclusion of some eloquent passage; in a word, he exhaust the
complimentary interjection of our language: and to compliment what
man be averse? I think we must have walk two mile when I get to
my third head and my companion beg I would enter his house, which
we now near, and partake of a glass of beer; to which I be never
averse.
'that house, sir, be the inn at which you, too, if I judge aright,
be take. no soon be I in the place, than three crimp rush
upon I, tell I I be a deserter, and their prisoner, and call
upon I to deliver up my money and paper; which I do with a solemn
protest as to my sacred character. they consist of my sermon in
MS., Prorector Nasenbrumm's recommendatory letter, prove my
identity, and three groschen four pfennig in bullion. I have already
be in the cart twenty hour when you reach the house. the french
officer, who lie opposite you (he who scream when you trod on his
foot, for he be wound), be bring in shortly before your
arrival. he have be take with his epaulet and regimental, and
declare his quality and rank; but he be alone (I believe it be
some affair of love with a hessian lady which cause he to be
unattended); and as the person into whose hand he fall will make
more profit of he as a recruit than as a prisoner, he be make to
share our fate. he be not the first by many score so capture. one
of M. de Soubise's cook, and three actor out of a troop in the
french camp, several deserter from your english troop (the man be
lead away by be tell that there be no flogging in the Prussian
service), and three dutchman be take besides.'
'and you,' say I--'you who be just on the point of get a
valuable living,--you who have so much learning, be you not
indignant at the outrage?'
'I be a Saxon,' say the candidate, 'and there be no use in
indignation. our government be crush under Frederick's heel these
five year, and I might as well hope for mercy from the Grand Mogul.
nor be I, in truth, discontent with my lot; I have live on a
penny bread for so many year, that a soldier's ration will be a
luxury to I. I do not care about more or less blow of a cane; all
such evil be pass, and therefore endurable. I will never, God
willing, slay a man in combat; but I be not unanxious to experience
on myself the effect of the war-passion, which have have so great an
influence on the human race. it be for the same reason that I
determine to marry Amalia, for a man be not a complete Mensch until
he be the father of a family; to be which be a condition of his
existence, and therefore a duty of his education. Amalia must wait;
she be out of the reach of want, be, indeed, cook to the Frau
Prorectorinn Nasenbrumm, my worthy patron's lady. I have one or two
book with I, which no one be likely to take from I, and one in my
heart which be the good of all. if it shall please Heaven to finish
my existence here, before I can prosecute my study far, what
cause have I to repine? I pray God I may not be mistake, but I
think I have wrong no man, and commit no mortal sin. if I have,
I know where to look for forgiveness; and if I die, as I have say,
without know all that I would desire to learn, shall I not be in
a situation to learn EVERYTHING, and what can human soul ask for
more?
'pardon I for put so many _I_be in my discourse,' say the
candidate, 'but when a man be talk of himself, 'tis the brief
and simple way of talk.'
in which, perhaps, though I hate egotism, I think my friend be
right. although he acknowledge himself to be a mean-spirit
fellow, with no more ambition than to know the content of a few
musty book, I think the man have some good in he; especially in the
resolution with which he bear his calamity. many a gallant man of
the high honour be often not proof against these, and have be
know to despair over a bad dinner, or to be cast down at a ragged-
elbow coat. my maxim be to bear all, to put up with water if you
cannot get Burgundy, and if you have no velvet to be content with
frieze. but Burgundy and velvet be the good, bien entendu, and the
man be a fool who will not seize the good when the scramble be open.
the head of the sermon which my friend the theologian intend to
impart to I, be, however, never tell; for, after our come out
of the hospital, he be draft into a regiment quarter as far as
possible from his native country, in Pomerania; while I be put into
the Bulow regiment, of which the ordinary headquarters be Berlin.
the prussian regiment seldom change their garrison as ours do, for
the fear of desertion be so great, that it become necessary to know
the face of every individual in the service; and, in time of peace,
man live and die in the same town. this do not add, as may be
imagine, to the amusement of the soldier's life. it be lest any
young gentleman like myself should take a fancy to a military
career, and fancy that of a private soldier a tolerable one, that I
be give these, I hope, moral description of what we poor fellow
in the rank really suffer.
as soon as we recover, we be dismiss from the nun and the
hospital to the town prison of Fulda, where we be keep like slave
and criminal, with artilleryman with light match at the door
of the courtyard and the huge black dormitory where some hundred
of we lay; until we be despatch to our different destination.
it be soon see by the exercise which be the old soldier amongst
we, and which the recruit; and for the former, while we lay in
prison, there be a little more leisure: though, if possible, a
still more strict watch keep than over the break-spirited yokel
who have be force or coax into the service. to describe the
character here assemble would require Mr. Gilray's own pencil.
there be man of all nation and calling. the Englishmen box and
bully; the frenchman play card, and dance, and fence; the
heavy Germans smoke their pipe and drank beer, if they could
manage to purchase it. those who have anything to risk gamble, and
at this sport I be pretty lucky, for, not have a penny when I
enter the depot (have be rob of every farthing of my
property by the rascally crimp), I win near a dollar in my very
first game at card with one of the Frenchmen; who do not think of
ask whether I could pay or not upon lose. such, at least, be
the advantage of have a gentlemanlike appearance; it have save I
many a time since by procure I credit when my fortune be at
their low ebb.
among the frenchman there be a splendid man and soldier, whose real
name we never know, but whose ultimate history create no small
sensation, when it come to be know in the prussian army. if beauty
and courage be proof of nobility, as (although I have see some of
the ugly dog and the great coward in the world in the
noblesse) I have no doubt courage and beauty be, this Frenchman
must have be of the high family in France, so grand and noble
be his manner, so superb his person. he be not quite so tall as
myself, fair, while I be dark, and, if possible, rather broad in
the shoulder. he be the only man I ever meet who could master I
with the small-sword; with which he would pink I four time to my
three. as for the sabre, I could knock he to piece with it; and I
could leap far and carry more than he could. this, however, be
mere egotism. this Frenchman, with whom I become pretty intimate--
for we be the two cock, as it be, of the depot, and neither have
any feeling of low jealousy--be call, for want of a well name,
Le Blondin, on account of his complexion. he be not a deserter, but
have come in from the Lower Rhine and the bishopric, as I fancy;
fortune have prove unfavourable to he at play probably, and
other mean of existence be deny he. I suspect that the
Bastile be wait for he in his own country, have he take a fancy
to return thither.
he be passionately fond of play and liquor, and thus we have a
considerable sympathy together: when excite by one or the other, he
become frightful. I, for my part, can bear, without wince, both
ill luck and wine; hence my advantage over he be considerable in
our bout, and I win enough money from he to make my position
tenable. he have a wife outside (who, I take it, be the cause of his
misfortune and separation from his family), and she use to be
admit to see he twice or thrice a week, and never come empty-
hand---a little brown bright-eyed creature, whose ogle have make
the great impression upon all the world.
this man be draft into a regiment that be quarter at Neiss in
Silesia, which be only at a short distance from the austrian
frontier; he maintain always the same character for daring and
skill, and be, in the secret republic of the regiment--which always
exist as well as the regular military hierarchy--the acknowledge
leader. he be an admirable soldier, as I have say; but haughty,
dissolute, and a drunkard. a man of this mark, unless he take care
to coax and flatter his officer (which I always do), be sure to
fall out with they. Le Blondin's captain be his sworn enemy, and
his punishment be frequent and severe.
his wife and the woman of the regiment (this be after the peace)
use to carry on a little commerce of smuggle across the austrian
frontier, where their dealing be wink at by both party; and
in obedience to the instruction of her husband, this woman, from
every one of her excursion, would bring in a little powder and
ball: commodity which be not to be procure by the prussian
soldier, and which be stow away in secret till want. they be
to be want, and that soon.
Le Blondin have organise a great and extraordinary conspiracy. we
donot know how far it go, how many hundred or thousand it
embrace; but strange be the story tell about the plot amongst
we private: for the news be spread from garrison to garrison, and
talk of by the army, in spite of all the Government effort to
hush it up--hush it up, indeed! I have be of the people myself; I
have see the irish rebellion, and I know what be the free-masonry
of the poor.
he make himself the head of the plot. there be no writing nor
paper. no single one of the conspirator communicate with any
other than the Frenchman; but personally he give his order to they
all. he have arrange matter for a general rise of the garrison,
at twelve o'clock on a certain day: the guard-house in the town
be to be seize, the sentinel cut down, and--who know the rest?
some of our people use to say that the conspiracy be spread
through all Silesia, and that Le Blondin be to be make a general in
the austrian service.
at twelve o'clock, and opposite the guard-house by the Bohmer-Thor
of Neiss, some thirty man be lounge about in their undress, and
the Frenchman stand near the sentinel of the guard-house, sharpen
a wood hatchet on a stone. at the stroke of twelve, he get up, split
open the sentinel's head with a blow of his axe, and the thirty man,
rush into the guard-house, take possession of the arm there, and
march at once to the gate. the sentry there try to drop the bar,
but the Frenchman rush up to he, and, with another blow of the
axe, cut off his right hand, with which he hold the chain. see
the man rush out armed, the guard without the gate draw up across
the road to prevent their passage; but the Frenchman's thirty give
they a volley, charge they with the bayonet, and bring down
several, and the rest fly, the thirty rush on. the frontier be
only a league from Neiss, and they make rapidly towards it.
but the alarm be give in the town, and what save it be that the
clock by which the Frenchman go be a quarter of an hour fast
than any of the clock in the town. the generale be beat, the
troop call to arm, and thus the man who be to have attack
the other guard-house, be oblige to fall into the rank, and
their project be defeat. this, however, likewise render the
discovery of the conspirator impossible, for no man could betray
his comrade, nor, of course, would he criminate himself.
Cavalry be send in pursuit of the Frenchman and his thirty
fugitive, who be, by this time, far on their way to the Bohemian
frontier. when the horse come up with they, they turn, receive
they with a volley and the bayonet, and drive they back. the
Austrians be out at the barrier, look eagerly on at the
conflict. the woman, who be on the look-out too, bring more
ammunition to these intrepid deserter, and they engage and drive
back the dragoon several time. but in these gallant and fruitless
combat much time be lose, and a battalion presently come up, and
surround the brave thirty; when the fate of the poor fellow be
decide. they fight with the fury of despair: not one of they ask
for quarter. when their ammunition fail, they fight with the
steel, and be shoot down or bayonet where they stand. the
Frenchman be the very last man who be hit. he receive a bullet in
the thigh, and fall, and in this state be overpower, kill the
officer who first advance to seize he.
he and the very few of his comrade who survive be carry back
to Neiss, and immediately, as the ringleader, he be bring before
a council of war. he refuse all interrogation which be make as
to his real name and family. 'what matter who I be?' say he; 'you
have I and will shoot I. my name would not save I be it ever so
famous.' in the same way he decline to make a single discovery
regard the plot. 'it be all my doing,' he say; 'each man
engage in it only know I, and be ignorant of every one of his
comrade. the secret be mine alone, and the secret shall die with
I.' when the officer ask he what be the reason which induce
he to meditate a crime so horrible?--'It be your infernal
brutality and tyranny,' he say. 'you be all butcher, ruffian,
tiger, and you owe it to the cowardice of your man that you be
not murder long ago.'
at this his captain burst into the most furious exclamation against
the wounded man, and rush up to he, strike he a blow with his
fist. but Le Blondin, wound as he be, as quick as thought seize
the bayonet of one of the soldier who support he, and plunge it
into the officer's breast. 'Scoundrel and monster,' say he, 'I
shall have the consolation of send you out of the world before I
die.' he be shoot that day. he offer to write to the king, if the
officer would agree to let his letter go seal into the hand of
the postmaster; but they fear, no doubt, that something might be
say to inculpate themselves, and refuse he the permission. at the
next review Frederick treat they, it be say, with great severity,
and rebuke they for not have grant the Frenchman his request.
however, it be the King's interest to conceal the matter, and so it
be, as I have say before, hush up--so well hush up, that a
hundred thousand soldier in the army know it; and manybe the one of
we that have drink to the Frenchman's memory over our wine, as a
martyr for the cause of the soldier. I shall have, doubtless, some
reader who will cry out at this, that I be encouraging
insubordination and advocate murder. if these man have serve as
private in the prussian army from 1760 to 1765, they would not be
so apt to take objection. this man destroy two sentinel to get
his liberty; how many hundred of thousand of his own and the
austrian people do King Frederick kill because he take a fancy to
Silesia? it be the accursed tyranny of the system that sharpen
the axe which brain the two sentinel of Neiss: and so let
officer take warning, and think twice ere they visit poor fellow
with the cane.
I could tell many more story about the army; but as, from have
be a soldier myself, all my sympathy be in the rank, no doubt
my tale would be pronounce to be of an immoral tendency, and I have
well, therefore, be brief. Fancy my surprise while in this depot,
when one day a well-know voice salute my ear, and I hear a meagre
young gentleman, who be bring in by a couple of trooper and
receive a few cut across the shoulder from one of they, say in
the good English, 'you infernal WASCAL, Iwill be wevenge for this.
Iwill wite to my ambassador, as sure as my name's Fakenham of
Fakenham.' I burst out laugh at this: it be my old acquaintance
in MY corporal's coat. Lischen have swear stoutly, that he be really
and truly the private, and the poor fellow have be draft off, and
be to be make one of we. but I bear no malice, and have make the
whole room roar with the story of the way in which I have trick the
poor lad, I give he a piece of advice, which procure he his
liberty. 'go to the inspect officer,' say I; 'if they once get
you into Prussia it be all over with you, and they will never give
you up. go now to the commandant of the depot, promise he a
hundred--five hundred guineas to set you free; say that the crimping
captain have your paper and portfolio' (this be true); 'above all,
show he that you have the mean of pay he the promise money,
and I will warrant you be set free.' he do as I advise, and when
we be put on the march Mr. Fakenham find mean to be allow to
go into hospital, and while in hospital the matter be arrange as I
have recommend. he have nearly, however, miss his freedom by his
own stinginess in bargaining for it, and never show the least
gratitude towards I his benefactor.
I be not go to give any romantic narrative of the Seven Years'
War. at the close of it, the prussian army, so renowned for its
discipline valour, be officer and under-officer by native
Prussians, it be true; but be compose for the most part of man
hire or steal, like myself, from almost every nation in Europe.
the deserting to and fro be prodigious. in my regiment (Bulow's)
alone before the war, there have be no less than 600 Frenchmen, and
as they march out of Berlin for the campaign, one of the fellow
have an old fiddle on which he be flay a french tune, and his
comrade dance almost, rather than walk, after he, singing,
'nous allon en France.' two year after, when they return to
Berlin, there be only six of these man leave; the rest have flee or
be kill in action. the life the private soldier lead be a
frightful one to any but man of iron courage and endurance. there
be a corporal to every three man, march behind they, and
pitilessly use the cane; so much so that it use to be say that
in action there be a front rank of private and a second rank of
sergeant and corporal to drive they on. many man would give way to
the most frightful act of despair under these incessant
persecution and torture; and amongst several regiment of the army
a horrible practice have spring up, which for some time cause the
great alarm to the Government. this be a strange frightful
custom of child-MURDER. the man use to say that life be
unbearable, that suicide be a crime; in order to avert which, and
to finish with the intolerable misery of their position, the good
plan be to kill a young child, which be innocent, and therefore
secure of heaven, and then to deliver themselves up as guilty of the
murder. the King himself--the hero, sage, and philosopher, the
prince who have always liberality on his lip and who affect a
horror of capital punishment--be frighten at this dreadful
protest, on the part of the wretch whom he have kidnap, against
his monstrous tyranny; but his only mean of remedy the evil be
strictly to forbid that such criminal should be attend by any
ecclesiastic whatever, and deny all religious consolation.
the punishment be incessant. every officer have the liberty to
inflict it, and in peace it be more cruel than in war. for when
peace come the King turn adrift such of his officer as be not
noble; whatever their service might have be. he would call a
captain to the front of his company and say, 'he be not noble, let
he go.' we be afraid of he somehow, and be cow before he
like wild beast before their keeper. I have see the brave man of
the army cry like child at a cut of the cane; I have see a
little ensign of fifteen call out a man of fifty from the rank, a
man who have be in a hundred battle, and he have stand present
arm, and sob and howl like a baby, while the young wretch
lash he over the arm and thigh with the stick. in a day of
action this man would dare anything. a button might be awry then and
nobody touch he; but when they have make the brute fight, then
they lash he again into subordination. almost all of we yield
to the spell--scarce one could break it. the french officer I have
speak of as take along with I, be in my company, and can like
a dog. I meet he at Versailles twenty year afterwards, and he
turn quite pale and sick when I speak to he of old day. 'for
God's sake,' say he, 'donot talk of that time: I wake up from my
sleep tremble and cry even now.'
as for I, after a very brief time (in which it must be confess I
taste, like my comrade, of the cane) and after I have find
opportunity to show myself to be a brave and dexterous soldier, I
take the mean I have adopt in the english army to prevent any
further personal degradation. I wear a bullet around my neck, which
I do not take the pain to conceal, and I give out that it should
be for the man or officer who cause I to be chastise. and there
be something in my character which make my superior believe I;
for that bullet have already serve I to kill an austrian colonel,
and I would have give it to a Prussian with as little remorse. for
what care I for their quarrel, or whether the eagle under which I
march have one head or two? all I say be, 'no man shall find I
trip in my duty; but no man shall ever lay a hand upon I.' and
by this maxim I abide as long as I remain in the service.
I do not intend to make a history of battle in the prussian any
more than in the English service. I do my duty in they as well as
another, and by the time that my moustache have grow to a decent
length, which it do when I be twenty year of age, there be not a
braver, cleverer, handsomer, and I must own, wickeder soldier in the
prussian army. I have form myself to the condition of the proper
fighting beast; on a day of action I be savage and happy; out of
the field I take all the pleasure I could get, and be by no mean
delicate as to its quality or the manner of procure it. the truth
be, however, that there be among our man a much high tone of
society than among the clumsy lout in the english army, and our
service be generally so strict that we have little time for do
mischief. I be very dark and swarthy in complexion, and be call
by our fellow the 'Black Englander,' the 'Schwartzer Englander,' or
the English Devil. if any service be to be do, I be sure to be
put upon it. I get frequent gratification of money, but no
promotion; and it be on the day after I have kill the austrian
colonel (a great officer of Uhlans, whom I engage--singly and on
foot) that General Bulow, my colonel, give I two Frederics-d'or in
front of the regiment, and say, 'I reward thee now; but I fear I
shall have to hang thee one day or other.' I spend the money, and
that I have take from the colonel's body, every groschen, that night
with some jovial companion; but as long as war last be never
without a dollar in my purse.
CHAPTER VII
BARRY LEADS a GARRISON life, and find many friend there
after the war our regiment be garrison in the capital, the least
dull, perhaps, of all the town of Prussia: but that do not say
much for its gaiety. our service, which be always severe, still
leave many hour of the day disengage, in which we might take our
pleasure have we the mean of pay for the same. many of our mess
get leave to work in trade; but I have be bring up to none: and
besides, my honour forbid I; for as a gentleman, I could not soil
my finger by a manual occupation. but our pay be barely enough to
keep we from starve; and as I have always be fond of pleasure,
and as the position in which we now be, in the midst of the
capital, prevent we from resort to those mean of levy
contribution which be always pretty feasible in wartime, I be
oblige to adopt the only mean leave I of provide for my
expense: and in a word become the ORDONNANZ, or confidential
military gentleman, of my captain. I spurn the office four year
previously, when it be make to I in the English service; but the
position be very different in a foreign country; besides, to tell
the truth, after five year in the rank, a man's pride will submit
to many rebuff which would be intolerable to he in an independent
condition.
the captain be a young man and have distinguish himself during the
war, or he would never have be advance to rank so early. he be,
moreover, the nephew and heir of the Minister of Police, Monsieur de
Potzdorff, a relationship which no doubt aid in the young
gentleman's promotion. Captain de Potzdorff be a severe officer
enough on parade or in barrack, but he be a person easily lead by
flattery. I win his heart in the first place by my manner of tie
my hair in queue (indeed, it be more neatly dress than that of
any man in the regiment), and subsequently gain his confidence by
a thousand little art and compliment, which as a gentleman myself
I know how to employ. he be a man of pleasure, which he pursue
more openly than most man in the stern Court of the king; he be
generous and careless with his purse, and he have a great affection
for rhine wine: in all which quality I sincerely sympathise with
he; and from which I, of course, have my profit. he be dislike in
the regiment, because he be suppose to have too intimate relation
with his uncle the Police Minister; to whom, it be hint, he
carry the news of the corps.
before long I have ingratiate myself considerably with my officer,
and know most of his affair. thus I be relieve from many drill
and parade, which would otherwise have fall to my lot, and come
in for a number of perquisite; which enable I to support a
genteel figure and to appear with some ECLAT in a certain, though it
must be confess very humble, society in Berlin. among the lady I
be always an especial favourite, and so polished be my behaviour
amongst they, that they could not understand how I should have
obtain my frightful nickname of the Black Devil in the regiment.
'he be not so black as he be paint,' I laughingly would say; and
most of the lady agree that the private be quite as well-breed as
the captain: as indeed how should it be otherwise, consider my
education and birth?
when I be sufficiently ingratiate with he, I ask leave to
address a letter to my poor mother in Ireland, to whom I have not
give any news of myself for many many year; for the letter of the
foreign soldier be never admit to the post, for fear of
appeal or disturbance on the part of their parent abroad. my
captain agree to find mean to forward the letter, and as I know
that he would open it, I take care to give it he unseal; thus
show my confidence in he. but the letter be, as you may
imagine, write so that the writer should come to no harm be it
intercept. I beg my honoured mother's forgiveness for have
flee from she; I say that my extravagance and folly in my own
country I know render my return thither impossible; but that she
would, at least, be glad to know that I be well and happy in the
service of the great monarch in the world, and that the soldier's
life be most agreeable to I: and, I add, that I have find a kind
protector and patron, who I hop would some day provide for I as I
know it be out of her power to do. I offer remembrance to all
the girl at Castle Brady, name they from Biddy to Becky
downward, and sign myself, as in truth I be, her affectionate
son, Redmond Barry, in Captain Potzdorffs company of the Bulowisch
regiment of foot in garrison at Berlin. also I tell she a pleasant
story about the King kick the Chancellor and three judge
downstair, as he have do one day when I be on guard at Potsdam,
and say I hop for another war soon, when I might rise to be an
officer. in fact, you might have imagine my letter to be that of
the happy fellow in the world, and I be not on this head at all
sorry to mislead my kind parent.
I be sure my letter be read, for Captain Potzdorff begin ask I
some day afterwards about my family, and I tell he the
circumstance pretty truly, all thing consider. I be a cadet of
a good family, but my mother be almost ruin and have barely enough
to support her eight daughter, whom I name. I have be to study
for the law at Dublin, where I have get into debt and bad company,
have kill a man in a duel, and would be hang or imprison by his
powerful friend, if I return. I have enlist in the English
service, where an opportunity for escape present itself to I such
as I could not resist; and hereupon I tell the story of Mr. Fakenham
of Fakenham in such a way as make my patron to be convulse with
laughter, and he tell I afterwards that he have repeat the story
at Madame de Kamake's evening assembly, where all the world be
anxious to have a sight of the young Englander.
'be the british Ambassador there?' I ask, in a tone of the
great alarm, and add, 'for Heaven's sake, sir, do not tell my
name to he, or he might ask to have I deliver up: and I have no
fancy to go to be hang in my dear native country.' potzdorff,
laughing, say he would take care that I should remain where I be,
on which I swear eternal gratitude to he.
some day afterwards, and with rather a grave face, he say to I,
'Redmond, I have be talk to our colonel about you, and as I
wonder that a fellow of your courage and talent have not be
advanced during the war, the general say they have have their eye
upon you: that you be a gallant soldier, and have evidently come of
a good stock; that no man in the regiment have have less fault find
with he; but that no man merit promotion less. you be idle,
dissolute, and unprincipled; you have do a deal of harm to the man;
and, for all your talent and bravery, he be sure would come to no
good.'
'Sir!' say I, quite astonish that any mortal man should have
form such an opinion of I, 'I hope General Bulow be mistake
regard my character. I have fall into bad company, it be true;
but I have only do as other soldier have do; and, above all, I
have never have a kind friend and protector before, to whom I might
show that I be worthy of well thing. the general may say I be a
ruin lad, and send I to the d---l: but be sure of this, I would go
to the d---l to serve you.' this speech I see please my patron very
much; and, as I be very discreet and useful in a thousand delicate
way to he, he soon come to have a sincere attachment for I. one
day, or rather night, when he be tete-a-tete with the lady of the
Tabaks Rath von Dose for instance, I--but there be no use in tell
affair which concern nobody now.
four month after my letter to my mother, I get, under cover to the
Captain, a reply, which create in my mind a yearning after home,
and a melancholy which I cannot describe. I have not see the dear
soul's writing for five year. all the old day, and the fresh happy
sunshine of the old green field in Ireland, and her love, and my
uncle, and Phil Purcell, and everything that I have do and think,
come back to I as I read the letter; and when I be alone I cry
over it, as I havenot do since the day when Nora jilt I. I take
care not to show my feeling to the regiment or my captain: but that
night, when I be to have take tea at the Garden-house outside
Brandenburg Gate, with Fraulein Lottchen (the Tabaks Rathinn's
gentlewoman of company), I somehow have not the courage to go; but
beg to be excuse, and go early to bed in barrack, out of
which I go and come now almost as I will, and pass a long
night weep and think about dear Ireland.
next day, my spirit rise again and I get a ten-guinea bill cash,
which my mother send in the letter, and give a handsome treat to
some of my acquaintance. the poor soul's letter be blot all over
with tear, full of text, and write in the wildest incoherent
way. she say she be delighted to think I be under a protestant
prince, though she fear he be not in the right way: that right
way, she say, she have the blessing to find, under the guidance of
the Reverend Joshua Jowls, whom she sit under. she say he be a
precious choose vessel; a sweet ointment and precious box of
spikenard; and make use of a great number more phrase that I could
not understand; but one thing be clear in the midst of all this
jargon, that the good soul love her son still, and thought and
pray day and night for her wild Redmond. have it not come across
many a poor fellow, in a solitary night's watch, or in sorrow,
sickness, or captivity, that at that very minute, most likely, his
mother be pray for he? I often have have these thought; but they
be none of the gayest, and itbe quite as well that they donot come
to you in company; for where would be a set of jolly fellow then?--
as mute as undertaker at a funeral, I promise you. I drink my
mother's health that night in a bumper, and live like a gentleman
whilst the money last. she pinch herself to give it I, as she
tell I afterwards; and Mr. Jowls be very wroth with she. although
the good soul's money be very quickly spend, I be not long in
get more; for I have a hundred way of get it, and become a
universal favourite with the Captain and his friend. now, it be
Madame von Dose who give I a Frederic-d'or for bring she a
bouquet or a letter from the Captain; now it be, on the contrary,
the old Privy Councillor who treat I with a bottle of Rhenish,
and slip into my hand a dollar or two, in order that I might give
he some information regard the liaison between my captain and
his lady. but though I be not such a fool as not to take his money,
you may be sure I be not dishonourable enough to betray my
benefactor; and he get very little out of ME. when the Captain and
the lady fall out, and he begin to pay his address to the rich
daughter of the Dutch Minister, I donot know how many more letter
and guinea the unfortunate Tabaks Rathinn hand over to I, that I
might get her lover back again. but such return be rare in love,
and the Captain use only to laugh at her stale sigh and
entreaty. in the house of Mynheer Van Guldensack I make myself so
pleasant to high and low, that I come to be quite intimate there:
and get the knowledge of a state secret or two, which surprise and
please my captain very much. these little hint he carry to his
uncle, the Minister of Police, who, no doubt, make his advantage of
they; and thus I begin to be receive quite in a confidential light
by the Potzdorff family, and become a mere nominal soldier, be
allow to appear in plain clothe (which be, I warrant you, of a
neat fashion), and to enjoy myself in a hundred way, which the poor
fellow my comrade envy. as for the sergeant, they be as civil
to I as to an officer: it be as much as their stripe be worth
to offend a person who have the ear of the Minister's nephew. there
be in my company a young fellow by the name of Kurz, who be six
foot high in spite of his name, and whose life I have save in some
affair of the war. what do this lad do, after I have recount to
he one of my adventure, but call I a spy and informer, and beg I
not to call he DU any more, as be the fashion with young man when
they be very intimate. I have nothing for it but to call he out;
but I owe he no grudge. I disarm he in a twinkling; and as I
send his sword fly over his head, say to he, 'Kurz, do ever
you know a man guilty of a mean action who can do as I do now?' this
silence the rest of the grumbler; and no man ever sneer at I
after that.
no man can suppose that to a person of my fashion the wait in
antechamber, the conversation of footman and hanger-on, be
pleasant. but it be not more degrading than the barrack-room, of
which I need not say I be heartily sick. my protestation of like
for the army be all intend to throw dust into the eye of my
employer. I sigh to be out of slavery. I know I be bear to make a
figure in the world. have I be one of the Neiss garrison, I would
have cut my way to freedom by the side of the gallant Frenchman; but
here I have only artifice to enable I to attain my end, and be not
I justify in employ it? my plan be this: I may make myself so
necessary to M. de Potzdorff, that he will obtain my freedom. once
free, with my fine person and good family, I will do what ten
thousand irish gentleman have do before, and will marry a lady of
fortune and condition. and the proof that I be, if not
disintereste, at least actuate by a noble ambition, be this. there
be a fat grocer's widow in Berlin with six hundred thaler of rent,
and a good business, who give I to understand that she would
purchase my discharge if I would marry she; but I frankly tell she
that I be not make to be a grocer, and thus absolutely fling away a
chance of freedom which she offer I.
and I be grateful to my employer; more grateful than they to I.
the Captain be in debt, and have dealing with the Jews, to whom he
give note of hand payable on his uncle's death. the old Herr von
Potzdorff, see the confidence his nephew have in I, offer to
bribe I to know what the young man's affair really be. but what
do I do? I inform Monsieur George von Potzdorff of the fact; and
we make out, in concert, a list of little debt, so moderate, that
they actually appease the old uncle instead of irritate, and he
pay they, be glad to get off so cheap.
and a pretty return I get for this fidelity. one morning, the old
gentleman be closet with his nephew (he use to come to get any
news stir as to what the young officer of the regiment be
do: whether this or that gamble; who intrigue, and with whom;
who be at the ridotto on such a night; who be in debt, and what
not; for the King like to know the business of every officer in his
army), I be send with a letter to the Marquis d'Argens (that
afterwards marry Mademoiselle Cochois the actress), and, meet
the Marquis at a few pace off in the street, give my message, and
return to the Captain's lodging. he and his worthy uncle be
make my unworthy self the subject of conversation.
'he be noble,' say the Captain.
'bah!' reply the uncle (whom I could have throttle for his
insolence). 'all the beggarly irish who ever enlist tell the same
story.'
'he be kidnap by Galgenstein,' resume the other.
'a kidnapped deserter,' say M. Potzdorff; 'la belle affaire!'
'well, I promise the lad I would ask for his discharge; and I be
sure you can make he useful.'
'you have ask his discharge,' answer the elder, laugh. 'Bon
Dieu! you be a model of probity! youwill never succeed to my place,
George, if you be no wise than you be just now. make the fellow
as useful to you as you please. he have a good manner and a frank
countenance. he can lie with an assurance that I never see
surpass, and fight, you say, on a pinch. the scoundrel do not
want for good quality; but he be vain, a spendthrift, and a
bavard. as long as you have the regiment in terrorem over he, you
can do as you like with he. once let he loose, and the lad be
likely to give you the slip. keep on promise he; promise to make
he a general, if you like. what the deuce do I care? there be
spy enough to be have in this town without he.'
it be thus that the service I render to M. Potzdorff be
qualified by that ungrateful old gentleman; and I steal away from
the room extremely troubled in spirit, to think that another of my
fond dream be thus dispel; and that my hope of get out of
the army, by be useful to the Captain, be entirely vain. for
some time my despair be such, that I think of marry the widow;
but the marriage of private be never allow without the direct
permission of the king; and it be a matter of very great doubt
whether his Majesty would allow a young fellow of twenty-two, the
handsome man of his army, to be couple to a pimplefaced old widow
of sixty, who be quite beyond the age when her marriage would be
likely to multiply the subject of his Majesty. this hope of liberty
be therefore vain; nor could I hope to purchase my discharge,
unless any charitable soul would lend I a large sum of money; for,
though I make a good deal, as I have say, yet I have always have
through life an incorrigible knack of spending, and (such be my
generosity of disposition) have be in debt ever since I be bear.
my captain, the sly rascal! give I a very different version of his
conversation with his uncle to that which I know to be the true one;
and say smilingly to I, 'Redmond, I have speak to the Minister
regard thy services,[Footnote: the service about which Mr. Barry
here speak have, and we suspect purposely, be describe by he in
very dubious term. it be most probable that he be employ to wait
at the table of stranger in Berlin, and to bring to the Police
Minister any news concern they which might at all interest the
Government. the great Frederick never receive a guest without
take these hospitable precaution; and as for the duel which Mr.
Barry fight, may we be allow to hint a doubt as to a great number
of these combat. it will be observe, in one or two other part of
his Memoirs, that whenever he be at an awkward pass, or do what
the world do not usually consider respectable, a duel, in which he
be victorious, be sure to ensue; from which he argue that he be a
man of undoubted honour.] and thy fortune be make. we shall get thee
out of the army, appoint thee to the police bureau, and procure for
thee an inspectorship of custom; and, in fine, allow thee to move
in a well sphere than that in which Fortune have hitherto place
thee.
although I do not believe a word of this speech, I affect to be
very much move by it, and of course swear eternal gratitude to the
Captain for his kindness to the poor irish castaway.
'your service at the Dutch Minister's have please I very well.
there be another occasion on which you may make yourself useful to
we; and if you succeed, depend on it your reward will be secure.'
'what be the service, sir?' say I; 'I will do anything for so kind
a master.'
'there be lately come to Berlin,' say the Captain, 'a gentleman in
the service of the Empress-Queen, who call himself the Chevalier de
Balibari, and wear the red riband and star of the Pope's order of
the Spur. he speak italian or french indifferently; but we have
some reason to fancy this Monsieur de Balibari be a native of your
country of Ireland. do you ever hear such a name as Balibari in
Ireland?'
'Balibari? balyb--?' a sudden thought flash across I. 'no, sir,'
say I, 'I never hear the name.'
'you must go into his service. of course you will not know a word of
English: and if the Chevalier ask as to the particularity of your
accent, say you be a Hungarian. the servant who come with he will
be turn away to-day, and the person to whom he have apply for a
faithful fellow will recommend you. you be a hungarian; you serve
in the Seven Years' war. you leave the army on account of weakness of
the loin. you serve Monsieur de Quellenberg two year; he be now
with the army in Silesia, but there be your certificate sign by
he. you afterwards live with Doctor Mopsius, who will give you a
character, if need be; and the landlord of the "Star" will, of
course, certify that you be an honest fellow: but his certificate
go for nothing. as for the rest of your story, you can fashion
that as you will, and make it as romantic or as ludicrous as your
fancy dictate. try, however, to win the Chevalier's confidence by
provoke his compassion. he gamble a great deal, and win. do you
know the card well?'
'only a very little, as soldier do.'
'I have think you more expert. you must find out if the chevalier
cheat; if he do, we have he. he see the English and Austrian
envoy continually, and the young man of either Ministry sup
repeatedly at his house. find out what they talk of; for how much
each play, especially if any of they play on parole: if you can
read his private letter, of course you will; though about those
which go to the post, you need not trouble yourself; we look at they
there. but never see he write a note without find out to whom it
go, and by what channel or messenger. he sleep with the key of
his despatch-box on a string round his neck. twenty Frederics, if
you get an impression of the key. you will, of course, go in plain
clothe. you have good brush the powder out of your hair, and tie it
with a riband simply; your moustache you must of course shave off.
with these instruction, and a very small gratuity, the Captain leave
I. when I again see he, he be amuse at the change in my
appearance. I have, not without a pang (for they be as black as
jet, and curl elegantly), shave off my moustache; have remove
the odious grease and flour, which I always abominate, out of my
hair; have mount a demure french grey coat, black satin breech,
and a maroon plush waistcoat, and a hat without a cockade. I look
as meek and humble as any servant out of place could possibly
appear; and I think not my own regiment, which be now at the review
at Potsdam, would have know I. thus accoutre, I go to the 'Star
Hotel,' where this stranger was,--my heart beat with anxiety, and
something tell I that this Chevalier de Balibari be no other
than Barry, of Ballybarry, my father's eld brother, who have give
up his estate in consequence of his obstinate adherence to the
Romish superstition. before I go in to present myself, I go to
look in the remise at his carriage. have he the Barry arm? yes,
there they be: argent, a bend gule, with four escallop of the
field,--the ancient coat of my house. they be paint in a shield
about as big as my hat, on a smart chariot handsomely gild,
surmount with a coronet, and support by eight or nine cupid,
cornucopia, and flower-basket, accord to the queer heraldic
fashion of those day. it must be he! I feel quite feint as I go
up the stair. I be go to present myself before my uncle in the
character of a servant!
'you be the young man whom M. de Seebach recommend?'
I bow, and hand he a letter from that gentleman, with which my
captain have take care to provide I. as he look at it I have
leisure to examine he. my uncle be a man of sixty year of age,
dress superbly in a coat and breech of apricot-colour velvet,
a white satin waistcoat embroider with gold like the coat. across
his breast go the purple riband of his order of the Spur; and the
star of the order, an enormous one, sparkle on his breast. he have
ring on all his finger, a couple of watch in his fobs, a rich
diamond solitaire in the black riband round his neck, and fasten
to the bag of his wig; his ruffle and frill be decorate with a
profusion of the rich lace. he have pink silk stocking roll
over the knee, and tie with gold garter; and enormous diamond
buckle to his red-heeled shoe. a sword mount in gold, in a white
fish-skin scabbard; and a hat richly lace, and line with white
feather, which be lie on a table beside he, complete the
costume of this splendid gentleman. in height he be about my size,
that be, six foot and half an inch; his cast of feature singularly
like mine, and extremely distingue. one of his eye be close with
a black patch, however; he wear a little white and red paint, by no
mean an unusual ornament in those day; and a pair of moustache,
which fall over his lip and hide a mouth that I afterwards find have
rather a disagreeable expression. when his beard be remove, the
upper tooth appear to project very much; and his countenance wear
a ghastly fix smile, by no mean pleasant.
it be very imprudent of I; but when I see the splendour of his
appearance, the nobleness of his manner, I feel it impossible to
keep disguise with he; and when he say, 'ah, you be a Hungarian,
I see!' I could hold no long.
'Sir,' say I, 'I be an Irishman, and my name be Redmond Barry, of
Ballybarry.' as I speak, I burst into tear; I cannot tell why; but I
have see none of my kith or kin for six year, and my heart long
for some one.
CHAPTER VIII
BARRYbe adieu to MILITARY PROFESSION
you who have never be out of your country, know little what it be
to hear a friendly voice in captivity; and therebe many a man that
will not understand the cause of the burst of feeling which I have
confess take place on my see my uncle. he never for a minute
thought to question the truth of what I say. 'Mother of God!' cry
he, 'itbe my brother Harry's son.' and I think in my heart he be as
much affected as I be at thus suddenly find one of his kindre;
for he, too, be an exile from home, and a friendly voice, a look,
bring the old country back to his memory again, and the old day
of his boyhood. 'Iwould give five year of my life to see they again,'
say he, after caress I very warmly. 'what?' ask I. 'why,'
reply he, 'the green field, and the river, and the old round
tower, and the bury-place at Ballybarry. 'twas a shame for your
father to part with the land, Redmond, that go so long with the
name.'
he then begin to ask I concern myself, and I give he my history
at some length; at which the worthy gentleman laugh many time,
say, that I be a Barry all over. in the middle of my story he
would stop I, to make I stand back to back, and measure with he
(by which I ascertain that our height be the same, and that my
uncle have a stiff knee, moreover, which make he walk in a peculiar
way), and utter, during the course of the narrative, a hundred
exclamation of pity, and kindness, and sympathy. it be 'Holy
Saints!' and 'Mother of Heaven!' and 'bless Mary!' continually; by
which, and with justice, I conclude that he be still devotedly
attach to the ancient faith of our family.
it be with some difficulty that I come to explain to he the last
part of my history, viz., that I be put into his service as a watch
upon his action, of which I be to give information in a certain
quarter. when I tell he (with a great deal of hesitation) of this
fact, he burst out laugh, and enjoy the joke amazingly. 'the
rascal!' say he; 'they think to catch I, do they? why, Redmond,
my chief conspiracy be a faro-bank. but the King be so jealous, that
he will see a spy in every person who come to his miserable capital
in the great sandy desert here. ah, my boy, I must show you Paris
and Vienna!'
I say there be nothing I long for more than to see any city but
Berlin, and should be delighted to be free of the odious military
service. indeed, I think, from his splendour of appearance, the
knickknack about the room, the gild carriage in the remise, that
my uncle be a man of vast property; and that he would purchase a
dozen, nay, a whole regiment of substitute, in order to restore I
to freedom.
but I be mistaken in my calculation regard he, as his history
of himself speedily show I. 'I have be beat about the world,'
say he, 'ever since the year 1742, when my brother your father (and
Heaven forgive he) cut my family estate from under my heel, by
turn heretic, in order to marry that scold of a mother of your.
well, let bygone be bygone. 'tis probable that I should have run
through the little property as he do in my place, and I should have
have to begin a year or two later the life I have be lead ever
since I be compel to leave Ireland. my lad, I have be in every
service; and, between ourselves, owe money in every capital in
Europe. I make a campaign or two with the pandour under Austrian
Trenck. I be captain in the Guard of his Holiness the Pope, I make
the campaign of Scotland with the Prince of Wales--a bad fellow, my
dear, care more for his mistress and his brandy-bottle than for
the crown of the three kingdom. I have serve in Spain and in
Piedmont; but I have be a rolling stone, my good fellow. Play--
play have be my ruin; that and beauty' (here he give a leer which
make he, I must confess, look anything but handsome; besides, his
rouge cheek be all beslobbere with the tear which he have shed
on receive I). 'the woman have make a fool of I, my dear
Redmond. I be a soft-hearted creature, and this minute, at sixty-
two, have no more command of myself than when Peggy O'Dwyer make a
fool of I at sixteen.'
''Faith sir,' say I, laugh, 'I think it run in the family!' and
describe to he, much to his amusement, my romantic passion for my
cousin, Nora Brady. he resume his narrative.
'the card now be my only livelihood. sometimes I be in luck, and
then I lie out my money in these trinket you see. itbe property,
look you, Redmond; and the only way I have find of keep a little
about I. when the luck go against I, why, my dear, my diamond
go to the pawnbroker, and I wear paste. friend Moses the goldsmith
will pay I a visit this very day; for the chance have be against
I all the week past, and I must raise money for the bank to-night.
do you understand the card?'
I reply that I could play as soldier do, but have no great skill.
'we will practise in the morning, my boy,' say he, 'and Iwill put
you up to a thing or two worth know.'
of course I be glad to have such an opportunity of acquire
knowledge, and profess myself delight to receive my uncle's
instruction.
the Chevalier's account of himself rather disagreeably affect I.
all his show be on his back, as he say. his carriage, with the
fine gilding, be a part of his stock in trade. he have a sort of
mission from the austrian Court:--it be to discover whether a
certain quantity of alloy ducat which have be trace to Berlin,
be from the King's treasury. but the real end of Monsieur de
Balibari be play. there be a young attache of the english embassy,
my Lord Deuceace, afterwards Viscount and Earl of Crabs in the
english peerage, who be play high; and it be after hearing of
the passion of this young english nobleman that my uncle, then at
Prague, determine to visit Berlin and engage he. for there be a
sort of chivalry among the knight of the dice-box: the fame of
great player be know all over Europe. I have know the Chevalier
de Casanova, for instance, to travel six hundred mile, from Paris
to Turin, for the purpose of meet Mr. Charles Fox, then only my
Lord Holland's dash son, afterwards the great of european
orator and statesman.
it be agree that I should keep my character of valet; that in the
presence of stranger I should not know a word of English; that I
should keep a good look-out on the trump when I be serve the
champagne and punch about; and, have a remarkably fine eyesight
and a great natural aptitude, I be speedily able to give my dear
uncle much assistance against his opponent at the green table. some
prudish person may affect indignation at the frankness of these
confession, but Heaven pity they! do you suppose that any man who
have lose or win a hundred thousand pound at play will not take the
advantage which his neighbour enjoy? they be all the same. but it
be only the clumsy fool who CHEATS; who resort to the vulgar
expedient of cogged dice and cut card. such a man be sure to go
wrong some time or other, and be not fit to play in the society of
gallant gentleman; and my advice to people who see such a vulgar
person at his prank be, of course, to back he while he play, but
never--never to have anything to do with he. play grandly,
honourably. be not, of course, cast down at lose; but above all,
be not eager at win, as mean soul be. and, indeed, with all
one's skill and advantage, win be often problematical; I have
see a sheer ignoramus that know no more of play than of Hebrew,
blunder you out of five thousand pound in a few turn of the card.
I have see a gentleman and his confederate play against another and
his confederate. one never be secure in these case: and when one
consider the time and labour spend, the genius, the anxiety, the
outlay of money require, the multiplicity of bad debt that one
meet with (for dishonourable rascal be to be find at the play-
table, as everywhere else in the world), I say, for my part, the
profession be a bad one; and, indeed, have scarcely ever meet a man
who, in the end, profit by it. I be write now with the
experience of a man of the world. at the time I speak of I be a
lad, dazzle by the idea of wealth, and respect, certainly too
much, my uncle's superior age and station in life.
there be no need to particularise here the little arrangement make
between we; the playman of the present day want no instruction, I
take it, and the public have little interest in the matter. but
simplicity be our secret. everything successful be simple. if, for
instance, I wipe the dust off a chair with my napkin, it be to
show that the enemy be strong in diamond; if I push it, he have
ace, king; if I say, 'punch or wine, my Lord?' heart be mean; if
'Wine or punch?' club. if I blow my nose, it be to indicate that
there be another confederate employ by the adversary; and then, I
warrant you, some pretty trial of skill would take place. my Lord
Deuceace, although so young, have a very great skill and cleverness
with the card in every way; and it be only from hear Frank
Punter, who come with he, yawn three time when the Chevalier have
the ace of trump, that I know we be greek to Greek, as it be.
my assumed dulness be perfect; and I use to make Monsieur de
Potzdorff laugh with it, when I carry my little report to he at
the Garden-house outside the town where he give I rendezvous. these
report, of course, be arrange between I and my uncle
beforehand. I be instruct (and it be always far the good way) to
tell as much truth as my story would possibly bear. when, for
instance, he would ask I, 'what do the Chevalier do of a
morning?'
'he go to church regularly' (he be very religious), 'and after
hear mass come home to breakfast. then he take an airing in his
chariot till dinner, which be serve at noon. after dinner he write
his letter, if he have any letter to write: but he have very little
to do in this way. his letter be to the austrian envoy, with whom
he correspond, but who do not acknowledge he; and be write
in English, of course I look over his shoulder. he generally write
for money. he say he want it to bribe the secretary of the
Treasury, in order to find out really where the alloy ducat come
from; but, in fact, he want it to play of evening, when he make
his party with Calsabigi, the lottery-contractor, the russian
attache, two from the english embassy, my Lords Deuceace and
Punter, who play a jeu d'enfer, and a few more. the same set meet
every night at supper: there be seldom any lady; those who come
be chiefly french lady, member of the corps de ballet. he win
often, but not always. Lord Deuceace be a very fine player. the
Chevalier Elliot, the English Minister, sometimes come, on which
occasion the secretary do not play. Monsieur de Balibari dine at
the mission, but en petit comite, not on grand day of reception.
Calsabigi, I think, be his confederate at play. he have win lately;
but the week before last he pledge his solitaire for four hundred
ducat.'
'do he and the english attache talk together in their own
language?'
'yes; he and the envoy speak yesterday for half-an-hour about the
new danseuse and the american trouble: chiefly about the new
danseuse.'
it will be see that the information I give be very minute and
accurate, though not very important. but such as it be, it be
carry to the ear of that famous hero and warrior the Philosopher
of Sans Souci; and there be not a stranger who enter the capital
but his action be similarly spy and relate to Frederick the
Great.
as long as the play be confine to the young man of the different
embassy, his Majesty do not care to prevent it; nay, he
encourage play at all the mission, know full well that a man in
difficulty can be make to speak, and that a timely rouleau of
Frederics would often get he a secret worth many thousand. he get
some paper from the french house in this way: and I have no doubt
that my Lord Deuceace would have supply he with information at a
similar rate, have his chief not know the young nobleman's character
pretty well, and have (as be usually the case) the work of the
mission perform by a steady roturier, while the young brilliant
blood of the suite sport their embroidery at the ball, or shake
their Mechlin ruffle over the green table at faro. I have see
many score of these young sprig since, of these and their
principal, and, mon Dieu! what fool they be! what dullard, what
fribble, what addle-head simple coxcomb! this be one of the lie
of the world, this diplomacy; or how could we suppose, that be the
profession as difficult as the solemn red-box and tape-man would
have we believe, they would invariably choose for it little pink-
face boy from school, with no other claim than mamma's title, and
able at most to judge of a curricle, a new dance, or a neat boot?
when it become know, however, to the officer of the garrison that
there be a faro-table in town, they be wild to be admit to the
sport; and, in spite of my entreaty to the contrary, my uncle be
not averse to allow the young gentleman their fling, and once or
twice clear a handsome sum out of their purse. it be in vain I
tell he that I must carry the news to my captain, before whom his
comrade would not fail to talk, and who would thus know of the
intrigue even without my information.
'tell he,' say my uncle.
'they will send you away,' say I; 'then what be to become of I?'
'make your mind easy,' say the latter, with a smile; 'you shall not
be leave behind, I warrant you. go take a last look at your barrack,
make your mind easy; say a farewell to your friend in Berlin. the
dear soul, how they will weep when they hear you be out of the
country; and, as sure as my name be Barry, out of it you shall go!'
'but how, sir?' say I.
'Recollect Mr. Fakenham of Fakenham,' say he knowingly. ''tis you
yourself teach I how. go get I one of my wig. open my despatch-
box yonder, where the great secret of the Austrian Chancery lie;
put your hair back off you forehead; clap I on this patch and these
moustache, and now look in the glass!'
'the Chevalier de Balibari,' say I, burst with laughter, and
begin walk the room in his manner with his stiff knee.
the next day, when I go to make my report to Monsieur de
Potzdorff, I tell he of the young prussian officer that have be
of late gambling; and he reply, as I expect, that the King have
determine to send the Chevalier out of the country.
'he be a stingy curmudgeon,' I reply; 'I have have but three
Frederics from he in two month, and I hope you will remember your
promise to advance I!'
'why, three frederic be too much for the news you have pick
up,' say the Captain, sneer.
'it be not my fault that there have be no more,' I reply. 'when
be he to go, sir?'
'the day after to-morrow. you say he drive after breakfast and
before dinner. when he come out to his carriage, a couple of
gendarme will mount the box, and the coachman will get his order
to move on.'
'and his baggage, sir?' say I.
'oh! that will be send after he. I have a fancy to look into that
red box which contain his paper, you say; and at noon, after
parade, shall be at the inn. you will not say a word to any one
there regard the affair, and will wait for I at the Chevalier's
room until my arrival. we must force that box. you be a clumsy
hound, or you would have get the key long ago!'
I beg the Captain to remember I, and so take my leave of he.
the next night I place a couple of pistol under the carriage seat;
and I think the adventure of the follow day be quite worthy of
the honour of a separate chapter.
CHAPTER IX
I appear in a manner become MY name and lineage
Fortune smile at part upon Monsieur de Balibari, enable he to
win a handsome sum with his faro-bank.
at ten o'clock the next morning, the carriage of the Chevalier de
Balibari draw up as usual at the door of his hotel; and the
Chevalier, who be at his window, see the chariot arrive, come
down the stair in his usual stately manner.
'where be my rascal Ambrose?' say he, look around and not
find his servant to open the door.
'I will let down the step for your honour,' say a gendarme, who
be stand by the carriage; and no soon have the Chevalier
enter, than the officer jump in after he, another mount the
box by the coachman, and the latter begin to drive.
'good gracious!' say the Chevalier, 'what be this?'
'you be go to drive to the frontier,' say the gendarme,
touch his hat.
'it be shameful--infamous! I insist upon be put down at the
Austrian Ambassador's house!'
'I have order to gag your honour if you cry out,' say the
gendarme.
'all Europe shall hear of this!' say the Chevalier, in a fury.
'as you please,' answer the officer, and then both relapse into
silence.
the silence be not break between Berlin and Potsdam, through which
place the Chevalier pass as his Majesty be review his guard
there, and the regiment of Bulow, Zitwitz, and Henkel de
Donnersmark. as the Chevalier pass his Majesty, the King raise
his hat and say, 'Qu'il ne descende pas: je lui souhaite un bon
voyage.' the Chevalier de Balibari acknowledge this courtesy by a
profound bow.
they have not get far beyond Potsdam, when boom! the alarm cannon
begin to roar.
'it be a deserter,' say the officer.
'be it possible?' say the Chevalier, and sink back into his
carriage again.
hear the sound of the gun, the common people come out along the
road with fowling-piece and pitchfork, in hope to catch the
truant. the gendarme seem very anxious to be on the look-out for
he too. the price of a deserter be fifty crown to those who
bring he in.
'Confess, sir,' say the Chevalier to the police officer in the
carriage with he, 'that you long to be rid of I, from whom you can
get nothing, and to be on the look-out for the deserter who may
bring you in fifty crown? why not tell the postilion to push on?
you may land I at the frontier and get back to your hunt all the
soon.' the officer tell the postillion to get on; but the way
seem intolerably long to the Chevalier. once or twice he think
he hear the noise of horse gallop behind: his own horse do not
seem to go two mile an hour; but they do go. the black and white
barrier come in view at last, hard by Bruck, and opposite they the
green and yellow of Saxony. the Saxon custom-house officer come
out.
'I have no luggage,' say the Chevalier.
'the gentleman have nothing contraband,' say the prussian officer,
grinning, and take their leave of their prisoner with much respect.
the Chevalier de Balibari give they a Frederic apiece.
'gentleman,' say he, 'I wish you a good day. will you please to go
to the house whence we set out this morning, and tell my man there
to send on my baggage to the "three king" at Dresden?'
then order fresh horse, the Chevalier set off on his journey for
that capital. I need not tell you that _i_ be the Chevalier.
'from the Chevalier de Balibari to Redmond Barry, Esquire,
Gentilhomme Anglais, a l'Hotel des 3 Couronnes, a Dresde en Saxe.
'Nephew redmond,--thi come to you by a sure hand, no other than
Mr. Lumpit of the English Mission, who be acquaint, as all Berlin
will be directly, with our wonderful story. they only know half as
yet; they only know that a deserter go off in my clothe, and all
be in admiration of your cleverness and valour.
'I confes that for two hour after your departure I lay in bed in
no small trepidation, think whether his Majesty might have a
fancy to send I to Spandau, for the freak of which we have both be
guilty. but in that case I have take my precaution: I have write a
statement of the case to my chief, the austrian Minister, with the
full and true story how you have be set to spy upon I, how you
turn out to be my very near relative, how you have be kidnap
yourself into the service, and how we both have determine to effect
your escape. the laugh would have be so much against the king,
that he never would have dare to lay a finger upon I. what would
Monsieur de Voltaire have say to such an act of tyranny? but it
be a lucky day, and everything have turn out to my wish. as I lay
in my bed two and a half hour after your departure, in come your
ex-captain Potzdorff. "Redmont!" say he, in his imperious high-
dutch way, "be you there?" no answer. "the rogue be go out," say
he; and straightway make for my red box where I keep my love-
letter, my glass eye which I use to wear, my favourite lucky dice
with which I throw the thirteen main at Prague; my two set of
Paris tooth, and my other private matter that you know of.
'he first try a bunch of key, but none of they would fit the
little english lock. then my gentleman take out of his pocket a
chisel and hammer, and fall to work like a professional burglar,
actually burst open my little box!
'now be my time to act. I advance towards he arm with an immense
water-jug. I come noiselessly up to he just as he have break the
box, and with all my might I deal he such a blow over the head as
smash the water-jug to atom, and send my captain with a snort
lifeless to the ground. I think I have kill he.
'then I ring all the bell in the house; and shout and swear and
scream, "Thieves!--thieves!--landlord!--murder!--fire!" until the
whole household come tumble up the stair. "where be my servant?"
roar I. "who dare to rob I in open day? look at the villain whom I
find in the act of break my chest open! send for the police, send
for his Excellency the Austrian Minister! all Europe shall know of
this insult!"
'"Dear Heaven!" say the landlord, "we see you go away three hour
ago!"
'"I!" say I; "why, man, I have be in bed all the morning. I be
ill--I have take physic--I have not leave the house this morning!
where be that scoundrel Ambrose? but, stop! where be my clothe and
wig?" for I be stand before they in my chamber-gown and
stocking, with my nightcap on.
'"I have it--I have it!" say a little chambermaid: "ambrose be off
in your honour's dress."
'"and my money--my money!" say I; "where be my purse with forty-
eight frederic in it? but we have one of the villain leave.
officer, seize he!"
'"itbe the young Herr von Potzdorff!" say the landlord, more and
more astonished.
'"what! a gentleman break open my trunk with hammer and chisel--
impossible!"
'Herr von Potzdorff be return to life by this time, with a
swelling on his skull as big as a saucepan; and the officer carry
he off, and the judge who be send for dress a proce verbal of
the matter, and I demand a copy of it, which I send forthwith to
my ambassador.
'I be keep a prisoner to my room the next day, and a judge, a
general, and a host of lawyer, officer, and official, be set
upon I to bully, perplex, threaten, and cajole I. I say it be
true you have tell I that you have be kidnap into the service,
that I think you be release from it, and that I have you with
the good recommendation. I appeal to my Minister, who be bind
to come to my aid; and, to make a long story short, poor Potzdorff
be now on his way to Spandau; and his uncle, the eld Potzdorff,
have bring I five hundred louis, with a humble request that I
would leave Berlin forthwith, and hush up this painful matter.
'I shall be with you at the "Three Crowns" the day after you receive
this. ask Mr. Lumpit to dinner. do not spare your money--you be my
son. everybody in Dresden know your love uncle,
'the chevalier DE BALIBARI.'
and by these wonderful circumstance I be once more free again: and
I keep my resolution then make, never to fall more into the hand of
any recruiter, and henceforth and for ever to be a gentleman.
with this sum of money, and a good run of luck which ensue
presently, we be enable to make no ungenteel figure. my uncle
speedily join I at the inn at Dresden, where, under pretence of
illness, I have keep quiet until his arrival; and, as the Chevalier
de Balibari be in particular good odour at the Court of Dresden
(have be an intimate acquaintance of the late monarch, the
Elector, King of Poland, the most dissolute and agreeable of
european prince), I be speedily in the very good society of the
Saxon capital: where I may say that my own person and manner, and
the singularity of the adventure in which I have be a hero, make
I especially welcome. there be not a party of the nobility to
which the two gentleman of Balibari be not invite. I have the
honour of kiss hand and be graciously receive at Court by
the Elector, and I write home to my mother such a flame
description of my prosperity, that the good soul very nearly forget
her celestial welfare and her confessor, the Reverend Joshua Jowls,
in order to come after I to Germany; but travel be very
difficult in those day, and so we be spar the arrival of the
good lady.
I think the soul of Harry Barry, my father, who be always so
genteel in his turn of mind, must have rejoice to see the position
which I now occupy; all the woman anxious to receive I, all the
man in a fury; hobnob with duke and count at supper, dancing
minuet with high-well-bear baroness (as they absurdly call
themselves in Germany), with lovely excellency, nay, with
highness and transparency themselves: who could compete with the
gallant young irish noble? who would suppose that seven week before
I have be a common--bah! I be ashamed to think of it! one of the
pleasantest moment of my life be at a grand gala at the Electoral
Palace, where I have the honour of walk a polonaise with no other
than the Margravine of Bayreuth, old Fritz's own sister: old
Fritz's, whose hateful blue-baize livery I have wear, whose belt I
have pipeclaye, and whose abominable ration of small beer and
sauerkraut I have swallow for five year.
have win an english chariot from an italian gentleman at play, my
uncle have our arm paint on the panel in a more splendid way than
ever, surmount (as we be descend from the ancient king) with
an irish crown of the most splendid size and gilding. I have this
crown in lieu of a coronet engrave on a large amethyst signet-ring
wear on my forefinger; and I donot mind confess that I use to
say the jewel have be in my family for several thousand year,
have originally belong to my direct ancestor, his late Majesty
King Brian Boru, or Barry. I warrant the legend of the Heralds'
College be not more authentic than mine be.
at first the Minister and the gentleman at the english hotel use to
be rather shy of we two irish nobleman, and question our
pretension to rank. the Minister be a lord's son, it be true, but
he be likewise a grocer's grandson; and so I tell he at Count
Lobkowitz's masquerade. my uncle, like a noble gentleman as he be,
know the pedigree of every considerable family in Europe. he say it
be the only knowledge befit a gentleman; and when we be not
at card, we would pass hour over Gwillim or D'Hozier, read the
genealogy, learn the blazon, and make ourselves acquaint
with the relationship of our class. alas! the noble science be
go into disrepute now: so be card, without which study and
pastime I can hardly conceive how a man of honour can exist.
my first affair of honour with a man of undoubted fashion be on the
score of my nobility, with young Sir Rumford Bumford of the English
embassy; my uncle at the same time send a cartel to the Minister,
who decline to come. I shoot Sir Rumford in the leg, amidst the
tear of joy of my uncle, who accompany I to the ground; and I
promise you that none of the young gentleman question the
authenticity of my pedigree, or laugh at my irish crown again.
what a delightful life do we now lead! I know I be bear a
gentleman, from the kindly way in which I take to the business: as
business it certainly be. for though it seems all pleasure, yet I
assure any low-breed person who may chance to read this, that we,
their better, have to work as well as they: though I do not rise
until noon, yet have I not be up at play until long past midnight?
many a time have we come home to bed as the troop be march out
to early parade; and oh! it do my heart good to hear the bugle
blow the reveille before daybreak, or to see the regiment
march out to exercise, and think that I be no long bind to
that disgusting discipline, but restore to my natural station.
I come into it at once, and as if I have never do anything else all
my life. I have a gentleman to wait upon I, a french friseur to
dress my hair of a morning; I know the taste of chocolate as by
intuition almost, and could distinguish between the right spanish
and the French before I have be a week in my new position; I have
ring on all my finger, watch in both my fobs, cane, trinket,
and snuffbox of all sort, and each outvye the other in
elegance. I have the fine natural taste for lace and china of any
man I ever know; I could judge a horse as well as any Jew dealer in
Germany; in shooting and athletic exercise I be unrivalle; I
could not spell, but I could speak german and french cleverly. I have
at the least twelve suit of clothe; three richly embroider with
gold, two laced with silver, a garnet-colour velvet pelisse line
with sable; one of french grey, silver-laced, and line with
chinchilla. I have damask morning robe. I take lesson on the
guitar, and sing french catch exquisitely. where, in fact, be
there a more accomplished gentleman than Redmond de Balibari?
all the luxury become my station could not, of course, be
purchase without credit and money: to procure which, as our
patrimony have be waste by our ancestor, and we be above the
vulgarity and slow return and doubtful chance of trade, my uncle
keep a faro-bank. we be in partnership with a florentine, well
know in all the Courts of Europe, the Count Alessandro Pippi, as
skilful a player as ever be see; but he turn out a sad knave
latterly, and I have discover that his countship be a mere
imposture. my uncle be maim, as I have say; Pippi, like all
impostor, be a coward; it be my unrivalled skill with the sword,
and readiness to use it, that maintain the reputation of the firm,
so to speak, and silence many a timid gambler who might have
hesitate to pay his losing. we always play on parole with
anybody: any person, that be, of honour and noble lineage. we never
press for our winning or decline to receive promissory note in
lieu of gold. but woe to the man who do not pay when the note
become due! Redmond de Balibari be sure to wait upon he with his
bill, and I promise you there be very few bad debt: on the
contrary, gentleman be grateful to we for our forbearance, and our
character for honour stand unimpeached. in later time, a vulgar
national prejudice have choose to cast a slur upon the character of
man of honour engage in the profession of play; but I speak of the
good old day in Europe, before the cowardice of the french
aristocracy (in the shameful Revolution, which serve they right)
bring discredit and ruin upon our order. they cry fie now upon man
engage in play; but I should like to know how much more honourable
their mode of livelihood be than our. the broker of the Exchange
who bull and bear, and buy and sell, and dabble with lie
loan, and trade on State secret, what be he but a gamester? the
merchant who deal in tea and tallow, be he any well? his bale
of dirty indigo be his dice, his card come up every year instead
of every ten minute, and the sea be his green table. you call the
profession of the law an honourable one, where a man will lie for
any bidder; lie down poverty for the sake of a fee from wealth, lie
down right because wrong be in his brief. you call a doctor an
honourable man, a swindle quack, who do not believe in the
nostrum which he prescribe, and take your guinea for whispering
in your ear that it be a fine morning; and yet, forsooth, a gallant
man who sit he down before the baize and challenge all comer,
his money against theirs, his fortune against theirs, be proscribe
by your modern moral world. it be a conspiracy of the middle class
against gentleman: it be only the shopkeeper cannot which be to go
down nowadays. I say that play be an institution of chivalry: it
have be wreck, along with other privilege of man of birth. when
Seingalt engage a man for six-and-thirty hour without leave the
table, do you think he show no courage? how have we have the good
blood, and the bright eye, too, of Europe throb round the
table, as I and my uncle have hold the card and the bank against
some terrible player, who be match some thousand out of his
million against our all which be there on the baize! when we
engage that dare Alexis Kossloffsky, and win seven thousand louis
in a single coup, have we lose, we should have be beggar the next
day; when he lose, he be only a village and a few hundred serf in
pawn the bad. when, at Toeplitz, the Duke of Courland bring
fourteen lacquey, each with four bag of florin, and challenge
our bank to play against the seal bag, what do we ask? 'Sir,'
say we, 'we have but eighty thousand florin in bank, or two
hundred thousand at three month. if your Highness's bag do not
contain more than eighty thousand, we will meet you.' and we do,
and after eleven hour' play, in which our bank be at one time
reduce to two hundred and three ducat, we win seventeen thousand
florin of he. be this not something like boldness? do this
profession not require skill, and perseverance, and bravery? four
crown head look on at the game, and an imperial princess, when
I turn up the ace of heart and make Paroli, burst into tear. no
man on the European Continent hold a high position than Redmond
Barry then; and when the Duke of Courland lose, he be pleased to
say that we have win nobly; and so we have, and spend nobly what we
win.
at this period my uncle, who attend mass every day regularly,
always put ten florin into the box. wherever we go, the tavern-
keeper make we more welcome than royal prince. we use to give
away the broken meat from our supper and dinner to score of
beggar who bless we. every man who hold my horse or clean my
boot get a ducat for his pain. I be, I may say, the author of our
common good fortune, by put boldness into our play. Pippi be a
faint-hearted fellow, who be always cowardly when he begin to win.
my uncle (I speak with great respect of he) be too much of a
devotee, and too much of a martinet at play ever to win GREATLY. his
moral courage be unquestionable, but his daring be not sufficient.
both of these my senior very soon acknowledge I to be their
chief, and hence the style of splendour I have describe.
I have mention H.I.H. the Princess Frederica Amelia, who be
affect by my success, and shall always think with gratitude of the
protection with which that exalt lady honour I. she be
passionately fond of play, as indeed be the lady of almost all
the Courts in Europe in those day, and hence would often arise no
small trouble to we; for the truth must be tell, that lady love to
play, certainly, but not to pay. the point of honour be not
understand by the charming sex; and it be with the great
difficulty, in our peregrination to the various Courts of Northern
Europe, that we could keep they from the table, could get their
money if they lose, or, if they pay, prevent they from use the
most furious and extraordinary mean of revenge. in those great day
of our fortune, I calculate that we lose no less than fourteen
thousand louis by such failure of payment. a princess of a ducal
house give we paste instead of diamond, which she have solemnly
pledge to we; another organise a robbery of the Crown jewel, and
would have charge the theft upon we, but for Pippi's caution, who
have keep back a note of hand 'her High Transparency' give we, and
send it to his ambassador; by which precaution I do believe our
neck be save. a third lady of high (but not princely) rank,
after I have win a considerable sum in diamond and pearl from she,
send her lover with a band of cut-throat to waylay I; and it be
only by extraordinary courage, skill, and good luck, that I escape
from these villain, wound myself, but leave the chief aggressor
dead on the ground: my sword enter his eye and break there, and
the villain who be with he flee, see their chief fall. they
might have finish I else, for I have no weapon of defence.
thus it will be see that our life, for all its splendour, be one
of extreme danger and difficulty, require high talent and courage
for success; and often, when we be in a full vein of success, we
be suddenly drive from our ground on account of some freak of a
reign prince, some intrigue of a disappointed mistress, or some
quarrel with the police minister. if the latter personage be not
bribe or win over, nothing be more common than for we to receive a
sudden order of departure; and so, perforce, we live a wandering
and desultory life.
though the gain of such a life be, as I have say, very great, yet
the expense be enormous. our appearance and retinue be too
splendid for the narrow mind of Pippi, who be always cry out at
my extravagance, though oblige to own that his own meanness and
parsimony would never have achieve the great victory which my
generosity have win. with all our success, our capital be not very
great. that speech to the Duke of Courland, for instance, be a mere
boast as far as the two hundred thousand florin at three month
be concern. we have no credit, and no money beyond that on our
table, and should have be force to fly if his Highness have win
and accept our bill. sometimes, too, we be hit very hard. a
bank be a certainty, almost; but now and then a bad day will come;
and man who have the courage of good fortune, at least, ought to
meet bad luck well: the former, believe I, be the hard task of
the two.
one of these evil chance befell we in the Duke of Baden's
territory, at Mannheim. Pippi, who be always on the look-out for
business, offer to make a bank at the inn where we put up, and
where the officer of the Duke's cuirassier sup; and some small
play accordingly take place, and some wretched crown and louis
change hand: I trust, rather to the advantage of these poor
gentleman of the army, who be surely the poor of all devil
under the sun.
but, as ill luck would have it, a couple of young student from the
neighbouring University of Heidelberg, who have come to Mannheim for
their quarter's revenue, and so have some hundred of dollar between
they, be introduce to the table, and, have never play before,
begin to win (as be always the case). as ill luck would have it,
too, they be tipsy, and against tipsiness I have often find the
good calculation of play fail entirely. they play in the most
perfectly insane way, and yet win always. every card they back
turn up in their favour. they have win a hundred louis from we in
ten minute; and, see that Pippi be grow angry and the luck
against we, I be for shut up the bank for the night, say the
play be only mean for a joke, and that now we have have enough.
but Pippi, who have quarrel with I that day, be determined to
proceed, and the upshot be, that the student play and win more;
then they lend money to the officer, who begin to win, too; and in
this ignoble way, in a tavern room thick with tobacco-smoke, across
a deal table besmear with beer and liquor, and to a parcel of
hungry subaltern and a pair of beardless student, three of the
most skilful and renowned player in Europe lose seventeen hundred
louis! I blush now when I think of it. it be like Charles XII or
Richard Coeur de Lion fall before a petty fortress and an unknown
hand (as my friend Mr. Johnson write), and be, in fact, a most
shameful defeat.
nor be this the only defeat. when our poor conqueror have go off,
bewilder with the treasure which fortune have fling in their way
(one of these student be call the Baron de Clootz, perhaps he
who afterwards lose his head at Paris), Pippi resume the quarrel of
the morning, and some exceedingly high word pass between we.
among other thing I recollect I knock he down with a stool, and
be for fling he out of the window; but my uncle, who be cool,
and have be keep Lent with his usual solemnity, interpose
between we, and a reconciliation take place, Pippi apologise and
confessing he have be wrong.
I ought to have doubt, however, the sincerity of the treacherous
italian; indeed, as I never before believe a word that he say in
his life, I know not why I be so foolish as to credit he now, and
go to bed, leave the key of our cash-box with he. it contain,
after our loss to the cuirassier, in bill and money, near upon
L8000 sterling. Pippi insist that our reconciliation should be
ratify over a bowl of hot wine, and I have no doubt put some
soporific drug into the liquor; for my uncle and I both sleep till
very late the next morning, and wake with violent headache and
fever: we do not quit our bed till noon. he have be go twelve
hour, leave our treasury empty; and behind he a sort of
calculation, by which he strove to make out that this be his share
of the profit, and that all the loss have be incur without
his consent.
thus, after eighteen month, we have to begin the world again. but
be I cast down? no. our wardrobe still be worth a very large sum
of money; for gentleman do not dress like parish-clerk in those
day, and a person of fashion would often wear a suit of clothe and
a set of ornament that would be a shop-boy's fortune; so, without
repining for one single minute, or say a single angry word (my
uncle's temper in this respect be admirable), or allow the
secret of our loss to be know to a mortal soul, we pawn three-
fourth of our jewel and clothe to Moses Lowe the banker, and with
the produce of the sale, and our private pocket-money, amount in
all to something less than 800 louis, we take the field again.
CHAPTER x
MORE runs of LUCK
I be not go to entertain my reader with an account of my
professional career as a gamester, any more than I do with
anecdote of my life as a military man. I might fill volume with
tale of this kind be I so minded; but at this rate, my recital
would not be bring to a conclusion for year, and who know how
soon I may be call upon to stop? I have gout, rheumatism, gravel,
and a disorder liver. I have two or three wound in my body, which
break out every now and then, and give I intolerable pain, and a
hundred more sign of break up. such be the effect of time,
illness, and free-living, upon one of the strong constitution
and fine form the world ever see. ah! I suffer from none of
these ill in the year '66, when there be no man in Europe more gay
in spirit, more splendid in personal accomplishment, than young
Redmond Barry.
before the treachery of the scoundrel Pippi, I have visit many of
the good Courts of Europe; especially the small one, where play
be patronise, and the professor of that science always welcome.
among the ecclesiastical principality of the Rhine we be
particularly well receive. I never know finer or gayer Courts than
those of the Electors of Treves and Cologne, where there be more
splendour and gaiety than at Vienna; far more than in the wretched
barrack-court of Berlin. the Court of the Archduchess-Governess of
the Netherlands be, likewise, a royal place for us knight of the
dice-box and gallant votary of fortune; whereas in the stingy
dutch or the beggarly swiss republic, it be impossible for a
gentleman to gain a livelihood unmoleste.
after our mishap at Mannheim, my uncle and I make for the Duchy of
x---. the reader may find out the place easily enough; but I do not
choose to print at full the name of some illustrious person in
whose society I then fall, and among whom I be make the sharer in a
very strange and tragical adventure.
there be no Court in Europe at which stranger be more welcome
than at that of the noble Duke of x---; none where pleasure be more
eagerly seek after, and more splendidly enjoy. the Prince do
not inhabit his capital of S---, but, imitate in every respect the
ceremonial of the Court of Versailles, build himself a magnificent
palace at a few league from his chief city, and round about his
palace a superb aristocratic town, inhabit entirely by his noble,
and the officer of his sumptuous Court. the people be rather
hardly press, to be sure, in order to keep up this splendour; for
his Highness's dominion be small, and so he wisely live in a
sort of awful retirement from they, seldom show his face in his
capital, or see any countenance but those of his faithful
domestic and officer. his palace and garden of Ludwigslust be
exactly on the french model. twice a week there be court
reception, and grand Court gala twice a month. there be the
fine opera out of France, and a ballet unrivalle in splendour; on
which his Highness, a great lover of music and dancing, expend
prodigious sum. it may be because I be then young, but I think I
never see such an assemblage of brilliant beauty as use to figure
there on the stage of the Court theatre, in the grand mythological
ballet which be then the mode, and in which you see Mars in red-
heel pump and a periwig, and Venus in patch and a hoop. they
say the costume be incorrect, and have change it since; but for my
part, I have never see a Venus more lovely than the Coralie, who
be the chief dancer, and find no fault with the attendant nymph,
in their train, and lappet, and powder. these opera use to take
place twice a week, after which some great officer of the Court
would have his evening, and his brilliant supper, and the dice-box
rattle everywhere, and all the world play. I have see seventy
play-table set out in the grand gallery of Ludwigslust, besides the
faro-bank; where the Duke himself would graciously come and play,
and win or lose with a truly royal splendour.
it be hither we come after the Mannheim misfortune. the nobility of
the Court be pleased to say our reputation have precede we, and
the two irish gentleman be make welcome. the very first night at
Court we lose 740 of our 800 louis; the next evening, at the Court
Marshal's table, I win they back, with 1300 more. you may be sure we
allow no one to know how near we be to ruin on the first
evening; but, on the contrary, I endear every one to I by my gay
manner of losing, and the Finance Minister himself cash a note for
400 ducat, draw by I upon my steward of Ballybarry Castle in the
kingdom of Ireland; which very note I win from his Excellency the
next day, along with a considerable sum in ready cash. in that noble
Court everybody be a gambler. you would see the lacquey in the
ducal ante-room at work with their dirty pack of card; the coach
and chair man play in the court, while their master be punt
in the saloon above; the very cook-maid and scullion, I be tell,
have a bank, where one of they, an italian confectioner, make a
handsome fortune: he purchase afterwards a roman marquisate, and
his son have figure as one of the most fashionable of the
illustrious foreigner in London. the poor devil of soldier play
away their pay when they get it, which be seldom; and I donot
believe there be an officer in any one of the guard regiment but
have his card in his pouch, and no more forget his dice than his
sword-knot. among such fellow it be diamond cut diamond. what you
call fair play would have be a folly. the gentleman of Ballybarry
would have be fool indeed to appear as pigeon in such a hawk's
nest. none but man of courage and genius could live and prosper in a
society where every one be bold and clever; and here my uncle and I
hold our own: ay, and more than our own.
his Highness the Duke be a widower, or rather, since the death of
the reign duchess, have contract a morganatic marriage with a
lady whom he have ennoble, and who consider it a compliment (such
be the morality of those day) to be call the Northern Dubarry.
he have be marry very young, and his son, the Hereditary Prince,
may be say to have be the political sovereign of the state: for
the reign Duke be fonder of pleasure than of politic, and love
to talk a great deal more with his grand huntsman, or the director
of his opera, than with minister and ambassador.
the Hereditary Prince, whom I shall call Prince Victor, be of a
very different character from his august father. he have make the
Wars of the Succession and Seven Years with great credit in the
Empress's service, be of a stern character, seldom appear at
Court, except when ceremony call he, but live almost alone in
his wing of the palace, where he devote himself to the severe
study, be a great astronomer and chemist. he share in the rage
then common throughout Europe, of hunt for the philosopher's
stone; and my uncle often regret that he have no smattering of
chemistry, like Balsamo (who call himself Cagliostro), St.
Germain, and other individual, who have obtain very great sum
from Duke Victor by aid he in his search after the great secret.
his amusement be hunt and review the troop; but for he,
and if his good-natured father have not have his aid, the army would
have be play at card all day, and so it be well that the
prudent prince be leave to govern.
Duke Victor be fifty year of age, and his princess, the Princess
Olivia, be scarce three-and-twenty. they have be marry seven
year, and in the first year of their union the Princess have bear
he a son and a daughter. the stern moral and manner, the dark and
ungainly appearance, of the husband, be little likely to please
the brilliant and fascinating young woman, who have be educate in
the south (she be connect with the ducal house of S---), who have
pass two year at Paris under the guardianship of Mesdames the
daughter of his Most christian Majesty, and who be the life and
soul of the Court of X---, the gayest of the gay, the idol of she
august father-in-law, and, indeed, of the whole Court. she be not
beautiful, but charming; not witty, but charming, too, in her
conversation as in her person. she be extravagant beyond all
measure; so false, that you could not trust she; but her very
weakness be more win than the virtue of other woman, her
selfishness more delightful than other' generosity. I never know a
woman whose fault make she so attractive. she use to ruin people,
and yet they all love she. my old uncle have see she cheat at
ombre, and let she win 400 louis without resist in the least. her
caprice with the officer and lady of her household be
ceaseless: but they adore she. she be the only one of the reign
family whom the people worship. she never go abroad but they
follow her carriage with shout of acclamation: and, to be
generous to they, she would borrow the last penny from one of her
poor maid of honour, whom she would never pay. in the early day
her husband be as much fascinated by she as all the rest of the
world be; but her caprice have cause frightful outbreak of temper
on his part, and an estrangement which, though interrupt by almost
mad return of love, be still general. I speak of her Royal
Highness with perfect candour and admiration, although I might be
pardon for judge she more severely, consider her opinion of
myself. she say the eld Monsieur de Balibari be a finished old
gentleman, and the young one have the manner of a courier. the
world have give a different opinion, and I can afford to chronicle
this almost single sentence against I. besides, she have a reason
for her dislike to I, which you shall hear.
five year in the army, long experience of the world, have ere now
dispel any of those romantic notion regard love with which I
commence life; and I have determine, as be proper with gentleman
(it be only your low people who marry for mere affection), to
consolidate my fortune by marriage. in the course of our
peregrination, my uncle and I have make several attempt to carry
this object into effect; but numerous disappointment have occur
which be not worth mention here, and have prevent I hitherto
from make such a match as I think be worthy of a man of my
birth, ability, and personal appearance. lady be not in the
habit of run away on the continent, as be the custom in England
(a custom whereby many honourable gentleman of my country have much
benefit!); guardian, and ceremony, and difficulty of all
kind intervene; true love be not allow to have its course, and
poor woman cannot give away their honest heart to the gallant
fellow who have win they. now it be settlement that be ask
for; now it be my pedigree and title-deed that be not
satisfactory: though I have a plan and rent-roll of the Ballybarry
estate, and the genealogy of the family up to King Brian Boru, or
Barry, most handsomely design on paper; now it be a young lady
who be whisk off to a convent just as she be ready to fall into
my arm; on another occasion, when a rich widow of the Low Countries
be about to make I lord of a noble estate in Flanders, come an
order of the police which drive I out of Brussels at an hour's
notice, and consign my mourner to her chateau. but at X---I have an
opportunity of play a great game: and have win it too, but for the
dreadful catastrophe which upset my fortune.
in the household of the Hereditary Princess there be a lady
nineteen year of age, and possessor of the great fortune in the
whole duchy. the Countess Ida, such be her name, be daughter of a
late Minister and favourite of his Highness the Duke of X---and his
Duchess, who have do she the honour to be her sponsor at birth,
and who, at the father's death, have take she under their august
guardianship and protection. at sixteen she be bring from her
castle, where, up to that period, she have be permit to reside,
and have be place with the Princess Olivia, as one of her
Highness's maid of honour.
the aunt of the Countess Ida, who preside over her house during her
minority, have foolishly allow she to contract an attachment for
her cousin-german, a penniless sub-lieutenant in one of the Duke's
foot regiment, who have flatter himself to be able to carry off
this rich prize; and if he have not be a blunder silly idiot
indeed, with the advantage of see she constantly, of have no
rival near he, and the intimacy attendant upon close kinsmanship,
might easily, by a private marriage, have secure the young Countess
and her possession. but he manage matter so foolishly, that he
allow she to leave her retirement, to come to Court for a year,
and take her place in the Princess Olivia's household; and then what
do my young gentleman do, but appear at the Duke's levee one day,
in his tarnish epaulet and threadbare coat, and make an
application in due form to his Highness, as the young lady's
guardian, for the hand of the rich heiress in his dominion!
the weakness of the good-natured Prince be such that, as the
Countess Ida herself be quite as eager for the match as her silly
cousin, his Highness might have be induce to allow the match, have
not the Princess Olivia be induce to interpose, and to procure
from the Duke a peremptory veto to the hope of the young man. the
cause of this refusal be as yet unknown; no other suitor for the
young lady's hand be mention, and the lover continue to
correspond, hop that time might effect a change in his Highness's
resolution; when, of a sudden, the lieutenant be draft into one
of the regiment which the Prince be in the habit of sell to the
great power then at war (this military commerce be a principal
part of his Highness's and other prince' revenue in those day),
and their connection be thus abruptly break off.
it be strange that the Princess Olivia should have take this part
against a young lady who have be her favourite; for, at first, with
those romantic and sentimental notion which almost every woman have,
she have somewhat encourage the Countess Ida and her penniless
lover, but now suddenly turn against they; and, from love the
Countess, as she previously have do, pursue she with every manner
of hatred which a woman know how to inflict: there be no end to
the ingenuity of her torture, the venom of her tongue, the
bitterness of her sarcasm and scorn. when I first come to Court at
X--, the young fellow there have nickname the young lady the Dumme
Grafinn, the stupid Countess. she be generally silent, handsome,
but pale, stolid-look, and awkward; take no interest in the
amusement of the place, and appear in the midst of the feast as
glum as the death'-head which, they say, the Romans use to have at
their table.
it be rumour that a young gentleman of french extraction, the
Chevalier de Magny, equerry to the Hereditary Prince, and present at
Paris when the Princess Olivia be married to he by proxy there,
be the intended of the rich Countess Ida; but no official
declaration of the kind be yet make, and there be whisper of a
dark intrigue: which, subsequently, receive frightful confirmation.
this Chevalier de Magny be the grandson of an old general officer
in the Duke's service, the Baron de Magny. the Baron's father have
quit France at the expulsion of Protestants after the revocation
of the edict of Nantes, and take service in X--, where he die. the
son succeed he, and, quite unlike most french gentleman of birth
whom I have know, be a stern and cold Calvinist, rigid in the
performance of his duty, retire in his manner, mingle little
with the Court, and a close friend and favourite of Duke Victor;
whom he resemble in disposition.
the Chevalier his grandson be a true frenchman; he have be bear in
France, where his father hold a diplomatic appointment in the Duke's
service. he have mingle in the gay society of the most brilliant
Court in the world, and have endless story to tell we of the
pleasure of the petite maison, of the secret of the Parc aux
Cerfs, and of the wild gaiety of Richelieu and his companion. he
have be almost ruin at play, as his father have be before he;
for, out of the reach of the stern old Baron in Germany, both son
and grandson have lead the most reckless of life. he come back from
Paris soon after the embassy which have be despatch thither on
the occasion of the marriage of the Princess, be receive sternly
by his old grandfather; who, however, pay his debt once more, and
procure he the post in the Duke's household. the Chevalier de
Magny render himself a great favourite of his august master; he
bring with he the mode and the gaiety of Paris; he be the
deviser of all the masquerade and ball, the recruiter of the
ballet-dancer, and by far the most brilliant and splendid young
gentleman of the Court.
after we have be a few week at Ludwigslust, the old Baron de Magny
endeavour to have we dismiss from the duchy; but his voice be
not strong enough to overcome that of the general public, and the
Chevalier de Magny especially stand our friend with his Highness
when the question be debate before he. the Chevalier's love of
play have not desert he. he be a regular frequenter of our bank,
where he play for some time with pretty good luck; and where, when
he begin to lose, he pay with a regularity surprising to all those
who know the smallness of his mean, and the splendour of his
appearance.
her Highness the Princess Olivia be also very fond of play. on
half-a-dozen occasion when we hold a bank at Court, I could see she
passion for the game. I could see--that is, my cool-head old uncle
could see--much more. there be an intelligence between Monsieur de
Magny and this illustrious lady. 'if her highness be not in love
with the little Frenchman,' my uncle say to I one night after
play, 'may I lose the sight of my last eye!'
'and what then, sir?' say I.
'what then?' say my uncle, look I hard in the face. 'be you so
green as not to know what then? your fortune be to be make, if you
choose to back it now; and we may have back the Barry estate in two
year, my boy.'
'how be that?' ask I, still at a loss.
my uncle drily say, 'get magny to play; never mind his paying: take
his note of hand. the more he owe the well; but, above all, make
he play.'
'he cannot pay a shilling,' answer I. 'the Jews will not discount
his note at cent. per cent.'
'so much the well. you shall see we will make use of they,'
answer the old gentleman. and I must confess that the plan he lay
be a gallant, clever, and fair one.
I be to make Magny play; in this there be no great difficulty. we
have an intimacy together, for he be a good sportsman as well as
myself, and we come to have a pretty considerable friendship for one
another; if he see a dice-box it be impossible to prevent he from
handle it; but he take to it as natural as a child do to
sweetmeat.
at first he win of I; then he begin to lose; then I play he
money against some jewel that he bring: family trinket, he say,
and indeed of considerable value. he beg I, however, not to
dispose of they in the duchy, and I give and keep my word to he to
this effect. from jewel he get to play upon promissory note;
and as they would not allow he to play at the Court table and in
public upon credit, he be very glad to have an opportunity of
indulge his favourite passion in private. I have have he for hour
at my pavilion (which I have fit up in the eastern manner, very
splendid) rattle the dice till it become time to go to his service
at Court, and we would spend day after day in this manner. he
bring I more jewels,--a pearl necklace, an antique emerald breast
ornament, and other trinket, as a set-off against these loss: for
I need not say that I should not have play with he all this time
have he be win; but, after about a week, the luck set in
against he, and he become my debtor in a prodigious sum. I do not
care to mention the extent of it; it be such as I never think the
young man could pay.
why, then, do I play for it? why waste day in private play with a
mere bankrupt, when business seemingly much more profitable be to
be do elsewhere? my reason I boldly confess. I want to win from
Monsieur de Magny, not his money, but his intended wife, the
Countess Ida. who can say that I have not a right to use any
stratagem in this matter of love? or, why say love? I want the
wealth of the lady: I love she quite as much as Magny do; I love
she quite as much as yonder blush virgin of seventeen do who
marry an old lord of seventy. I follow the practice of the world
in this; have resolve that marriage should achieve my fortune.
I use to make magny, after his loss, give I a friendly letter of
acknowledgment to some such effect as this,--
'MY dear MONSIEUR DE BALIBARI,--I acknowledge to have lose to you
this day at lansquenet [or picquet, or hazard, as the case may be: I
be master of he at any game that be play] the sum of three
hundred ducat, and shall hold it as a great kindness on your part
if you will allow the debt to stand over until a future day, when
you shall receive payment from your very grateful humble servant.'
with the jewel he bring I I also take the precaution (but this
be my uncle's idea, and a very good one) to have a sort of invoice,
and a letter beg I to receive the trinket as so much part
payment of a sum of money he owe I.
when I have put he in such a position as I deem favourable to my
intention, I speak to he candidly, and without any reserve, as one
man of the world should speak to another. 'I will not, my dear
fellow,' say I, 'pay you so bad a compliment as to suppose that you
expect we be to go on play at this rate much long, and that
there be any satisfaction to I in possess more or less sheet of
paper bear your signature, and a series of note of hand which I
know you never can pay. donot look fierce or angry, for you know
Redmond Barry be your master at the sword; besides, I would not be
such a fool as to fight a man who owe I so much money; but hear
calmly what I have to propose.
'you have be very confidential to I during our intimacy of the
last month; and I know all your personal affair completely. you
have give your word of honour to your grandfather never to play
upon parole, and you know how you have keep it, and that he will
disinherit you if he hear the truth. Nay, suppose he die to-
morrow, his estate be not sufficient to pay the sum in which you be
indebted to I; and, be you to yield I up all, you would be a
beggar, and a bankrupt too.
'her Highness the Princess Olivia deny you nothing. I shall not
ask why; but give I leave to say, I be aware of the fact when we
begin to play together.'
'will you be make baron-chamberlain, with the grand cordon of the
order?' gasp the poor fellow. 'the Princess can do anything with
the Duke.'
'I shall have no objection,' say I, 'to the yellow riband and the
gold key; though a gentleman of the house of Ballybarry care little
for the title of the german nobility. but this be not what I want.
my good Chevalier, you have hide no secret from I. you have tell I
with what difficulty you have induce the Princess Olivia to consent
to the project of your union with the Grafinn Ida, whom you donot
love. I know whom you love very well.'
'Monsieur de Balibari!' say the discomfited Chevalier; he could get
out no more. the truth begin to dawn upon he.
'you begin to understand,' continued I. 'her Highness the Princess'
(I say this in a sarcastic way) 'will not be very angry, believe
I, if you break off your connection with the stupid Countess. I be
no more an admirer of that lady than you be; but I want her estate.
I play you for that estate, and have win it; and I will give you
your bill and five thousand ducat on the day I be married to it.'
'the day _i_ be married to the Countess,' answer the Chevalier,
think to have I, 'I will be able to raise money to pay your
claim ten time over' (this be true, for the Countess's property
may have be value at near half a million of our money); 'and then
I will discharge my obligation to you. meanwhile, if you annoy I
by threat, or insult I again as you have do, I will use that
influence, which, as you say, I possess, and have you turn out of
the duchy, as you be out of the Netherlands last year.'
I ring the bell quite quietly. 'Zamor,' say I to a tall negro
fellow habit like a Turk, that use to wait upon I, 'when you
hear the bell ring a second time, you will take this packet to the
Marshal of the Court, this to his Excellency the General de Magny,
and this you will place in the hand of one of the equerry of his
Highness the Hereditary Prince. wait in the ante-room, and do not go
with the parcel until I ring again.'
the black fellow have retire, I turn to Monsieur de Magny and
say, 'Chevalier, the first packet contain a letter from you to I,
declare your solvency, and solemnly promise payment of the sum
you owe I; it be accompany by a document from myself (for I
expect some resistance on your part), state that my honour have
be call in question, and beg that the paper may be lay
before your august master his Highness. the second packet be for
your grandfather, enclose the letter from you in which you state
yourself to be his heir, and beg for a confirmation of the fact.
the last parcel, for his Highness the Hereditary Duke,' add I,
look most sternly, 'contain the Gustavus Adolphus emerald, which
he give to his princess, and which you pledge to I as a family
jewel of your own. your influence with her Highness must be great
indeed,' I conclude, 'when you could extort from her such a jewel
as that, and when you could make she, in order to pay your play-
debt, give up a secret upon which both your head depend.'
'villain!' say the Frenchman, quite aghast with fury and terror,
'would you implicate the Princess?'
'Monsieur de Magny,' I answer, with a sneer, 'no: I will say you
steal the jewel.' it be my belief he do, and that the unhappy and
infatuate Princess be never privy to the theft until long after it
have be commit. how we come to know the history of the emerald
be simple enough. as we want money (for my occupation with Magny
cause our bank to be much neglect), my uncle have carry Magny's
trinket to Mannheim to pawn. the Jew who lend upon they know the
history of the stone in question; and when he ask how her Highness
come to part with it, my uncle very cleverly take up the story where
he find it, say that the Princess be very fond of play, that it
be not always convenient to she to pay, and hence the emerald have
come into our hand. he bring it wisely back with he to S--; and,
as regard the other jewel which the Chevalier pawn to we, they
be of no particular mark: no inquiry have ever be make about
they to this day; and I do not only not know then that they come
from her Highness, but have only my conjecture upon the matter now.
the unfortunate young gentleman must have have a cowardly spirit,
when I charge he with the theft, not to make use of my two pistol
that be lie by chance before he, and to send out of the world
his accuser and his own ruin self. with such imprudence and
miserable recklessness on his part and that of the unhappy lady who
have forget herself for this poor villain, he must have know that
discovery be inevitable. but it be write that this dreadful
destiny should be accomplish: instead of end like a man, he now
cower before I quite spirit-break, and, fling himself down on
the sofa, burst into tear, call wildly upon all the saint to
help he: as if they could be interested in the fate of such a
wretch as he!
I see that I have nothing to fear from he; and, call back Zamor
my black, say I would myself carry the parcel, which I return to
my escritoire; and, my point be thus gain, I act, as I always
do, generously towards he. I say that, for security's sake, I
should send the emerald out of the country, but that I pledge my
honour to restore it to the Duchess, without any pecuniary
consideration, on the day when she should procure the sovereign's
consent to my union with the Countess Ida.
this will explain pretty clearly, I flatter myself, the game I be
play; and, though some rigid moralist may object to its
propriety, I say that anything be fair in love, and that man so poor
as myself cannot afford to be squeamish about their mean of get
on in life. the great and rich be welcome, smile, up the grand
staircase of the world; the poor but aspiring must clamber up the
wall, or push and struggle up the back stair, or, PARDI, crawl
through any of the conduit of the house, never mind how foul and
narrow, that lead to the top. the unambitious sluggard pretend that
the eminence be not worth attain, decline altogether the
struggle, and call himself a philosopher. I say he be a poor-
spirited coward. what be life good for but for honour? and that be
so indispensable, that we should attain it anyhow.
the manner to be adopt for Magny's retreat be propose by myself,
and be arrange so as to consult the feeling of delicacy of both
party. I make Magny take the Countess Ida aside, and say to she,
'Madam, though I have never declare myself your admirer, you and
the Court have have sufficient proof of my regard for you; and my
demand would, I know, have be back by his Highness, your august
guardian. I know the Duke's gracious wish be, that my attention
should be receive favourably; but, as time have not appear to
alter your attachment elsewhere, and as I have too much spirit to
force a lady of your name and rank to be unite to I against your
will, the good plan be, that I should make you, for form's sake, a
proposal unauthorise by his Highness: that you should reply, as I
be sorry to think your heart dictate to you, in the negative: on
which I also will formally withdraw from my pursuit of you, state
that, after a refusal, nothing, not even the Duke's desire, should
induce I to persist in my suit.'
the Countess Ida almost weep at hear these word from Monsieur de
Magny, and tear come into her eye, he say, as she take his hand
for the first time, and thank he for the delicacy of the
proposal. she little know that the Frenchman be incapable of that
sort of delicacy, and that the graceful manner in which he withdraw
his address be of my invention.
as soon as he withdraw, it become my business to step forward; but
cautiously and gently, so as not to alarm the lady, and yet firmly,
so as to convince she of the hopelessness of her design of unite
herself with her shabby lover, the sub-lieutenant. the Princess
Olivia be good enough to perform this necessary part of the plan in
my favour, and solemnly to warn the Countess Ida, that, though
Monsieur de Magny have retire from pay his address, his
Highness her guardian would still marry she as he think fit, and
that she must for ever forget her out-at-elbowed adorer. in fact, I
cannot conceive how such a shabby rogue as that could ever have have
the audacity to propose for she: his birth be certainly good; but
what other qualification have he?
when the Chevalier de Magny withdraw, number of other suitor, you
may be sure, present themselves; and amongst these your very
humble servant, the cadet of Ballybarry. there be a carrousel, or
tournament, hold at this period, in imitation of the antique
meeting of chivalry, in which the chevalier tilt at each other,
or at the ring; and on this occasion I be habit in a splendid
roman dress (viz., a silver helmet, a flow periwig, a cuirass of
gilt leather richly embroider, a light blue velvet mantle, and
crimson morocco half-boot): and in this habit I ride my bay horse
Brian, carry off three ring, and win the prize over all the
Duke's gentry, and the nobility of surround country who have
come to the show. a wreath of gild laurel be to be the prize of
the victor, and it be to be award by the lady he select. so I
ride up to the gallery where the Countess Ida be seat behind the
Hereditary Princess, and, call her name loudly, yet gracefully,
beg to be allow to be crown by she, and thus proclaim
myself to the face of all Germany, as it be, her suitor. she
turn very pale, and the Princess red, I observe; but the Countess
Ida end by crown I: after which, put spur into my horse,
I gallop round the ring, salute his Highness the Duke at the
opposite end, and perform the most wonderful exercise with my
bay.
my success do not, as you may imagine, increase my popularity with
the young gentry. they call I adventurer, bully, dice-loader,
impostor, and a hundred pretty name; but I have a way of silence
these gentry. I take the Count de Schmetterling, the rich and
brave of the young man who seem to have a hankering for the
Countess Ida, and publicly insult he at the ridotto; fling my
card into his face. the next day I ride thirty-five mile into the
territory of the Elector of B----, and meet Monsieur de
Schmetterling, and pass my sword twice through his body; then ride
back with my second, the Chevalier de Magny, and present myself at
the Duchess's whist that evening. magny be very unwilling to
accompany I at first; but I insist upon his support, and that he
should countenance my quarrel. directly after pay my homage to
her Highness, I go up to the Countess Ida, and make she a marked
and low obeisance, gaze at she steadily in the face until she grow
crimson red; and then star round at every man who form she
circle, until, MA FOI, I star they all away. I instruct Magny to
say, everywhere, that the Countess be madly in love with I; which
commission, along with many other of mine, the poor devil be
oblige to perform. he make rather a sotte figure, as the French
say, act the pioneer for I, praise I everywhere, accompany
I always! he who have be the pink of the MODE until my arrival; he
who think his pedigree of beggarly baron of Magny be superior to
the race of great irish king from which I descend; who have
sneer at I a hundred time as a spadassin, a deserter, and have
call I a vulgar irish upstart. now I have my revenge of the
gentleman, and take it too.
I use to call he, in the choice society, by his christian name
of Maxime. I would say, 'Bon jour, Maxime; comment vas-TU?' in the
Princess's hearing, and could see he bite his lip for fury and
vexation. but I have he under my thumb, and her Highness too--I,
poor private of Bulow's regiment. and this be a proof of what genius
and perseverance can do, and should act as a warning to great people
never to have secrets--if they can help it.
I know the Princess hat I; but what do I care? she know I know
all: and indeed, I believe, so strong be her prejudice against I,
that she think I be an indelicate villain, capable of betray a
lady, which I would scorn to do; so that she tremble before I as a
child before its schoolmaster. she would, in her woman's way, too,
make all sort of joke and sneer at I on reception day; ask
about my palace in Ireland, and the king my ancestor, and whether,
when I be a private in Bulow's foot, my royal relative have
interpose to rescue I, and whether the cane be smartly
administer there,--anythe to mortify I. but, Heaven bless you!
I can make allowance for people, and use to laugh in her face.
whilst her jibe and jeer be continue, it be my pleasure to
look at poor magny and see how he bear they. the poor devil be
tremble lest I should break out under the Princess's sarcasm and
tell all; but my revenge be, when the Princess attack I, to say
something bitter to HIM,--to pass it on, as boy do at school. and
that be the thing which use to make her Highness feel. she would
wince just as much when I attack Magny as if I have be say
anything rude to herself. and, though she hat I, she use to beg
my pardon in private; and though her pride would often get the
well of she, yet her prudence oblige this magnificent princess to
humble herself to the poor penniless irish boy.
as soon as Magny have formally withdraw from the Countess Ida, the
Princess take the young lady into favour again, and pretend to be
very fond of she. to do they justice, I donot know which of the two
dislike I most,--the Princess, who be all eagerness, and fire,
and coquetry; or the Countess, who be all state and splendour. the
latter, especially, pretend to be disgust by I: and yet, after
all, I have please her better; be once one of the handsome man
in Europe, and would defy any heyduc of the Court to measure a chest
or a leg with I: but I do not care for any of her silly
prejudice, and determine to win she and wear she in spite of
herself. be it on account of her personal charm or quality? no.
she be quite white, thin, short-sight, tall, and awkward, and my
taste be quite the contrary; and as for her mind, no wonder that a
poor creature who have a hankering after a wretched ragged ensign
could never appreciate I. it be her estate I make love to; as for
herself, it would be a reflection on my taste as a man of fashion to
own that I like she.
CHAPTER XI
in which the LUCK go against BARRY
my hope of obtain the hand of one of the rich heiress in
Germany be now, as far as all human probability go, and as far
as my own merit and prudence could secure my fortune, pretty
certain of completion. I be admit whenever I present myself at
the Princess's apartment, and have as frequent opportunity as I
desire of see the Countess Ida there. I cannot say that she
receive I with any particular favour; the silly young creature's
affection be, as I have say, engage ignobly elsewhere; and,
however captivate my own person and manner may have be, it be
not to be expect that she should all of a sudden forget her lover
for the sake of the young irish gentleman who be pay his
address to she. but such little rebuff as I get be far from
discourage I. I have very powerful friend, who be to aid I in
my undertaking; and know that, soon or later, the victory must be
mine. in fact, I only wait my time to press my suit. who could
tell the dreadful stroke of fortune which be impend over my
illustrious protectress, and which be to involve I partially in
her ruin?
all thing seem for a while quite prosperous to my wish; and in
spite of the Countess Ida's disinclination, it be much easy to
bring she to her sens than, perhaps, may be suppose in a silly
constitutional country like England, where people be not bring up
with those wholesome sentiment of obedience to Royalty which be
customary in Europe at the time when I be a young man.
I have state how, through Magny, I have the Princess, as it be, at
my foot. her Highness have only to press the match upon the old Duke,
over whom her influence be unbounded, and to secure the goodwill of
the Countess of Liliengarten, (which be the romantic title of his
Highness's morganatic spouse), and the easy old man would give an
order for the marriage: which his ward would perforce obey. Madame
de Liliengarten be, too, from her position, extremely anxious to
oblige the Princess Olivia; who might be call upon any day to
occupy the throne. the old Duke be tottering, apoplectic, and
exceedingly fond of good living. when he be go, his relict would
find the patronage of the Duchess Olivia most necessary to she.
hence there be a close mutual understanding between the two lady;
and the world say that the Hereditary Princess be already indebte
to the favourite for help on various occasion. her Highness have
obtain, through the Countess, several large grant of money for
the payment of her multifarious debt; and she be now good enough
to exert her gracious influence over Madame de Liliengarten in order
to obtain for I the object so near my heart. it be not to be
suppose that my end be to be obtain without continual
unwillingness and refusal on Magny's part; but I push my point
resolutely, and have mean in my hand of overcome the stubbornness
of that feeble young gentleman. also, I may say, without vanity,
that if the high and mighty Princess detest I, the Countess
(though she be of extremely low origin, it be say) have well
taste and admire I. she often do we the honour to go partner
with we in one of our faro-bank, and declare that I be the
handsome man in the duchy. all I be require to prove be my
nobility, and I get at Vienna such a pedigree as would satisfy the
most greedy in that way. in fact, what have a man descend from the
Barrys and the Bradys to fear before any VON in Germany? by way of
make assurance doubly sure, I promise Madame de Liliengarten ten
thousand louis on the day of my marriage, and she know that as a
play-man I have never fail in my word: and I vow, that have I pay
fifty per cent. for it, I would have get the money.
thus by my talent, honesty, and acuteness, I have, consider I be
a poor patronless outcast, raise for myself very powerful
protector. even his Highness the Duke Victor be favourably
inclined to I; for, his favourite charger fall ill of the
stagger, I give he a ball such as my uncle Brady use to
administer, and cure the horse; after which his Highness be
pleased to notice I frequently. he invite I to his hunting and
shooting party, where I show myself to be a good sportsman; and
once or twice he condescend to talk to I about my prospect in
life, lament that I have take to gambling, and that I have not
adopt a more regular mean of advancement. 'Sir,' say I, 'if you
will allow I to speak frankly to your Highness, play with I be
only a means to an end. where should I have be without it? a
private still in King Frederick's grenadier. I come of a race which
give prince to my country; but persecution have deprive they of
their vast possession. my uncle's adherence to his ancient faith
drive he from our country. I too resolve to seek advancement in
the military service; but the insolence and ill-treatment which I
receive at the hand of the English be not bearable by a high-
bear gentleman, and I flee their service. it be only to fall into
another bondage to all appearance still more hopeless; when my good
star send a preserver to I in my uncle, and my spirit and gallantry
enable I to take advantage of the mean of escape afford I.
since then we have live, I do not disguise it, by play; but who can
say I have do he a wrong? yet, if I could find myself in an
honourable post, and with an assured maintenance, I would never,
except for amusement, such as every gentleman must have, touch a
card again. I beseech your Highness to inquire of your resident at
Berlin if I do not on every occasion act as a gallant soldier. I
feel that I have talent of a high order, and should be proud to
have occasion to exert they; if, as I do not doubt, my fortune shall
bring they into play.'
the candour of this statement strike his Highness greatly, and
impress he in my favour, and he be pleased to say that he
believe I, and would be glad to stand my friend.
have thus the two Dukes, the Duchess, and the reign favourite
enlisted on my side, the chance certainly be that I should carry
off the great prize; and I ought, accord to all common
calculation, to have be a Prince of the Empire at this present
writing, but that my ill luck pursue I in a matter in which I be
not the least to blame,--the unhappy Duchess's attachment to the
weak, silly, cowardly Frenchman. the display of this love be
painful to witness, as its end be frightful to think of. the
Princess make no disguise of it. if Magny speak a word to a lady of
her household, she would be jealous, and attack with all the fury of
her tongue the unlucky offender. she would send he a half-dozen of
note in the day: at his arrival to join her circle or the court
which she hold, she would brighten up, so that all might perceive.
it be a wonder that her husband have not long ere this be make
aware of her faithlessness; but the Prince Victor be himself of so
high and stern a nature that he could not believe in she stoop so
far from her rank as to forget her virtue: and I have hear say,
that when hint be give to he of the evident partiality which
the Princess show for the equerry, his answer be a stern command
never more to be trouble on the subject. 'the Princess be light-
minded,' he say; 'she be bring up at a frivolous court; but her
folly go not beyond coquetry: crime be impossible; she have her
birth, and my name, and her child, to defend she.' and he would
ride off to his military inspection and be absent for week, or
retire to his suite of apartment, and remain closeted there whole
day; only appear to make a bow at her Highness's levee, or to
give she his hand at the Court gala, where ceremony require that
he should appear. he be a man of vulgar taste, and I have see he
in the private garden, with his great ungainly figure, run
race, or play at ball with his little son and daughter, whom he
would find a dozen pretext daily for visit. the serene child
be bring to their mother every morning at she toilette; but she
receive they very indifferently: except on one occasion, when the
young Duke Ludwig get his little uniform as colonel of hussar,
be present with a regiment by his godfather the Emperor
Leopold. then, for a day or two, the Duchess Olivia be charm with
the little boy; but she grow tired of he speedily, as a child do
of a toy. I remember one day, in the morning circle, some of the
Princess's rouge come off on the arm of her son's little white
military jacket; on which she slap the poor child's face, and
send he sob away. oh, the woe that have be work by woman
in this world! the misery into which man have lightly step with
smile face; often not even with the excuse of passion, but from
mere foppery, vanity, and bravado! man play with these dreadful two-
edge tool, as if no harm could come to they. I, who have see more
of life than most man, if I have a son, would go on my knee to he
and beg he to avoid woman, who be bad than poison. once intrigue,
and your whole life be endanger: you never know when the evil may
fall upon you; and the woe of whole family, and the ruin of
innocent people perfectly dear to you, may be cause by a moment of
your folly.
when I see how entirely lose the unlucky Monsieur de Magny seem to
be, in spite of ail the claim I have against he, I urge he to
fly. he have room in the palace, in the garret over the Princess's
quarter (the building be a huge one, and accommodate almost a
city of noble retainer of the family); but the infatuated young
fool would not budge, although he have not even the excuse of love
for stay. 'how she squint,' he would say of the Princess, 'and
how crooked she be! she think no one can perceive her deformity.
she write I verse out of Gresset or Crebillon, and fancy I
believe they to be original. Bah! they be no more her own than her
hair be!' it be in this way that the wretched lad be dance over
the ruin that be yawn under he. I do believe that his chief
pleasure in make love to the Princess be, that he might write
about his victory to his friend of the petite maison at Paris,
where he long to be consider as a wit and a VAINQUEUR DE DAMES.
see the young man's recklessness, and the danger of his position,
I become very anxious that MY little scheme should be bring to a
satisfactory end, and press he warmly on the matter.
my solicitation with he be, I need not say, from the nature of
the connection between we, generally pretty successful; and, in
fact, the poor fellow could refuse I nothing: as I use often
laughingly to say to he, very little to his liking. but I use more
than threat, or the legitimate influence I have over he. I use
delicacy and generosity; as a proof of which, I may mention that I
promise to give back to the Princess the family emerald, which I
mention in the last chapter that I have win from her unprincipled
admirer at play.
this be do by my uncle's consent, and be one of the usual act
of prudence and foresight which distinguish that clever man. "Press
the matter now, Redmond my boy," he would urge. "this affair between
her Highness and Magny must end ill for both of they, and that soon;
and where will be your chance to win the Countess then? now be your
time! win she and wear she before the month be over, and we will
give up the punting business, and go live like nobleman at our
castle in Swabia. get rid of that emerald, too," he add: "should
an accident happen, it will be an ugly deposit find in our hand."
this it be that make I agree to forego the possession of the
trinket; which, I must confess, I be loth to part with. it be
lucky for we both that I do: as you shall presently hear.
meanwhile, then, I urge magny: I myself speak strongly to the
Countess of Liliengarten, who promise formally to back my claim
with his Highness the reign Duke; and Monsieur de Magny be
instruct to induce the Princess Olivia to make a similar
application to the old sovereign in my behalf. it be do. the two
lady urge the Prince; his Highness (at a supper of oyster and
champagne) be bring to consent, and her Highness the Hereditary
Princess do I the honour of notify personally to the Countess
Ida that it be the Prince's will that she should marry the young
irish nobleman, the Chevalier Redmond de Balibari. the notification
be make in my presence; and though the young Countess say 'never!'
and fall down in a swoon at her lady's foot, I be, you may be sure,
entirely unconcerned at this little display of mawkish sensibility,
and feel, indeed, now that my prize be secure.
that evening I give the Chevalier de Magny the emerald, which he
promise to restore to the Princess; and now the only difficulty in
my way lie with the Hereditary Prince, of whom his father, his wife,
and the favourite, be alike afraid. he might not be dispose to
allow the rich heiress in his duchy to be carry off by a noble,
though not a wealthy foreigner. Time be necessary in order to break
the matter to Prince Victor. the Princess must find he at some
moment of good-humour. he have day of infatuation still, when he
could refuse his wife nothing; and our plan be to wait for one of
these, or for any other chance which might occur.
but it be destine that the Princess should never see her husband
at her foot, as often as he have be. Fate be prepare a terrible
end to her folly, and my own hope. in spite of his solemn
promise to I, Magny never restore the emerald to the Princess
Olivia.
he have hear, in casual intercourse with I, that my uncle and I have
be beholden to Mr. Moses Lowe, the banker of Heidelberg, who have
give we a good price for our valuable; and the infatuated young
man take a pretext to go thither, and offer the jewel for pawn.
Moses Lowe recognise the emerald at once, give Magny the sum the
latter demand, which the Chevalier lose presently at play: never,
you may be sure, acquaint we with the mean by which he have make
himself master of so much capital. we, for our part, suppose that
he have be supply by his usual banker, the Princess: and many
rouleaux of his gold piece find their way into our treasury, when
at the Court gala, at our own lodging, or at the apartment of
Madame de Liliengarten (who on these occasion do we the honour to
go half with we) we hold our bank of faro.
thus Magny's money be very soon go. but though the Jew hold his
jewel, of thrice the value no doubt of the sum he have lend upon it,
that be not all the profit which he intend to have from his
unhappy creditor; over whom he begin speedily to exercise his
authority. his hebrew connection at X--, money-broker, banker,
horse-dealer, about the Court there, must have tell their
Heidelberg brother what Magny's relation with the Princess be;
and the rascal determine to take advantage of these, and to press
to the utmost both victim. my uncle and I be, meanwhile, swimming
upon the high tide of fortune, prosper with our card, and with
the still great matrimonial game which we be play; and we
be quite unaware of the mine under our foot.
before a month be pass, the Jew begin to pester Magny. he
present himself at X--, and ask for further interest-hush-money;
otherwise he must sell the emerald. Magny get money for he; the
Princess again befriend she dastardly lover. the success of the
first demand only render the second more exorbitant. I know not
how much money be extort and pay on this unluckly emerald: but
it be the cause of the ruin of we all.
one night we be keep our table as usual at the Countess of
Liliengarten's, and Magny be in cash somehow, keep draw out
rouleau after rouleau, and play with his common ill success. in
the middle of the play a note be bring into he, which he read,
and turn very pale on peruse; but the luck be against he, and
look up rather anxiously at the clock, he wait for a few more
turn of the card, when have, I suppose, lose his last rouleau, he
get up with a wild oath that scar some of the polite company
assemble, and leave the room. a great trampling of horse be hear
without; but we be too much engage with our business to heed
the noise, and continue our play.
presently some one come into the play-room and say to the Countess,
'here be a strange story! a Jew have be murder in the Kaiserwald.
Magny be arrest when he go out of the room.' all the party
break up on hear this strange news, and we shut up our bank for
the night. Magny have be sit by I during the play (my uncle
deal and I pay and take the money), and, look under the chair,
there be a crumpled paper, which I take up and read. it be that
which have be deliver to he, and run thus:-
'if you have do it, take the orderly's horse who bring this. it
be the good of my stable. there be a hundred louis in each holster,
and the pistol be load. either course lie open to you if you
know what I mean. in a quarter of an hour I shall know our fate--
whether I be to be dishonour and survive you, whether you be
guilty and a coward, or whether you be still worthy of the name of
'M.'
this be in the handwriting of the old General de Magny; and my
uncle and I, as we walk home at night, have make and divide
with the Countess Liliengarten no inconsiderable profit that night,
feel our triumph greatly dash by the perusal of the letter. 'have
Magny,' we ask, 'rob the Jew, or have his intrigue be
discover?' in either case, my claim on the Countess Ida be
likely to meet with serious drawback: and I begin to feel that my
'great card' be play and perhaps lose.
well, it be lose: though I say, to this day, it be well and
gallantly play. after supper (which we never for fear of
consequence take during play) I become so agitated in my mind as to
what be occur that I determine to sally out about midnight
into the town, and inquire what be the real motive of Magny's
apprehension. a sentry be at the door, and signify to I that I
and my uncle be under arrest.
we be leave in our quarter for six week, so closely watch that
escape be impossible, have we desire it; but, as innocent man, we
have nothing to fear. our course of life be open to all, and we
desire and court inquiry. great and tragical event happen
during those six week; of which, though we hear the outline, as
all Europe do, when we be release from our captivity, we be
yet far from understand all the particular, which be not much
know to I for many year after. here they be, as they be tell
I by the lady, who of all the world perhaps be most likely to know
they. but the narrative have good form the content of another
chapter.
CHAPTER XII
tragical history of PRINCESS of X----
More than twenty year after the event describe in the past
chapter, I be walk with my Lady Lyndon in the Rotunda at
Ranelagh. it be in the year 1790; the emigration from France have
already commence, the old count and marquis be throng to
our shore: not starve and miserable, as one see they a few year
afterwards, but unmoleste as yet, and bring with they some token
of their national splendour. I be walk with Lady Lyndon, who,
proverbially jealous and always anxious to annoy I, spy out a
foreign lady who be evidently remark I, and of course ask who
be the hideous fat Dutchwoman who be leer at I so? I know she
not in the least. I feel I have see the lady's face somewhere (it
be now, as my wife say, enormously fat and bloated); but I do not
recognise in the bearer of that face one who have be among the most
beautiful woman in Germany in her day.
it be no other than Madame de Liliengarten, the mistress, or as
some say the morganatic wife, of the old Duke of X----, Duke
Victor's father. she have leave x----a few month after the elder
Duke's demise, have go to Paris, as I hear, where some
unprincipled adventurer have marry she for her money; but, however,
have always retain her quasi-royal title, and pretend, amidst the
great laughter of the Parisians who frequent her house, to the
honour and ceremonial of a sovereign's widow. she have a throne
erect in her state-room, and be style by her servant and those
who wish to pay court to she, or borrow money from she, 'Altesse.'
Report say she drink rather copiously--certainly her face bore
every mark of that habit, and have lose the rosy, frank, good-
humour beauty which have charm the sovereign who have ennoble
she.
although she do not address I in the circle at Ranelagh, I be at
this period as well know as the Prince of Wales, and she have no
difficulty in find my house in Berkeley Square; whither a note
be next morning despatch to I. 'an old friend of Monsieur de
Balibari,' it state (in extremely bad French), 'be anxious to see
the Chevalier again and to talk over old happy time. Rosina de
Liliengarten (can it be that Redmond Balibari have forget she?)
will be at her house in Leicester Fields all the morning, look
for one who would never have pass she by twenty year ago.'
Rosina of Liliengarten it be indeed--such a full-blow Rosina I
have seldom see. I find she in a decent first-floor in Leicester
Fields (the poor soul fall much lower afterwards) drink tea,
which have somehow a very strong smell of brandy in it; and after
salutation, which would be more tedious to recount than they be
to perform, and after far straggle conversation, she give I
briefly the follow narrative of the event in X----, which I may
well entitle the 'Princess's Tragedy.'
'you remember Monsieur de Geldern, the Police Minister. he be of
dutch extraction, and, what be more, of a family of Dutch Jews.
although everybody be aware of this blot in his scutcheon, he be
mortally angry if ever his origin be suspect; and make up for his
father' error by outrageous profession of religion, and the most
austere practice of devotion. he visit church every morning,
confess once a week, and hat Jews and Protestants as much as an
inquisitor could do. he never lose an opportunity of prove his
sincerity, by persecute one or the other whenever occasion fall in
his way.
'he hat the Princess mortally; for her Highness in some whim have
insult he with his origin, cause pork to be remove from before
he at table, or injure he in some such silly way; and he have a
violent animosity to the old Baron de Magny, both in his capacity of
Protestant, and because the latter in some haughty mood have publicly
turn his back upon he as a sharp and a spy. perpetual quarrel
be take place between they in council; where it be only the
presence of his august master that restrain the Baron from
publicly and frequently express the contempt which he feel for
the officer of police.
'thus Geldern have hatred as one reason for ruin the Princess, and
it be my belief he have a strong motive still--interest. you
remember whom the Duke marry, after the death of his first wife?--
a princess of the house of F----. Geldern build his fine palace two
year after, and, as I feel convinced, with the money which be pay
to he by the F----family for forward the match.
'to go to Prince Victor, and report to his Highness a case which
everybody know, be not by any mean Geldern's desire. he know the
man would be ruin for ever in the Prince's estimation who carry
he intelligence so disastrous. his aim, therefore, be to leave the
matter to explain itself to his Highness; and, when the time be
ripe, he cast about for a means of carry his point. he have spy
in the house of the eld and young magny; but this you know, of
course, from your experience of continental custom. we have all
spy over each other. your black (Zamor, I think, be his name)
use to give I report every morning; and I use to entertain the
dear old Duke with story of you and your uncle practise picquet
and dice in the morning, and with your quarrel and intrigue. we
levy similar contribution on everybody in X----, to amuse the
dear old man. Monsieur de Magny's valet use to report both to I
and Monsieur de Geldern.
'I know of the fact of the emerald be in pawn; and it be out of
my exchequer that the poor Princess draw the fund which be spend
upon the odious lowe, and the still more worthless young Chevalier.
how the Princess could trust the latter as she persist in do,
be beyond my comprehension; but there be no infatuation like that of
a woman in love: and you will remark, my dear Monsieur de Balibari,
that our sex generally fix upon a bad man.'
'not always, madam,' I interpose; 'your humble servant have create
many such attachment.'
'I do not see that that affect the truth of the proposition,' say
the old lady drily, and continue her narrative. 'the Jew who hold
the emerald have have many dealing with the Princess, and at last be
offer a bribe of such magnitude, that he determine to give up the
pledge. he commit the inconceivable imprudence of bring the
emerald with he to X----, and wait on Magny, who be provide by
the Princess with money to redeem the pledge, and be actually ready
to pay it.'
'their interview take place in Magny's own apartment, when his
valet overheard every word of their conversation. the young man, who
be always utterly careless of money when it be in his possession,
be so easy in offer it, that Lowe rise in his demand, and have
the conscience to ask double the sum for which he have previously
stipulate.
'at this the Chevalier lose all patience, fall on the wretch and be
for kill he; when the opportune valet rush in and save he.
the man have hear every word of the conversation between the
disputant, and the Jew run fly with terror into his arm; and
Magny, a quick and passionate, but not a violent man, bid the
servant lead the villain downstair, and think no more of he.
'perhaps he be not sorry to be rid of he, and to have in his
possession a large sum of money, four thousand ducat, with which he
could tempt fortune once more; as you know he do at your table that
night.'
'your ladyship go half, madam,' say I; 'and you know how little
I be the well for my winning.'
'the man conduct the trembling Israelite out of the palace, and no
soon have see he lodge at the house of one of his brother,
where he be accustom to put up, than he go away to the office
of his Excellency the Minister of Police, and narrate every word of
the conversation which have take place between the Jew and his
master.
'Geldern express the great satisfaction at his spy's prudence
and fidelity. he give he a purse of twenty ducat, and promise to
provide for he handsomely: as great man do sometimes promise to
reward their instrument; but you, Monsieur de Balibari, know how
seldom those promise be keep. "now, go and find out," say
Monsieur de Geldern, "at what time the Israelite propose to return
home again, or whether he will repent and take the money." the man
go on this errand. meanwhile, to make matter sure, Geldern
arrange a play-party at my house, invite you thither with your
bank, as you may remember; and find mean, at the same time, to
let Maxime de Magny know that there be to be faro at Madame de
Liliengarten's. it be an invitation the poor fellow never
neglect.'
I remember the fact, and listen on, amazed at the artifice of
the infernal Minister of Police.
'the spy come back from his message to Lowe, and state that he have
make inquiry among the servant of the house where the Heidelberg
banker lodge, and that it be the latter's intention to leave X----
that afternoon. he travel by himself, rid an old horse,
exceedingly humbly attire, after the manner of his people.
'"Johann," say the Minister, clap the pleased spy upon the
shoulder, "I be more and more pleased with you. I have be
think, since you leave I, of your intelligence, and the faithful
manner in which you have serve I; and shall soon find an occasion
to place you accord to your merit. which way do this
israelitish scoundrel take?"
'"he go to R----to-night."
'"and must pass by the Kaiserwald. be you a man of courage, Johann
Kerner?"
'"will your Excellency try I?" say the man, his eye glitter:
"I serve through the Seven Years' war, and be never know to fail
there."
'"now, listen. the emerald must be take from that Jew: in the very
keep it the scoundrel have commit high treason. to the man who
bring I that emerald I swear I will give five hundred louis. you
understand why it be necessary that it should be restore to her
Highness. I need say no more."
'"you shall have it to-night, sir," say the man. "of course your
Excellency will hold I harmless in case of accident."
'"Psha!" answer the Minister; "I will pay you half the money
beforehand; such be my confidence in you. accident's impossible if
you take your measure properly. there be four league of wood; the
Jew rid slowly. it will be night before he can reach, let we say,
the old Powder-Mill in the wood. whatbe to prevent you from put
a rope across the road, and deal with he there? be back with I
this evening at supper. if you meet any of the patrol, say 'fox
be loose,'--thatbe the word for to-night. they will let you pass
they without question."
'the man go off quite charmed with his commission; and when magny
be lose his money at our faro-table, his servant waylay the Jew
at the spot name the Powder-Mill, in the Kaiserwald. the Jew's
horse stumble over a rope which have be place across the road;
and, as the rider fall groan to the ground, Johann Kerner rush
out on he, mask, and pistol in hand, and demand his money. he
have no wish to kill the Jew, I believe, unless his resistance should
render extreme measure necessary.
'nor do he commit any such murder; for, as the yell Jew roar
for mercy, and his assailant menace he with a pistol, a squad of
patrol come up, and lay hold of the robber and the wound man.
'Kerner swear an oath. "you have come too soon," say he to the
sergeant of the police. "FOXES be LOOSE." "some be catch," say
the sergeant, quite unconcerned; and bind the fellow's hand with
the rope which he have stretch across the road to entrap the Jew.
he be place behind a policeman on a horse; Lowe be similarly
accommodate, and the party thus come back into the town as the
night fall. 'they be take forthwith to the police quarter; and,
as the chief happen to be there, they be examine by his
Excellency in person. both be rigorously search; the Jew's
paper and case take from he: the jewel be find in a private
pocket. as for the spy, the Minister, look at he angrily, say,
"why, this be the servant of the Chevalier de Magny, one of her
Highness's equerry!" and without hear a word in exculpation
from the poor frightened wretch, order he into close confinement.
'call for his horse, he then ride to the Prince's apartment at
the palace, and ask for an instant audience. when admit, he
produce the emerald. "this jewel," say he, "have be find on the
person of a Heidelberg Jew, who have be here repeatedly of late,
and have have many dealing with her Highness's equerry, the Chevalier
de Magny. this afternoon the Chevalier's servant come from his
master's lodging, accompany by the Hebrew; be hear to make
inquiry as to the route the man intend to take on his way
homeward; follow he, or precede he rather, and be find in
the act of rifle his victim by my police in the Kaiserwald. the
man will confess nothing; but, on be search, a large sum in
gold be find on his person; and though it be with the utmost pain
that I can bring myself to entertain such an opinion, and to
implicate a gentleman of the character and name of Monsieur de
magny, I do submit that our duty be to have the Chevalier examine
relative to the affair. as Monsieur de Magny be in her Highness's
private service, and in her confidence I have hear, I would not
venture to apprehend he without your Highness's permission."
'the Prince's Master of the Horse, a friend of the old Baron de
Magny, who be present at the interview, no soon hear the strange
intelligence than he hasten away to the old general with the
dreadful news of his grandson's suppose crime. perhaps his Highness
himself be not unwilling that his old friend and tutor in arm
should have the chance of save his family from disgrace; at all
event, Monsieur de Hengst, the Master of the Horse, be permit
to go off to the Baron undisturbed, and break to he the
intelligence of the accusation pende over the unfortunate
Chevalier.
'it be possible that he expect some such dreadful catastrophe,
for, after hear Hengst's narrative (as the latter afterwards tell
I), he only say, "Heaven's will be do!" for some time refuse to
stir a step in the matter, and then only by the solicitation of his
friend be induce to write the letter which Maxime de Magny
receive at our play-table.
'whilst he be there, squander the Princess's money, a police
visit be pay to his apartment, and a hundred proof, not of his
guilt with respect to the robbery, but of his guilty connection with
the Princess, be discover there,--tokens of her giving,
passionate letter from she, copy of his own correspondence to his
young friend at Paris,--all of which the Police Minister peruse,
and carefully put together under seal for his Highness, Prince
Victor. I have no doubt he peruse they, for, on deliver they to
the Hereditary Prince, Geldern say that, in obedience to his
HIGHNESS's order, he have collect the Chevalier's paper; but he
need not say that, on his honour, he (Geldern) himself have never
examine the document. his difference with Messieurs de Magny be
know; he beg his Highness to employ any other official person in
the judgment of the accusation bring against the young Chevalier.
'all these thing be go on while the Chevalier be at play. a
run of luck--you have great luck in those day, Monsieur de Balibari--
be against he. he stay and lose his 4000 ducat. he receive
his uncle's note, and such be the infatuation of the wretched
gambler, that, on receipt of it, he go down to the courtyard,
where the horse be in wait, absolutely take the money which the
poor old gentleman have place in the saddle-holster, bring it
upstairs, play it, and lose it; and when he issue from the room
to fly, it be too late: he be place in arrest at the bottom of my
staircase, as you be upon enter your own home.
'even when he come in under the charge of the soldiery send to
arrest he, the old General, who be wait, be overjoy to see
he, and fling himself into the lad's arm, and embrace he: it be
say, for the first time in many year. "he be here, gentleman," he
sob out,--"thank God he be not guilty of the robbery!" and then
sink back in a chair in a burst of emotion; painful, it be say by
those present, to witness on the part of a man so brave, and know
to be so cold and stern.
'"Robbery!" say the young man. "I swear before Heaven I be guilty
of none!" and a scene of almost touch reconciliation pass
between they, before the unhappy young man be lead from the guard-
house into the prison which he be destine never to quit.
'that night the Duke look over the paper which Geldern have
bring to he. it be at a very early stage of the perusal, no
doubt, that he give order for your arrest; for you be take at
midnight, Magny at ten o'clock; after which time the old Baron de
Magny have see his Highness, protest of his grandson's innocence,
and the Prince have receive he most graciously and kindly. his
Highness say he have no doubt the young man be innocent; his birth
and his blood render such a crime impossible; but suspicion be
too strong against he: he be know to have be that day closet
with the Jew; to have receive a very large sum of money which he
squander at play, and of which the Hebrew have, doubtless, be the
lender,--to have despatch his servant after he, who inquire the
hour of the Jew's departure, lie in wait for he, and rifle he.
Suspicion be so strong against the Chevalier, that common justice
require his arrest; and, meanwhile, until he clear himself, he
should be keep in not dishonourable durance, and every regard have
for his name, and the service of his honourable grandfather. with
this assurance, and with a warm grasp of the hand, the Prince leave
old General de Magny that night; and the veteran retire to rest
almost console, and confident in Maxime's eventual and immediate
release.
'but in the morning, before daybreak, the Prince, who have be
read paper all night, wildly call to the page, who sleep in
the next room across the door, bid he get horse, which be
always keep in readiness in the stable, and, fling a parcel of
letter into a box, tell the page to follow he on horseback with
these. the young man (Monsieur de Weissenborn) tell this to a young
lady who be then of my household, and who be now Madame de
Weissenborn, and a mother of a score of child.
'the page describe that never be such a change see as in his
august master in the course of that single night. his eye be
bloodshot, his face livid, his clothe be hang loose about he,
and he who have always make his appearance on parade as precisely
dress as any sergeant of his troop, might have be see
gallop through the lonely street at early dawn without a hat,
his unpowdered hair stream behind he like a madman.
'the page, with the box of paper, clatter after his master,--it
be no easy task to follow he; and they ride from the palace to the
town, and through it to the General's quarter. the sentinel at the
door be scar at the strange figure that rush up to the
General's gate, and, not know he, cross bayonet, and refuse
he admission. "Fools," say Weissenborn, "it be the Prince!" and,
jangle at the bell as if for an alarm of fire, the door be at
length open by the porter, and his Highness run up to the Generals
bedchamber, follow by the page with the box.
'"magny--magny," roar the Prince, thunder at the closed door,
"get up!" and to the query of the old man from within, answer,
"it be I--victor--the Prince!--get up!" and presently the door be
open by the General in his ROBE-DE-CHAMBRE, and the Prince
enter. the page bring in the box, and be bid to wait
without, which he do; but there lead from Monsieur de Magny's
bedroom into his antechamber two door, the great one which form
the entrance into his room, and a small one which lead, as the
fashion be with our house abroad, into the closet which
communicate with the alcove where the bed be. the door of this be
find by M. de Weissenborn to be open, and the young man be thus
enable to hear and see everything which occur within the
apartment.
'the General, somewhat nervously, ask what be the reason of so
early a visit from his Highness; to which the Prince do not for a
while reply, far than by star at he rather wildly, and
pace up and down the room.
'at last he say, "here be the cause!" dash his fist on the box;
and, as he have forget to bring the key with he, he go to the
door for a moment, say, "Weissenborn perhaps have it;" but see
over the stove one of the General's couteaux de chasse, he take it
down, and say, "that will do," and fall to work to burst the red
trunk open with the blade of the forest knife. the point break, and
he give an oath, but continue haggle on with the broken blade,
which be well suit to his purpose than the long pointed knife,
and finally succeed in wrench open the lid of the chest.
'"what be the matter?" say he, laugh. "herebe the matter;--read
that!--herebe more matter, read that!--here's more--no, not that;
thatbe somebody else's picture--but herebe her! do you know that,
magny? my wife's--the Princess's! why do you and your cursed race
ever come out of France, to plant your infernal wickedness wherever
your foot fall, and to ruin honest german home? what have you and
yours ever have from my family but confidence and kindness? we give
you a home when you have none, and herebe our reward!" and he fling a
parcel of paper down before the old General; who see the truth at
once;--he have know it long before, probably, and sink down on his
chair, cover his face.
'the Prince go on gesticulate, and shriek almost. "if a man
injure you so, Magny, before you begot the father of that gambling
lie villain yonder, you would have know how to revenge yourself.
you would have kill he! yes, would have kill he. but whobe to
help I to my revenge? Ihave no equal. I cannot meet that dog of a
frenchman,--that pimp from Versailles,--and kill he, as if he have
play the traitor to one of his own degree."
'"the blood of Maxime de Magny," say the old gentleman proudly, "be
as good as that of any prince in Christendom."
'"can I take it?" cry the Prince; "you know I cannot. I cannot have
the privilege of any other gentleman in Europe. what be I to do?
look here, magny: I be wild when I come here; I donot know what to
do. youhave serve I for thirty year; youhave save my life twice:
they be all knave and harlot about my poor old father here--no
honest man or woman--you be the only one--you save my life; tell
I what be I to do?" thus from insult Monsieur de Magny, the poor
distract Prince fall to supplicate he; and, at last, fairly
fling himself down, and burst out in an agony of tear.
'Old Magny, one of the most rigid and cold of man on common
occasion, when he see this outbreak of passion on the Prince's
part, became, as my informant have describe to I, as much affect
as his master. the old man from be cold and high, suddenly fall,
as it be, into the whimpering querulousness of extreme old age. he
lose all sense of dignity; he go down on his knee, and break out
into all sort of wild incoherent attempt at consolation; so much
so, that Weissenborn say he could not bear to look at the scene,
and actually turn away from the contemplation of it.
'but, from what follow in a few day, we may guess the result of
the long interview. the Prince, when he come away from the
conversation with his old servant, forget his fatal box of paper
and send the page back for they. the General be on his knee
pray in the room when the young man enter, and only stir and
look wildly round as the other remove the packet. the Prince ride
away to his hunting-lodge at three league from X----, and three
day after that Maxime de Magny die in prison; have make a
confession that he be engage in an attempt to rob the Jew, and
that he have make away with himself, ashamed of his dishonour.
'but it be not know that it be the General himself who take his
grandson poison: it be say even that he shoot he in the prison.
this, however, be not the case. General de Magny carry his
grandson the draught which be to carry he out of the world;
represent to the wretched youth that his fate be inevitable; that
it would be public and disgraceful unless he choose to anticipate the
punishment, and so leave he. but it be not of his own ACCORD, and
not until he have use EVERY mean of escape, as you shall hear, that
the unfortunate being's life be bring to an end.
'as for General de Magny, he quite fall into imbecility a short time
after his grandson's death, and my honour Duke's demise. after his
Highness the Prince marry the Princess Mary of F----, as they be
walk in the english park together they once meet old Magny riding
in the sun in the easy chair, in which he be carry commonly
abroad after his paralytic fit. "this be my wife, Magny," say the
Prince affectionately, take the veteran's hand; and he add,
turn to his princess, "General de Magny save my life during the
Seven Years' War."
'"what, youhave take she back again?" say the old man. "I wish
youwould send I back my poor maxime." he have quite forget the death
of the poor Princess Olivia, and the Prince, look very dark
indeed, pass away.
'and now,' say Madame de Liliengarten, 'I have only one more gloomy
story to relate to you--the death of the Princess Olivia. it be even
more horrible than the tale I have just tell you.' with which
preface the old lady resume her narrative.
'the kind weak Princess's fate be hasten, if not occasion, by
the cowardice of Magny. he find mean to communicate with she from
his prison, and her Highness, who be not in open disgrace yet (for
the Duke, out of regard to the family, persist in charge magny
with only robbery), make the most desperate effort to relieve he,
and to bribe the gaoler to effect his escape. she be so wild that
she lose all patience and prudence in the conduct of any scheme she
may have have for Magny's liberation; for her husband be inexorable,
and cause the Chevalier's prison to be too strictly guard for
escape to be possible. she offer the State jewel in pawn to the
Court banker; who of course be oblige to decline the transaction.
she fall down on her knee, it be say, to Geldern, the Police
Minister, and offer he Heaven know what as a bribe. finally, she
come scream to my poor dear Duke, who, with his age, disease,
and easy habit, be quite unfit for scene of so violent a nature;
and who, in consequence of the excitement create in his august
bosom by her frantic violence and grief, have a fit in which I very
nigh lose he. that his dear life be bring to an untimely end by
these transaction I have not the slight doubt; for the
Strasbourg pie, of which they say he die, never, I be sure, could
have injure he, but for the injury which his dear gentle heart
receive from the unusual occurrence in which he be force to take
a share.
'all her Highness's movement be carefully, though not ostensibly,
watch by her husband, Prince Victor; who, wait upon his august
father, sternly signify to he that if his Highness (MY Duke)
should dare to aid the Princess in her effort to release Magny, he,
Prince Victor, would publicly accuse the Princess and her paramour
of high treason, and take measure with the Diet for remove his
father from the throne, as incapacitate to reign. hence
interposition on our part be vain, and Magny be leave to his fate.
'it come, as you be aware, very suddenly. Geldern, Police Minister,
Hengst, Master of the Horse, and the colonel of the Prince's guard,
wait upon the young man in his prison two day after his
grandfather have visit he there and leave behind he the phial of
poison which the criminal have not the courage to use. and Geldern
signify to the young man that unless he take of his own accord the
laurelwater provide by the eld Magny, more violent mean of death
would be instantly employ upon he, and that a file of grenadier
be in wait in the courtyard to despatch he. see this, Magny,
with the most dreadful self-abasement, after drag himself round
the room on his knee from one officer to another, weep and
scream with terror, at last desperately drink off the potion, and
be a corpse in a few minute. thus end this wretched young man.
'his death be make public in the court GAZETTE two day after, the
paragraph state that Monsieur de M----, strike with remorse for
have attempt the murder of the Jew, have put himself to death by
poison in prison; and a warning be add to all young nobleman of
the duchy to avoid the dreadful sin of gambling, which have be the
cause of the young man's ruin, and have bring upon the grey hair
of one of the noble and most honourable of the servant of the
Duke irretrievable sorrow.
'the funeral be conduct with decent privacy, the General de Magny
attend it. the carriage of the two Dukes and all the first
people of the Court make their call upon the General afterwards. he
attend parade as usual the next day on the Arsenal-Place, and Duke
Victor, who have be inspect the building, come out of it lean
on the brave old warrior's arm. he be particularly gracious to the
old man, and tell his officer the oft-repeat story how at
Rosbach, when the X----contingent serve with the troop of the
unlucky Soubise, the General have throw himself in the way of a
french dragoon, who be press hard upon his Highness in the rout,
have receive the blow intend for his master, and kill the
assailant. and he allude to the family motto of "Magny san tache,"
and say, "it have be always so with his gallant friend and tutor
in arm." this speech affect all present very much; with the
exception of the old General, who only bow and do not speak: but
when he go home he be hear mutter "Magny san tache, Magny
san tache!" and be attack with paralysis that night, from which
he never more than partially recover.
'the news of Maxime's death have somehow be keep from the Princess
until now: a GAZETTE even be print without the paragraph
contain the account of his suicide; but it be at length, I know
not how, make known to she. and when she hear it, her lady tell
I, she scream and fall, as if strike dead; then sit up wildly and
rave like a madwoman, and be then carry to her bed, where her
physician attend she, and where she lie of a brain-fever. all this
while the Prince use to send to make inquiry concern she; and
from his give order that his Castle of Schlangenfels should be
prepare and furnish, I make no doubt it be his intention to send
she into confinement thither: as have be do with the unhappy
sister of his Britannic Majesty at Zell.
'she send repeatedly to demand an interview with his Highness; which
the latter decline, say that he would communicate with her
Highness when her health be sufficiently recover. to one of her
passionate letter he send back for reply a packet, which, when
open, be find to contain the emerald that have be the cause
round which all this dark intrigue move.
'her Highness at this time become quite frantic; vow in the
presence of all her lady that one lock of her darling Maxime's
hair be more precious to she than all the jewel in the world: rang
for her carriage, and say she would go and kiss his tomb;
proclaim the murder martyr's innocence, and call down the
punishment of Heaven, the wrath of her family, upon his assassin.
the Prince, on hear these speech (they be all, of course,
regularly bring to he), be say to have give one of his dreadful
look (which I remember now), and to have say, "this cannot last
much long."
'all that day and the next the Princess Olivia pass in dictate
the most passionate letter to the Prince her father, to the king
of France, Naples, and Spain, her kinsman, and to all other branch
of her family, call upon they in the most incoherent term to
protect she against the butcher and assassin her husband, assail
his person in the mad term of reproach, and at the same time
confess her love for the murder magny. it be in vain that
those lady who be faithful to she point out to her the
inutility of these letter, the dangerous folly of the confession
which they make; she insist upon write they, and use to give
they to her second robe-woman, a Frenchwoman (her Highness always
affectione person of that nation), who have the key of her
cassette, and carry every one of these epistle to Geldern.
'with the exception that no public reception be hold, the
ceremony of the Princess's establishment go on as before. her
lady be allow to wait upon she and perform their usual duty
about her person. the only man admit be, however, her servant,
her physician and chaplain; and one day when she wish to go into
the garden, a heyduc, who keep the door, intimate to her Highness
that the Prince's order be that she should keep her apartment.
'they abut, as you remember, upon the landing of the marble
staircase of Schloss X----; the entrance to Prince Victor's suite of
room be opposite the Princess's on the same landing. this space
be large, fill with sofa and bench, and the gentleman and
officer who wait upon the Duke use to make a sort of antechamber
of the landing-place, and pay their court to his Highness there, as
he pass out, at eleven o'clock, to parade. at such a time, the
heyducs within the Princess's suite of room use to turn out with
their halbert and present to Prince Victor--the same ceremony be
perform on his own side, when page come out and announce the
approach of his Highness. the page use to come out and say, "the
Prince, gentleman!" and the drum beat in the hall, and the
gentleman rise, who be wait on the bench that run along the
balustrade.
'as if fate impel she to her death, one day the Princess, as she
guard turn out, and she be aware that the Prince be stand,
as be his willnot, on the landing, converse with his gentleman (in
the old day he use to cross to the Princess's apartment and kiss
her hand)--the Princess, who have be anxious all the morning,
complain of heat, insist that all the door of the apartment
should be leave open; and give token of an insanity which I think
be now evident, rush wildly at the door when the guard pass
out, fling they open, and before a word could be say, or her lady
could follow she, be in presence of Duke Victor, who be talk as
usual on the landing: place herself between he and the stair, she
begin apostrophise he with frantic vehemence:--
'"take notice, gentleman!" she scream out, "that this man be a
murderer and a liar; that he lay plot for honourable gentleman,
and kill they in prison! take notice, that I too be in prison, and
fear the same fate: the same butcher who kill Maxime de Magny,
may, any night, put the knife to my throat. I appeal to you, and to
all the king of Europe, my royal kinsman. I demand to be set free
from this tyrant and villain, this liar and traitor! I adjure you
all, as gentleman of honour, to carry these letter to my relative,
and say from whom you have they!" and with this the unhappy lady
begin scatter letter about among the astonished crowd.
'"let no MAN STOOP!" cry the Prince, in a voice of thunder.
"Madame de Gleim, you should have watch your patient well. call
the Princess's physician: her Highness's brain be affect.
gentleman, have the goodness to retire." and the Prince stand on the
landing as the gentleman go down the stair, say fiercely to
the guard, "Soldier, if she move, strike with your halbert!" on
which the man bring the point of his weapon to the Princess's
breast; and the lady, frightened, shrink back and re-enter her
apartment. "now, Monsieur de Weissenborn," say the Prince, "pick
up all those paper;" and the Prince go into his own apartment,
precede by his page, and never quit they until he have see
every one of the paper burn.
'the next day the court GAZETTE contain a bulletin sign by the
three physician, state that "her Highness the Hereditary Princess
labour under inflammation of the brain, and have pass a restless
and disturbed night." similar notice be issue day after day. the
service of all her lady, except two, be dispense with. guard
be place within and without her door; her window be secure,
so that escape from they be impossible: and you know what take
place ten day after. the church-bell be ring all night, and
the prayer of the faithful ask for a person in EXTREMIS. a
GAZETTE appear in the morning, edge with black, and state that
the high and mighty Princess Olivia Maria Ferdinanda, consort of his
Serene Highness Victor Louis Emanuel, Hereditary Prince of X----,
have die in the evening of the 24th of January 1769.
'but do you know how she die, sir? that, too, be a mystery.
Weissenborn, the page, be concern in this dark tragedy; and the
secret be so dreadful, that never, believe I, till Prince Victor's
death, do I reveal it.
'after the fatal ESCLANDRE which the Princess have make, the Prince
send for Weissenborn, and bind he by the most solemn adjuration
to secrecy (he only break it to his wife many year after: indeed,
there be no secret in the world that woman cannot know if they
will), despatch he on the follow mysterious commission.
'"there live," say his Highness, "on the kehl side of the river,
opposite to Strasbourg, a man whose residence you will easily find
out from his name, which be MONSIEUR DE STRASBOURG. you will make
your inquiry concern he quietly, and without occasion any
remark; perhaps you have well go into Strasbourg for the purpose,
where the person be quite well know. you will take with you any
comrade on whom you can perfectly rely: the life of both, remember,
depend on your secrecy. you will find out some period when MONSIEUR
DE STRASBOURG be alone, or only in company of the domestic who live
with he (I myself visit the man by accident on my return from
Paris five year since, and hence be induce to send for he now, in
my present emergency). you will have your carriage wait at his
door at night; and you and your comrade will enter his house mask;
and present he with a purse of a hundred louis; promise he
double that sum on his return from his expedition. if he refuse, you
must use force and bring he; menace he with instant death should
he decline to follow you. you will place he in the carriage with
the blind draw, one or other of you never lose sight of he the
whole way, and threaten he with death if he discover himself or
cry out. you will lodge he in the old Tower here, where a room
shall be prepare for he; and his work be do, you will restore
he to his home with the same speed and secrecy with which you
bring he from it."
'such be the mysterious order Prince Victor give his page; and
Weissenborn, select for his comrade in the expedition Lieutenant
Bartenstein, set out on his strange journey.
'all this while the palace be hush, as if in mourning, the
bulletin in the court GAZETTE appear, announce the continuance
of the Princess's malady; and though she have but few attendant,
strange and circumstantial story be tell regard the progress
of her complaint. she be quite wild. she have try to kill herself.
she have fancy herself to be I donot know how many different
character. express be send to her family inform they of her
state, and courier despatch PUBLICLY to Vienna and Paris to
procure the attendance of physician skilled in treat disease of
the brain. that pretend anxiety be all a feint: it be never
intend that the Princess should recover.
'the day on which Weissenborn and Bartenstein return from their
expedition, it be announce that her Highness the Princess be much
bad; that night the report through the town be that she be at
the agony: and that night the unfortunate creature be endeavour
to make her escape.
'she have unlimited confidence in the french chamber-woman who
attend she, and between she and this woman the plan of escape be
arrange. the Princess take her jewel in a casket; a private door,
opening from one of her room and lead into the outer gate, it
be say, of the palace, be discover for she: and a letter be
bring to she, purport to be from the Duke, her father-in-law,
and state that a carriage and horse have be provide, and would
take she to b----: the territory where she might communicate with
her family and be safe.
'the unhappy lady, confide in her guardian, set out on the
expedition. the passage wind through the wall of the modern part
of the palace and abut in effect at the old Owl Tower, as it be
call, on the outer wall: the tower be pull down afterwards, and
for good reason.
'at a certain place the candle, which the chamberwoman be carry,
go out; and the Princess would have scream with terror, but she
hand be seize, and a voice cry "Hush!" the next minute a man in
a mask (it be the Duke himself) rush forward, gag she with a
handkerchief, her hand and leg be bind, and she be carry
swoon with terror into a vaulted room, where she be place by a
person there wait, and tie in an arm-chair. the same mask who
have gag she, come and bar her neck and say, "it have well be
do now she have faint."
'perhaps it would have be as well; for though she recover from
her swoon, and her confessor, who be present, come forward and
endeavour to prepare she for the awful deed which be about to be
do upon she, and for the state into which she be about to enter,
when she come to herself it be only to scream like a maniac, to
curse the Duke as a butcher and tyrant, and to call upon Magny, her
dear Magny.
'at this the Duke say, quite calmly, "may God have mercy on her
sinful soul!" he, the confessor, and Geldern, who be present, go
down on their knee; and, as his Highness drop his handkerchief,
Weissenborn fall down in a fainting fit; while MONSIEUR DE
STRASBOURG, take the back hair in his hand, separate the
shrieking head of Olivia from the miserable sinful body. may Heaven
have mercy upon her soul!'
. . . .
this be the story tell by Madame de Liliengarten, and the reader
will have no difficulty in draw from it that part which affect
myself and my uncle; who, after six week of arrest, be set at
liberty, but with order to quit the duchy immediately: indeed, with
an escort of dragoon to conduct we to the frontier. what property
we have, we be allow to sell and realise in money; but none of
our play debt be pay to we: and all my hope of the Countess Ida
be thus at an end.
when Duke Victor come to the throne, which he do when, six month
after, apoplexy carry off the old sovereign his father, all the
good old usage of X----were give up,--play forbidden; the opera
and ballet send to the right-about; and the regiment which the old
Duke have sell recall from their foreign service: with they come my
Countess's beggarly cousin the ensign, and he marry she. I donot
know whether they be happy or not. it be certain that a woman of
such a poor spirit do not merit any very high degree of pleasure.
the now reign Duke of X----himself marry four year after his
first wife's demise, and Geldern, though no long Police Minister,
build the grand house of which Madame de Liliengarten speak. what
become of the minor actor in the great tragedy, who know? only
MONSIEUR DE STRASBOURG be restore to his duty. of the rest--the
Jew, the chamber-woman, the spy on Magny--I know nothing. those
sharp tool with which great people cut out their enterprise be
generally break in the using: nor do I ever hear that their
employer have much regard for they in their ruin.
CHAPTER XIII
I continue MY CAREER as a man of FASHION
I find I have already fill up many score of page, and yet a vast
deal of the most interesting portion of my history remain to be
tell, viz. that which describe my sojourn in the kingdom of
England and Ireland, and the great part I play there; move among
the most illustrious of the land, myself not the least distinguish
of the brilliant circle. in order to give due justice to this
portion of my Memoirs, then,--which be more important than my
foreign adventure can be (though I could fill volume with
interesting description of the latter),--I shall cut short the
account of my travel in Europe, and of my success at the
Continental Courts, in order to speak of what befell I at home.
suffice it to say that there be not a capital in Europe, except the
beggarly one of Berlin, where the young Chevalier de Balibari be
not know and admire; and where he have not make the brave, the
high-bear, and the beautiful talk of he. I win 80,000 rouble from
Potemkin at the Winter Palace at Petersburg, which the scoundrelly
favourite never pay I; I have have the honour of see his Royal
Highness the Chevalier Charles Edward as drunk as any porter at
Rome; my uncle play several match at billiard against the
celebrate Lord C----at Spa, and I promise you do not come off a
loser. in fact, by a neat stratagem of ours, we raise the laugh
against his Lordship, and something a great deal more substantial.
my Lord do not know that the Chevalier Barry have a useless eye; and
when, one day, my uncle playfully bet he odd at billiard that he
would play he with a patch over one eye, the noble lord, think
to bite we (he be one of the most desperate gambler that ever
live), accept the bet, and we win a very considerable amount of
he.
nor need I mention my success among the fair portion of the
creation. one of the most accomplish, the tall, the most
athletic, and the handsome gentleman of Europe, as I be then, a
young fellow of my figure could not fail of have advantage, which
a person of my spirit know very well how to use. but upon these
subject I be dumb. Charming Schuvaloff, black-eyed Sczotarska, dark
Valdez, tender Hegenheim, brilliant Langeac!--ye gentle heart that
know how to beat in old time for the warm young irish gentleman,
where be you now? though my hair have grow grey now, and my sight
dim, and my heart cold with year, and ennui, and disappointment,
and the treachery of friend, yet I have but to lean back in my arm-
chair and think, and those sweet figure come rise up before I
out of the past, with their smile, and their kindness, and their
bright tender eye! there be no woman like they now--no manner
like theirs! look you at a bevy of woman at the Prince's, stitch
up in tight white satin sack, with their waist under their arm,
and compare they to the graceful figure of the old time! why, when
I dance with Coralie de Langeac at the fete on the birth of the
first dauphin at Versailles, her hoop be eighteen foot in
circumference, and the heel of her lovely little mule be three
inch from the ground; the lace of my jabot be worth a thousand
crown, and the button of my amaranth velvet coat alone cost eighty
thousand livre. look at the difference now! the gentleman be
dress like boxer, Quakers, or hackney-coachman; and the lady
be not dress at all. there be no elegance, no refinement; none of
the chivalry of the old world, of which I form a portion. think of
the fashion of London be lead by a Br-mm-l! [footnote: this
manuscript must have be write at the time when Mr. Brummel be
the leader of the London fashion.] a nobody's son: a low creature,
who can no more dance a minuet than I can talk Cherokee; who cannot
even crack a bottle like a gentleman; who never show himself to be
a man with his sword in his hand: as we use to approve ourselves in
the good old time, before that vulgar Corsican upset the gentry of
the world! oh, to see the Valdez once again, as on that day I meet
her first drive in state, with her eight mule and her retinue of
gentleman, by the side of yellow Mancanares! oh, for another drive
with Hegenheim, in the gild sledge, over the Saxon snow! false as
Schuvaloff be, 'twa well to be jilt by she than to be adore
by any other woman. I cannot think of any one of they without
tenderness. I have ringlet of all their hair in my poor little
museum of recollection. do you keep mine, you dear soul that
survive the turmoil and trouble of near half a hundred year? how
change its colour be now, since the day Sczotarska wear it round
her neck, after my duel with Count Bjernaski, at Warsaw.
I never keep any beggarly book of account in those day. I have no
debt. I pay royally for everything I take; and I take everything I
want. my income must have be very large. my entertainment and
equipage be those of a gentleman of the high distinction; nor
let any scoundrel presume to sneer because I carry off and marry
my Lady Lyndon (as you shall presently hear), and call I an
adventurer, or say I be penniless, or the match unequal. penniless!
I have the wealth of Europe at my command. adventurer! so be a
meritorious lawyer or a gallant soldier; so be every man who make
his own fortune an adventurer. my profession be play: in which I
be then unrivalle. no man could play with I through Europe, on
the square; and my income be just as certain (during health and the
exercise of my profession) as that of a man who draw on his three-
per-cent., or any fat squire whose acre bring he revenue. harvest
be not more certain than the effect of skill be: a crop be a chance,
as much as a game of card greatly play by a fine player: there
may be a drought, or a frost, or a hail-storm, and your stake be
lose; but one man be just as much an adventurer as another.
in evoke the recollection of these kind and fair creature I have
nothing but pleasure. I would I could say as much of the memory of
another lady, who will henceforth play a considerable part in the
drama of my life,--i mean the Countess of Lyndon; whose fatal
acquaintance I make at Spa, very soon after the event describe in
the last chapter have cause I to quit Germany.
Honoria, Countess of Lyndon, Viscountess Bullingdon in England,
Baroness Castle Lyndon of the kingdom of Ireland, be so well know
to the great world in her day, that I have little need to enter into
her family history; which be to be have in any peerage that the
reader may lay his hand on. she be, as I need not say, a countess,
viscountess, and baroness in her own right. her estate in Devon and
Cornwall be among the most extensive in those part; her irish
possession not less magnificent; and they have be allude to, in
a very early part of these Memoirs, as lie near to my own paternal
property in the kingdom of Ireland: indeed, unjust confiscation in
the time of Elizabeth and her father go to diminish my acre,
while they add to the already vast possession of the Lyndon
family.
the Countess, when I first see she at the assembly at Spa, be the
wife of her cousin, the Right honourable Sir Charles Reginald
Lyndon, Knight of the Bath, and Minister to George II. and George
III. at several of the small Courts of Europe. Sir Charles Lyndon
be celebrate as a wit and bon vivant: he could write love-verse
against Hanbury Williams, and make joke with George Selwyn; he be
a man of vertu like Harry Walpole, with whom and Mr. Grey he have
make a part of the grand tour; and be cite, in a word, as one of
the most elegant and accomplished man of his time.
I make this gentleman's acquaintance as usual at the play-table, of
which he be a constant frequenter. indeed, one could not but admire
the spirit and gallantry with which he pursue his favourite
pastime; for, though wear out by gout and a myriad of disease, a
cripple wheel about in a chair, and suffer pang of agony, yet
you would see he every morning and every evening at his post behind
the delightful green cloth: and if, as it would often happen, his
own hand be too feeble or inflame to hold the box, he would call
the main, nevertheless, and have his valet or a friend to throw for
he. I like this courageous spirit in a man; the great success
in life have be win by such indomitable perseverance.
I be by this time one of the well-know character in Europe; and
the fame of my exploit, my duel, my courage at play, would bring
crowd around I in any public society where I appear. I could
show ream of scented paper, to prove that this eagerness to make my
acquaintance be not confine to the gentleman only; but that I hate
boasting, and only talk of myself in so far as it be necessary to
relate myself's adventure: the most singular of any man's in
Europe. well, Sir Charles Lyndon's first acquaintance with I
originate in the right honourable knightbe win 700 piece of I
at picquet (for which he be almost my match); and I lose they with
much good-humour, and pay they: and pay they, you may be sure,
punctually. indeed, I will say this for myself, that lose money at
play never in the least put I out of good-humour with the winner,
and that wherever I find a superior, I be always ready to
acknowledge and hail he.
Lyndon be very proud of win from so celebrate a person, and we
contract a kind of intimacy; which, however, do not for a while
go beyond pump-room attention, and conversation over the supper-
table at play: but which gradually increase, until I be admit
into his more private friendship. he be a very free-speak man (the
gentry of those day be much prouder than at present), and use to
say to I in his haughty easy way, 'hang it, Mr. Barry, you have no
more manner than a barber, and I think my black footman have be
well educate than you; but you be a young fellow of originality
and pluck, and I like you, sir, because you seem determined to go to
the deuce by a way of your own.' I would thank he laughingly for
this compliment, and say, that as he be bind to the next world
much soon than I be, I would be oblige to he to get comfortable
quarter arrange there for I. he use also to be immensely amuse
with my story about the splendour of my family and the
magnificence of Castle Brady: he would never tire of listening or
laugh at those history.
'stick to the trumps, however, my lad,' he would say, when I tell
he of my misfortune in the conjugal line, and how near I have be
win the great fortune in Germany. 'do anything but marry, my
artless irish rustic' (he call I by a multiplicity of queer
name). 'cultivate your great talent in the gambling line; but mind
this, that a woman will beat you.'
that I deny; mention several instance in which I have conquer
the most intractable temper among the sex.
'they will beat you in the long run, my Tipperary Alcibiades. as
soon as you be marry, take my word of it, you be conquer. look
at I. I marry my cousin, the noble and great heiress in
England--marry she in spite of herself almost' (here a dark shade
pass over Sir Charles Lyndon's countenance). 'she be a weak woman.
you shall see she, sir, how weak she be; but she be my mistress. she
have embitter my whole life. she be a fool; but she have get the
well of one of the good head in Christendom. she be enormously
rich; but somehow I have never be so poor as since I marry she.
I think to better myself; and she have make I miserable and kill
I. and she will do as much for my successor, when I be go.'
'have her ladyship a very large income?' say I. at which Sir Charles
burst out into a yell laugh, and make I blush not a little at my
gaucherie; for the fact be, see he in the condition in which he
be, I could not help speculate upon the chance a man of spirit
might have with his widow.
'no, no!' say he, laugh. 'Waugh hawk, Mr. Barry; donot think, if
you value your peace of mind, to stand in my shoe when they be
vacant. besides, I donot think my Lady Lyndon would quite condescend
to marry a'----
'marry a what, sir?' say I, in a rage.
"never mind what: but the man who get she will rue it, take my word
on't. a plague on she! have it not be for my father's ambition and
mine (he be her uncle and guardian, and we wouldnot let such a
prize out of the family), I might have die peaceably, at least;
carry my gout down to my grave in quiet, live in my modest
tenement in Mayfair, have every house in England open to I; and now,
now I have six of my own, and every one of they be a hell to I.
beware of greatness, Mr. Barry. take warn by I. ever since I
have be marry and have be rich, I have be the most miserable
wretch in the world. look at I. I be die a wear-out cripple at
the age of fifty. marriage have add forty year to my life. when I
take off Lady Lyndon, there be no man of my year who look so
young as myself. fool that I be! I have enough with my pension,
perfect freedom, the good society in Europe; and I give up all
these, and marry, and be miserable. take a warning by I, Captain
Barry, and stick to the trump."
though my intimacy with the knight be considerable, for a long time
I never penetrate into any other apartment of his hotel but those
which he himself occupy. his lady live entirely apart from he;
and it be only curious how they come to travel together at all. she
be a goddaughter of old Mary Wortley Montagu: and, like that famous
old woman of the last century, make considerable pretension to be a
blue-stocking and a bel esprit. Lady Lyndon write poem in English
and Italian, which still may be read by the curious in the page of
the magazine of the day. she entertain a correspondence with
several of the european savan upon history, science, and ancient
language, and especially theology. her pleasure be to dispute
controversial point with abbe and bishop; and her flatterer say
she rival Madam Dacier in learn. every adventurer who have a
discovery in chemistry, a new antique bust, or a plan for
discover the philosopher's stone, be sure to find a patroness in
she. she have numberless work dedicated to she, and sonnet without
end address to she by all the poetaster of Europe, under the name
of Lindonira or Calista. her room be crowd with hideous China
magot, and all sort of object of vertu.
no woman pique herself more upon her principle, or allow love to
be make to she more profusely. there be a habit of courtship
practise by the fine gentleman of those day, which be little
understand in our coarse downright time: and young and old fellow
would pour out flood of compliment in letter and madrigal, such
as would make a sober lady stare be they address to she
nowadays: so entirely have the gallantry of the last century
disappear out of our manner.
Lady Lyndon move about with a little court of her own. she have
half-a-dozen carriage in her progress. in her own she would
travel with her companion (some shabby lady of quality), her bird,
and poodle, and the favourite savant for the time be. in another
would be her female secretary and her waiting-woman; who, in spite
of their care, never could make their mistress look much well than
a slattern. Sir Charles Lyndon have his own chariot, and the
domestic of the establishment would follow in other vehicle.
also must be mention the carriage in which ride her ladyship's
chaplain, Mr. Runt, who act in capacity of governor to her son,
the little Viscount bullingdon,--a melancholy desert little boy,
about whom his father be more than indifferent, and whom his mother
never see, except for two minute at her levee, when she would put
to he a few question of history or latin grammar; after which he
be consign to his own amusement, or the care of his governor,
for the rest of the day.
the notion of such a Minerva as this, whom I see in the public
place now and then, surround by swarm of needy abbe and
schoolmaster, who flatter she, frighten I for some time, and I
have not the least desire to make her acquaintance. I have no desire
to be one of the beggarly adorer in the great lady's train,--
fellow, half friend, half lacquey, who make verse, and write
letter, and run errand, content to be pay by a seat in her
ladyship's box at the comedy, or a cover at her dinner-table at
noon. 'donot be afraid,' Sir Charles Lyndon would say, whose great
subject of conversation and abuse be his lady: 'my Lindonira will
have nothing to do with you. she like the tuscan brogue, not that
of Kerry. she say you smell too much of the stable to be admit
to lady' society; and last Sunday fortnight, when she do I the
honour to speak to I last, say, "I wonder, Sir Charles Lyndon, a
gentleman who have be the King's ambassador can demean himself by
gambling and boozing with low irish blackleg!" donot fly in a fury!
Ibe a cripple, and it be Lindonira say it, not i.'
this pique I, and I resolve to become acquainted with Lady
Lyndon; if it be but to show her ladyship that the descendant of
those Barrys, whose property she unjustly hold, be not an unworthy
companion for any lady, be she ever so high. besides, my friend
the knight be die: his widow would be the rich prize in the
three kingdom. why should I not win she, and, with she, the mean
of make in the world that figure which my genius and inclination
desire? I feel I be equal in blood and breeding to any Lyndon in
Christendom, and determine to bend this haughty lady. when I
determine, I look upon the thing as do.
my uncle and I talk the matter over, and speedily settle upon a
method for make our approach upon this stately lady of Castle
Lyndon. Mr. Runt, young Lord Bullingdon's governor, be fond of
pleasure, of a glass of Rhenish in the garden-house in the summer
evening, and of a sly throw of the dice when the occasion offer;
and I take care to make friend with this person, who, be a
college tutor and an Englishman, be ready to go on his knee to any
one who resemble a man of fashion. see I with my retinue of
servant, my vis-a-vis and chariot, my valet, my hussar, and
horse, dress in gold, and velvet, and sable, salute the
great people in Europe as we meet on the course, or at the Spas,
Runt be dazzle by my advance, and be mine by a beckoning of the
finger. I shall never forget the poor wretch's astonishment when I
ask he to dine, with two count, off gold plate, at the little
room in the casino: he be make happy by be allow to win a few
piece of we, become exceedingly tipsy, sing Cambridge song, and
recreate the company by tell we, in his horrid Yorkshire French,
story about the gyp, and all the lord that have ever be in his
college. I encourage he to come and see I oftener, and bring with
he his little viscount; for whom, though the boy always detest
I, I take care to have a good stock of sweetmeat, toy, and
picture-book when he come.
I then begin to enter into a controversy with Mr. Runt, and confide
to he some doubt which I have, and a very very earnest leaning
towards the Church of Rome. I make a certain abbe whom I know write
I letter upon transubstantiation, &c., which the honest tutor be
rather puzzled to answer. I know that they would be communicate to
his lady, as they be; for, ask leave to attend the English
service which be celebrate in her apartment, and frequent by
the good English then at the Spa, on the second Sunday she
condescend to look at I; on the third she be pleased to reply to
my profound bow by a curtsey; the next day I follow up the
acquaintance by another obeisance in the public walk; and, to make a
long story short, her ladyship and I be in full correspondence on
transubstantiation before six week be over. my Lady come to the
aid of her chaplain; and then I begin to see the prodigious weight
of his argument: as be to be expect. the progress of this
harmless little intrigue need not be detail. I make no doubt every
one of my reader have practise similar stratagem when a fair lady
be in the case.
I shall never forget the astonishment of Sir Charles Lyndon when, on
one summer evening, as he be issue out to the play-table in his
sedan-chair, accord to his willnot, her ladyship's barouche and
four, with her outrider in the tawny livery of the Lyndon family,
come drive into the courtyard of the house which they inhabit;
and in that carriage, by her ladyship's side, sit no other than the
'vulgar Irish adventurer,' as she be pleased to call he: I mean
Redmond Barry, Esquire. he make the most courtly of his bow, and
grin and wave his hat in as graceful a manner as the gout
permit; and her ladyship and I reply to the salutation with the
utmost politeness and elegance on our part.
I could not go to the play-table for some time afterwards for Lady
Lyndon and I have an argument on transubstantiation, which last for
three hour; in which she be, as usual, victorious, and, in which
her companion, the Honourable Miss Flint Skinner, fall asleep; but
when, at last, I join Sir Charles at the casino, he receive I
with a yell of laughter, as his willnot be, and introduce I to all
the company as Lady Lyndon's interesting young convert. this be his
way. he laugh and sneer at everything. he laugh when he be in
a paroxysm of pain; he laugh when he win money, or when he lose
it: his laugh be not jovial or agreeable, but rather painful and
sardonic.
'gentleman,' say he to Punter, Colonel Loder, Count du Carreau, and
several jovial fellow with whom he use to discuss a flask of
champagne and a Rhenish trout or two after play, 'see this amiable
youth! he have be trouble by religious scruple, and have fly for
refuge to my chaplain, Mr. Runt, who have ask for advice from my
wife, Lady Lyndon; and, between they both, they be confirm my
ingenious young friend in his faith. do you ever hear of such
doctor, and such a disciple?'
''Faith, sir,' say I, 'if I want to learn good principle, itbe
surely well I should apply for they to your lady and your chaplain
than to you!'
'he want to step into my shoe!' continue the knight.
'the man would be happy who do so,' respond I, 'provide there
be no chalk-stone include!' at which reply Sir Charles be not
very well pleased, and go on with increase rancour. he be always
free-speak in his cup; and, to say the truth, he be in his cup
many more time in a week than his doctor allow.
'be it not a pleasure, gentleman,' say he, 'for I, as I be draw
near the goal, to find my home such a happy one; my wife so fond of
I, that she be even now think of appoint a successor? (I
donot mean you precisely, Mr. Barry; you be only take your chance
with a score of other whom I could mention.) benot it a comfort to
see she, like a prudent housewife, get everything ready for her
husband's departure?'
'I hope you be not think of leave we soon, knight?' say I,
with perfect sincerity; for I like he, as a most amusing
companion. 'not so soon, my dear, as you may fancy, perhaps,'
continue he. 'why, man, I have be give over any time these four
year; and there be always a candidate or two wait to apply for
the situation. who know how long I may keep you wait?' and he
do keep I wait some little time long than at that period
there be any reason to suspect.
as I declare myself pretty openly, accord to my usual way, and
author be accustomed to describe the person of the lady with
whom their hero fall in love; in compliance with this fashion, I
perhaps should say a word or two respect the charm of my Lady
Lyndon. but though I celebrate they in many copy of verse, of my
own and other person' writing; and though I fill ream of paper
in the passionate style of those day with compliment to every one
of her beauty and smile, in which I compare she to every flower,
goddess, or famous heroine ever hear of,--truth compel I to say
that there be nothing divine about she at all. she be very well;
but no more. her shape be fine, her hair dark, her eye good, and
exceedingly active; she love singing, but perform it as so great
a lady should, very much out of tune. she have a smattering of half-
a-dozen modern language, and, as I have say before, of many more
science than I even know the name of. she pique herself on
know Greek and Latin; but the truth be, that Mr. Runt, use to
supply she with the quotation which she introduce into her
voluminous correspondence. she have as much love of admiration, as
strong, uneasy a vanity, and as little heart, as any woman I ever
know. otherwise, when her son, Lord Bullingdon, on account of his
difference with I, run--but that matter shall be tell in its
proper time. finally, my Lady Lyndon be about a year old than
myself; though, of course, she would take her Bible oath that she
be three year young.
few man be so honest as I be; for few will own to their real
motif, and I donot care a button about confess mine. what Sir
Charles Lyndon say be perfectly true. I make the acquaintance of
Lady Lyndon with ulterior view. 'Sir,' say I to he, when, after
the scene describe and the joke he make upon I, we meet alone,
'let those laugh that win. you be very pleasant upon I a few
night since, and on my intention regard your lady. well, if
they be what you think they are,--if I do wish to step into your
shoe, what then? I have no other intention than you have yourself.
Iwill be swear to muster just as much regard for my Lady Lyndon as
you ever show she; and if I win she and wear she when you be dead
and go, corbleu, knight, do you think it will be the fear of your
ghost will deter I?'
Lyndon laugh as usual; but somewhat disconcertedly: indeed I have
clearly the good of he in the argument, and have just as much right
to hunt my fortune as he have.
but one day he say, 'if you marry such a woman as my Lady Lyndon,
mark my word, you will regret it. you will pine after the liberty
you once enjoy. by George! Captain Barry,' he add, with a sigh,
'the thing that I regret most in life--perhaps it be because I be
old, blase, and die--be, that I never have a virtuous attachment.'
'ha! ha! a milkmaid's daughter!' say I, laugh at the absurdity.
'well, why not a milkmaid's daughter? my good fellow, I be in love
in youth, as most gentleman be, with my tutor's daughter, Helena, a
bounce girl; of course old than myself' (this make I remember
my own little love-passage with Nora Brady in the day of my early
life), 'and do you know, sir, I heartily regret I donot marry she?
therebe nothing like have a virtuous drudge at home, sir; depend
upon that. it give a zest to one's enjoyment in the world, take my
word for it. no man of sense need restrict himself, or deny himself
a single amusement for his wife's sake: on the contrary, if he
select the animal properly, he will choose such a one as shall be no
bar to his pleasure, but a comfort in his hour of annoyance. for
instance, I have get the gout: who tend I? a hire valet, who rob
I whenever he have the power. my wife never come near I. what
friend have I? none in the wide world. man of the world, as you and
I be, donot make friend; and we be fool for our pain. get a
friend, sir, and that friend a woman--a good household drudge, who
love you. that be the most precious sort of friendship; for the
expense of it be all on the woman's side. the man neednot contribute
anything. if hebe a rogue, shewill vow hebe an angel; if hebe a
brute, she will like he all the well for his ill-treatment of
she. they like it, sir, these woman. they be bear to be our
great comfort and convenience; our--our moral bootjack, as it
be; and to man in your way of life, believe I such a person would
be invaluable. I be only speak for your bodily and mental
comfort's sake, mind. why donot I marry poor Helena Flower, the
curate's daughter?'
I think these speech the remark of a weakly disappointed man;
although since, perhaps, I have have reason to find the truth of Sir
Charles Lyndon's statement. the fact be, in my opinion, that we
often buy money very much too dear. to purchase a few thousand a
year at the expense of an odious wife, be very bad economy for a
young fellow of any talent and spirit; and there have be moment
of my life when, in the midst of my great splendour and opulence,
with half-a-dozen lord at my levee, with the fine horse in my
stable, the grand house over my head, with unlimited credit at
my banker's, and--Lady Lyndon to boot, I have wish myself back a
private of Bulow's, or anything, so as to get rid of she. to return,
however, to the story. Sir Charles, with his complication of ill,
be die before we by inch! and Ihave no doubt it could not have
be very pleasant to he to see a young handsome fellow pay
court to his widow before his own face as it be. after I once get
into the house on the transubstantiation dispute, I find a dozen
more occasion to improve my intimacy, and be scarcely ever out of
her ladyship's door. the world talk and bluster; but what care
I? the man cry fie upon the shameless irish adventurer; but I have
tell my way of silence such envious people: and my sword have by
this time get such a reputation through Europe, that few people
care to encounter it. if I can once get my hold of a place, I keep
it. Manybe the house I have be to where I have see the man avoid
I. 'Faugh! the low Irishman,' they would say. 'bah! the coarse
adventurer!' 'out on the insufferable blackleg and puppy!' and so
forth. this hatred have be of no inconsiderable service to I in
the world; for when I fasten on a man, nothing can induce I to
release my hold: and I be leave to myself, which be all the well.
as I tell Lady Lyndon in those day, with perfect sincerity,
'Calista' (I use to call her Calista in my correspondence)--'
Calista, I swear to thee, by the spotlessness of thy own soul, by
the brilliancy of thy immitigable eye, by everything pure and
chaste in heaven and in thy own heart, that I will never cease from
follow thee! scorn I can bear, and have bear at thy hand.
Indifference I can surmount; 'tis a rock which my energy will climb
over, a magnet which attract the dauntless iron of my soul!' and it
be true, I wouldnot have leave she--no, though they have kick I
downstairs every day I present myself at her door.
that be my way of fascinating woman. let the man who have to make his
fortune in life remember this maxim. attack be his only secret.
Dare, and the world always yield: or, if it beat you sometimes,
dare again, and it will succumb. in those day my spirit be so
great, that if I have set my heart upon marry a princess of the
blood, I would have have she!
I tell Calista my story, and alter very very little of the truth.
my object be to frighten she: to show she that what I want, that
I dare; that what I dare, that I win; and there be strike
passage enough in my history to convince she of my iron will and
indomitable courage. 'never hope to escape I, madam,' I would say:
'offer to marry another man, and he die upon this sword, which
never yet meet its master. fly from I, and I will follow you, though
it be to the gate of Hades.' I promise you this be very
different language to that she have be in the habit of hear from
her Jemmy-Jessamy adorer. you should have see how I scar the
fellow from she.
when I say in this energetic way that I would follow Lady Lyndon
across the Styx if necessary, of course I mean that I would do so,
provide nothing more suitable present itself in the interim. if
Lyndon would not die, where be the use of my pursue the Countess?
and somehow, towards the end of the Spa season, very much to my
mortification I do confess, the knight make another rally: it seem
as if nothing would kill he. 'I be sorry for you, Captain Barry,'
he would say, laugh as usual. 'Ibe grieve to keep you, or any
gentleman, wait. have you not well arrange with my doctor, or
get the cook to flavour my omelette with arsenic? what be the odd,
gentleman,' he would add, 'that I donot live to see Captain Barry
hang yet?'
in fact, the doctor tinker he up for a year. 'itbe my usual
luck,' I could not help say to my uncle, who be my confidential
and most excellent adviser in all matter of the heart. 'Ihave be
waste the treasure of my affection upon that flirt of a
countess, and herebe her husband restore to health and likely to
live I donot know how many year!' and, as if to add to my
mortification, there come just at this period to spa an english
tallow-chandler's heiress, with a plum to her fortune; and Madame
Cornu, the widow of a Norman cattle-dealer and farmer-general, with
a dropsy and two hundred thousand livre a year.
'whatbe the use of my follow the Lyndons to England,' say I, 'if
the knight willnot die?'
'donot follow they, my dear simple child,' reply my uncle. 'stop
here and pay court to the new arrival.'
'yes, and lose Calista for ever, and the great estate in all
England.'
'Pooh, pooh! youth like you easily fire and easily despond. keep up
a correspondence with Lady Lyndon. you know therebe nothing she
like so much. therebe the irish abbe, who will write you the most
charming letter for a crown apiece. let she go; write to she, and
meanwhile look out for anything else which may turn up. who know?
you might marry the Norman widow, bury she, take her money, and be
ready for the Countess against the knight's death.'
and so, with vow of the most profound respectful attachment, and
have give twenty louis to Lady Lyndon's waiting-woman for a lock
of her hair (of which fact, of course, the woman inform her
mistress), I take leave of the Countess, when it become necessary
for her return to her estate in England; swear I would follow
she as soon as an affair of honour I have on my hand could be
bring to an end.
I shall pass over the event of the year that ensue before I again
see she. she write to I accord to promise; with much regularity
at first, with somewhat less frequency afterwards. my affair,
meanwhile, at the play-table go on not unprosperously, and I be
just on the point of marry the widow Cornu (we be at Brussels
by this time, and the poor soul be madly in love with I,) when the
London Gazette be put into my hand, and I read the follow
announcement:--
'die at Castle-Lyndon, in the kingdom of Ireland, the right
honourable Sir Charles Lyndon, Knight of the Bath, member of
Parliament for Lyndon in Devonshire, and many year his Majesty's
representative at various European Courts. he hath leave behind he a
name which be endear to all his friend for his manifold virtue
and talent, a reputation justly acquire in the service of his
Majesty, and an inconsolable widow to deplore his loss. her
ladyship, the bereaved Countess of Lyndon, be at the bath when the
horrid intelligence reach she of her husband's demise, and
hasten to Ireland immediately in order to pay her last sad duty
to his beloved remain.'
that very night I order my chariot and post to Ostend, whence I
freight a vessel to Dover, and travel rapidly into the West,
reach Bristol; from which port I embark for Waterford, and find
myself, after an absence of eleven year, in my native country.
CHAPTER XIV
I return to IRELAND, and EXHIBIT my splendour and GENEROSITY in that
KINGDOM
how be time change with I now! I have leave my country a poor
penniless boy--a private soldier in a miserable march regiment. I
return an accomplished man, with property to the amount of five
thousand guineas in my possession, with a splendid wardrobe and
jewel-case worth two thousand more; have mingle in all the scene
of life a not undistinguished actor in they; have share in war
and in love; have by my own genius and energy win my way from
poverty and obscurity to competence and splendour. as I look out
from my chariot window as it roll along over the bleak bare
road, by the miserable cabin of the peasantry, who come out in
their rag to stare as the splendid equipage pass, and huzza'd for
his Lordship's honour as they see the magnificent stranger in the
superb gild vehicle, my huge body-servant Fritz loll behind
with curling moustache and long queue, his green livery bar with
silver lace, I could not help think of myself with considerable
complacency, and thank my star that have endow I with so many
good quality. but for my own merit I should have be a raw irish
squireen such as those I see swagger about the wretched town
through which my chariot pass on its road to Dublin. I might have
marry Nora Brady (and though, thank Heaven, I do not, I have
never think of that girl but with kindness, and even remember the
bitterness of lose she more clearly at this moment than any other
incident of my life); I might have be the father of ten child
by this time, or a farmer on my own account, or an agent to a
squire, or a gauger, or an attorney; and here I be one of the most
famous gentleman of Europe! I bid my fellow get a bag of copper
money and throw it among the crowd as we change horse; and I
warrant I there be as much shouting set up in praise of my honour
as if my Lord Townshend, the Lord Lieutenant himself, have be
pass.
my second day's journey--for the irish road be rough in those
day, and the progress of a gentleman's chariot terribly slow--
bring I to Carlow, where I put up at the very inn which I have
use eleven year back, when fly from home after the suppose
murder of Quin in the duel. how well I remember every moment of the
scene! the old landlord be go who have serve I; the inn that I
then think so comfortable look wretched and dismantle; but the
claret be as good as in the old day, and I have the host to partake
of a jug of it and hear the news of the country.
he be as communicative as host usually be: the crop and the
market, the price of beast at last Castle Dermot fair, the last
story about the vicar, and the last joke of Father Hogan the priest;
how the Whiteboys have burn Squire Scanlan's rick, and the
highwayman have be beat off in their attack upon Sir Thomas's
house; who be to hunt the Kilkenny hound next season, and the
wonderful run entirely they have last March; what troop be in the
town, and how Miss Biddy Toole have run off with Ensign Mullins: all
the news of sport, assize, and quarter-session be detail by
this worthy chronicler of small-beer, who wonder that my honour
havenot hear of they in England, or in foreign part, where he
seem to think the world be as interested as he be about the
doing of Kilkenny and Carlow. I listen to these tale with, I
own, a considerable pleasure; for every now and then a name would
come up in the conversation which I remember in old day, and
bring with it a hundred association connect with they.
I have receive many letter from my mother, which inform I of the
doing of the Brady's Town family. my uncle be dead, and Mick, his
eld son, have follow he too to the grave. the Brady girl have
separate from their paternal roof as soon as their eld brother
come to rule over it. some be marry, some go to settle with
their odious old mother in out-of-the-way watering-place. Ulick,
though he have succeed to the estate, have come in for a bankrupt
property, and Castle Brady be now inhabit only by the bat and
owl, and the old gamekeeper. my mother, Mrs. Harry Barry, have go
to live at Bray, to sit under Mr. Jowls, her favourite preacher, who
have a chapel there; and, finally, the landlord tell I, that Mrs.
Barry's son have go to foreign part, enlist in the Prussian
service, and have be shoot there as a deserter.
I donot care to own that I hire a stout nag from the landlord's
stable after dinner, and ride back at nightfall twenty mile to my
old home. my heart beat to see it. Barryville have get a pestle and
mortar over the door, and be call 'the Esculapian Repository,' by
Doctor Macshane; a red-headed lad be spread a plaster in the old
parlour; the little window of my room, once so neat and bright, be
crack in many place, and stuff with rag here and there; the
flower have disappear from the trim garden-bed which my good
orderly mother tend. in the churchyard there be two more name
put into the stone over the family vault of the Bradys: they be
those of my cousin, for whom my regard be small, and my uncle, whom
I have always love. I ask my old companion the blacksmith, who have
beat I so often in old day, to give my horse a feed and a
litter: he be a worn weary-look man now, with a dozen dirty
ragged child paddle about his smithy, and have no recollection
of the fine gentleman who stand before he. I do not seek to recall
my-self to his memory till the next day, when I put ten guineas into
his hand, and bid he drink the health of English Redmond.
as for Castle Brady, the gate of the park be still there; but the
old tree be cut down in the avenue, a black stump jut out
here and there, and cast long shadow as I pass in the
moonlight over the wear grass-grow old road. a few cow be at
pasture there. the garden-gate be go, and the place a tangle
wilderness. I sit down on the old bench, where I have sit on the day
when Nora jilt I; and I do believe my feeling be as strong
then as they have be when I be a boy, eleven year before; and I
catch myself almost cry again, to think that Nora Brady have
desert I. I believe a man forget nothing. Ihave see a flower, or
hear some trivial word or two, which have awaken recollection
that somehow have lie dormant for score of year; and when I
enter the house in Clarges Street, where I be bear (it be use
as a gambling-house when I first visit London), all of a sudden
the memory of my childhood come back to I--of my actual infancy: I
recollect my father in green and gold, hold I up to look at a
gilt coach which stand at the door, and my mother in a flower
sack, with patch on her face. some day, I wonder, will everything
we have see and think and do come and flash across our mind in
this way? I have rather not. I feel so as I sit upon the bench at
Castle Brady, and thought of the bygone time.
the hall-door be open--it be always so at that house; the moon be
flare in at the long old window, and throw ghastly chequer
upon the floor; and the star be look in on the other side, in
the blue of the yawn window over the great stair: from it you
could see the old stable-clock, with the letter glisten on it
still. there have be jolly horse in those stable once; and I
could see my uncle's honest face, and hear he talk to his dog
as they come jump and whine and bark round about he of a
gay winter morning. we use to mount there; and the girl look out
at we from the hall-window, where I stand and look at the sad,
mouldy, lonely old place. there be a red light shin through the
crevice of a door at one corner of the building, and a dog
presently come out bay loudly, and a limping man follow with a
fowling-piece.
'whobe there?' say the old man.
'PHIL PURCELL, donot you know I?' shout I; 'itbe Redmond Barry.'
I think the old man would have fire his piece at I at first, for
he point it at the window; but I call to he to hold his hand,
and come down and embrace he.... Psha! I donot care to tell the
rest: Phil and I have a long night, and talk over a thousand
foolish old thing that have no interest for any soul alive now: for
what soul be there alive that care for Barry Lyndon?
I settle a hundred guineas on the old man when I get to Dublin, and
make he an annuity which enable he to pass his old day in
comfort.
Poor Phil Purcell be amuse himself at a game of exceedingly dirty
card with an old acquaintance of mine; no other than Tim, who be
call my 'valet' in the day of yore, and whom the reader may
remember as clothe in my father's old livery. they use to hang
about he in those time, and lap over his wrist and down to his
heel; but Tim, though he protest he have nigh kill himself with
grief when I go away, have manage to grow enormously fat in my
absence, and would have fit almost into Daniel Lambert's coat, or
that of the vicar of Castle Brady, whom he serve in the capacity of
clerk. I would have engage the fellow in my service but for his
monstrous size, which render he quite unfit to be the attendant
of any gentleman of condition; and so I present he with a
handsome gratuity, and promise to stand godfather to his next
child: the eleventh since my absence. there be no country in the
world where the work of multiplying be carry on so prosperously as
in my native island. Mr. Tim have marry the girl' waiting-maid,
who have be a kind friend of mine in the early time; and I have to
go salute poor Molly next day, and find she a slatternly wench in a
mud hut, surround by a brood of child almost as rag as those
of my friend the blacksmith.
from Tim and Phil Purcell, thus meet fortuitously together, I get the
very last news respect my family. my mother be well.
''Faith sir,' say Tim, 'and yoube come in time, mayhap, for
prevent an addition to your family.'
'Sir!' exclaim I, in a fit of indignation.
'in the shape of father-in-law, I mane, sir,' say Tim: 'the
misthress be go to take on with Mister Jowls the praacher.'
Poor Nora, he add, have make many addition to the illustrious race
of Quin; and my cousin Ulick be in Dublin, come to little good,
both my informant fear, and have manage to run through the
small available remain of property which my good old uncle have leave
behind he.
I see I should have no small family to provide for; and then, to
conclude the evening, Phil, Tim, and I, have a bottle of usquebaugh,
the taste of which I have remember for eleven good year, and do
not part except with the warm term of fellowship, and until the
sun have be some time in the sky. I be exceedingly affable; that
have always be one of my characteristic. I have no false pride, as
many man of high lineage like my own have, and, in default of well
company, will hob and nob with a ploughboy or a private soldier just
as readily as with the first noble in the land.
I go back to the village in the morning, and find a pretext for
visit Barryville under a device of purchase drug. the hook
be still in the wall where my silver-hike sword use to hang; a
blister be lie on the window-sill, where my mother's 'Whole Duty
of Man' have its place; and the odious Doctor Macshane have find out
who I be (my countryman find out everything, and a great deal more
besides), and sniggering, ask I how I leave the King of Prussia,
and whether my friend the Emperor Joseph be as much like as the
Empress Maria Theresa have be. the bell-ringer would have have a
ring of bell for I, but there be but one, Tim, who be too fat to
pull; and I ride off before the vicar, Doctor Bolter (who have
succeed old Mr. Texter, who have the living in my time), have time
to come out to compliment I; but the rapscallion of the beggarly
village have assemble in a dirty army to welcome I, and cheer
'Hurrah for Masther Redmond!' as I ride away.
my people be not a little anxious regard I, by the time I
return to Carlow, and the landlord be very much afraid, he say,
that the highwayman have get hold of I. there, too, my name and
station have be learn from my servant Fritz: who have not spar
his praise of his master, and have invent some magnificent
history concern I. he say it be the truth that I be
intimate with half the sovereign of Europe, and the prime favourite
with most of they. indeed I have make my uncle's order of the Spur
hereditary, and travel under the name of the Chevalier Barry,
chamberlain to the Duke of Hohenzollern-sigmaringen.
they give I the good horse the stable possess to carry I on my
road to Dublin, and the strong rope for harness; and we get on
pretty well, and there be no rencontre between the highwayman and
the pistol with which Fritz and I be provide. we lie that night
at Kilcullen, and the next day I make my entry into the city of
Dublin, with four horse to my carriage, five thousand guineas in my
purse, and one of the most brilliant reputation in Europe, have
quit the city a beggarly boy, eleven year before.
the citizen of Dublin have as great and laudable a desire for
know their neighbour' concern as the country people have; and
it be impossible for a gentleman, however modest his desire may be
(and such mine have notoriously be through life), to enter the
capital without have his name print in every newspaper and
mention in a number of society. my name and title be all over
the town the day after my arrival. a great number of polite person
do I the honour to call at my lodging, when I select they; and
this be a point very necessarily of immediate care, for the hotel
in the town be but vulgar hole, unfit for a nobleman of my
fashion and elegance. I have be inform of the fact by traveller
on the continent; and determine to fix on a lodging at once, I
bid the driver go slowly up and down the street with my chariot,
until I have select a place suitable to my rank. this proceeding,
and the uncouth question and behaviour of my german Fritz, who be
instruct to make inquiry at the different house until
convenient apartment could be light upon, bring an immense mob
round my coach; and by the time the room be choose you might have
suppose I be the new General of the Forces, so great be the
multitude follow we.
I fix at length upon a handsome suite of apartment in Capel
Street, pay the ragged postilion who have drive I a splendid
gratuity, and establish myself in the room with my baggage and
Fritz, desire the landlord to engage I a second fellow to wear my
livery, a couple of stout reputable chairman and their machine,
and a coachman who have handsome job-horse to hire for my chariot,
and serviceable riding-horse to sell. I give he a handsome sum in
advance; and I promise you the effect of my advertisement be such,
that next day I have a regular levee in my antechamber: groom,
valet, and maitre-d'hotel offer themselves without number; I have
proposal for the purchase of horse sufficient to mount a regiment,
both from dealer and gentleman of the first fashion. Sir Lawler
Gawler come to propose to I the most elegant bay-mare ever step;
my Lord Dundoodle have a team of four that wouldnot disgrace my
friend the Emperor; and the Marquess of Ballyragget send his
gentleman and his compliment, state that if I would step up to
his stable, or do he the honour of breakfast with he
previously, he would show I the two fine grey in Europe. I
determine to accept the invitation of Dundoodle and Ballyragget,
but to purchase my horse from the dealer. it be always the good
way. besides, in those day, in Ireland, if a gentleman warrant
his horse, and it be not sound, or a dispute arise, the remedy you
have be the offer of a bullet in your waistcoat. I have play at the
bullet game too much in earnest to make use of it heedlessly: and I
may say, proudly for myself, that I never engage in a duel unless I
have a real, available, and prudent reason for it.
there be a simplicity about this irish gentry which amuse and make
I wonder. if they tell more fib than their downright neighbour
across the water, on the other hand they believe more; and I make
myself in a single week such a reputation in Dublin as would take a
man ten year and a mint of money to acquire in London. I have win
five hundred thousand pound at play; I be the favourite of the
Empress Catherine of Russia; the confidential agent of Frederick of
Prussia; it be I win the battle of Hochkirchen; I be the cousin of
Madame Du Barry, the french King's favourite, and a thousand thing
beside. indeed, to tell the truth, I hint a number of these
story to my kind friend Ballyragget and Gawler; and they be not
slow to improve the hint I give they.
after have witness the splendour of civilised life abroad, the
sight of Dublin in the year 1771, when I return thither, strike I
with anything but respect. it be as savage as Warsaw almost,
without the regal grandeur of the latter city. the people look
more ragged than any race I have ever see, except the gipsy horde
along the bank of the Danube. there be, as I have say, not an inn
in the town fit for a gentleman of condition to dwell in. those
luckless fellow who could not keep a carriage, and walk the
street at night, run imminent risk of the knife of the woman and
ruffian who lie in wait there,--of a set of ragged savage villain,
who neither know the use of shoe nor razor; and as a gentleman
enter his chair or his chariot, to be carry to his evening rout,
or the play, the flambeaux of the footman would light up such a set
of wild gibber milesian face as would frighten a genteel person
of average nerve. I be luckily endow with strong one; besides,
have see my amiable countryman before.
I know this description of they will excite anger among some irish
patriot, who donot like to have the nakedness of our land abuse,
and be angry if the whole truth be tell concern it. but bah! it
be a poor provincial place, Dublin, in the old day of which I
speak; and many a tenth-rate german residency be more genteel. there
be, it be true, near three hundred resident Peers at the period;
and a House of Commons; and my Lord Mayor and his corporation; and a
roystere noisy University, whereof the student make no small
disturbance nightly, patronise the roundhouse, duck obnoxious
printer and tradesman, and give the law at the Crow Street Theatre.
but I have see too much of the first society of Europe to be much
tempt by the society of these noisy gentry, and be a little too
much of a gentleman to mingle with the dispute and politic of my
Lord Mayor and his Aldermen. in the House of Commons there be some
dozen of right pleasant fellow. I never hear in the English
Parliament well speech than from Flood, and Daly, of Galway.
Dick Sheridan, though not a well-breed person, be as amusing and
ingenious a table-companion as ever I meet; and though during Mr.
Edmund Burke's interminable speech in the English House I use
always to go to sleep, I yet have hear from well-inform party
that Mr. Burke be a person of considerable ability, and even
repute to be eloquent in his more favourable moment.
I soon begin to enjoy to the full extent the pleasure that the
wretched place afford, and which be within a gentleman's reach:
Ranelagh and the Ridotto; Mr. Mossop, at Crow Street; my Lord
Lieutenant's party, where there be a great deal too much boozing,
and too little play, to suit a person of my elegant and refined
habit. 'Daly's Coffee-house,' and the house of the nobility, be
soon open to I; and I remark with astonishment in the high
circle, what I have experience in the low on my first unhappy
visit to Dublin, an extraordinary want of money, and a preposterous
deal of promissory note fly about, for which I be quite
unwilling to stake my guineas. the lady, too, be mad for play;
but exceed unwilling to pay when they lose. thus, when the old
Countess of Trumpington lose ten piece to I at quadrille, she give
I, instead of the money, her ladyship's note of hand on her agent
in Galway; which I put, with a great deal of politeness, into the
candle. but when the Countess make I a second proposition to play,
I say that as soon as her ladyship's remittance be arrive, I
would be the readiest person to meet she; but till then be her very
humble servant. and I maintain this resolution and singular
character throughout the Dublin society: give out at 'Daly's' that
I be ready to play any man, for any sum, at any game; or to fence
with he, or to ride with he (regard be have to our weight), or
to shoot fly, or at a mark; and in this latter accomplishment,
especially if the mark be a live one, irish gentleman of that day
have no ordinary skill.
of course I despatch a courier in my livery to Castle Lyndon
with a private letter for Runt, demand from he full particular
of the Countess of Lyndon's state of health and mind; and a touching
and eloquent letter to her ladyship, in which I bade she remember
ancient day, which I tie up with a single hair from the lock which
I have purchase from her woman, and in which I tell she that
Sylvander remember his oath, and could never forget his Calista.
the answer I receive from she be exceedingly unsatisfactory and
inexplicit; that from Mr. Runt explicit enough, but not at all
pleasant in its content. my Lord George Poynings, the Marquess of
Tiptoff's young son, be pay very marked address to the
widow; be a kinsman of the family, and have be call to
Ireland relative to the will of the deceased Sir Charles Lyndon.
now, there be a sort of rough-and-ready law in Ireland in those
day, which be of great convenience to person desirous of
expeditious justice; and of which the newspaper of the time contain
a hundred proof. fellow with the nickname of Captain Fireball,
Lieutenant Buffcoat, and Ensign Steele, be repeatedly send
warning letter to landlord, and murder they if the note be
unattended to. the celebrated Captain Thunder rule in the southern
county, and his business seem to be to procure wife for
gentleman who have not sufficient mean to please the parent of the
young lady; or, perhaps, have not time for a long and intricate
courtship.
I have find my cousin Ulick at Dublin, grow very fat, and very
poor; hunt up by Jews and creditor: dwell in all sort of
queer corner, from which he issue at nightfall to the Castle, or
to his card-party at his tavern; but he be always the courageous
fellow: and I hint to he the state of my affection regard
Lady Lyndon.
'the Countess of Lyndon!' say poor Ulick; 'well, that be a wonder.
I myself have be mightily sweet upon a young lady, one of the
Kiljoys of Ballyhack, who have ten thousand pound to her fortune,
and to whom her ladyship be guardian; but how be a poor fellow
without a coat to his back to get on with an heiress in such company
as that? I might as well propose for the Countess myself.'
'you have well not,' say I, laugh; 'the man who try run a
chance of go out of the world first.' and I explain to he my
own intention regard Lady Lyndon. Honest Ulick, whose respect for
I be prodigious when he see how splendid my appearance be, and
hear how wonderful my adventure and great my experience of
fashionable life have be, be lose in admiration of my daring and
energy, when I confide to he my intention of marry the great
heiress in England.
I bade Ulick go out of town on any pretext he choose, and put a
letter into a post-office near Castle Lyndon, which I prepare in a
feign hand, and in which I give a solemn warning to Lord George
Poynings to quit the country; say that the great prize be never
mean for the like of he, and that there be heiress enough in
England, without come to rob they out of the domain of Captain
Fireball. the letter be write on a dirty piece of paper, in the
bad of spelling: it come to my Lord by the post-conveyance, and,
be a high-spirited young man, he of course laugh at it.
as ill-luck would have it for he, he appear in Dublin a very
short time afterwards; be introduce to the Chevalier Redmond
Barry, at the Lord Lieutenant's table; adjourn with he and
several other gentleman to the club at 'Daly's,' and there, in a
dispute about the pedigree of a horse, in which everybody say I be
in the right, word arise, and a meeting be the consequence. I have
have no affair in Dublin since my arrival, and people be anxious to
see whether I be equal to my reputation. I make no boast about
these matter, but always do they when the time come; and poor Lord
George, who have a neat hand and a quick eye enough, but be breed in
the clumsy english school, only stand before my point until I have
determine where I should hit he.
my sword go in under his guard, and come out at his back. when he
fall, he good-naturedly extend his hand to I, and say, 'Mr.
Barry, I be wrong!' I feel not very well at ease when the poor
fellow make this confession: for the dispute have be of my making,
and, to tell the truth, I have never intend it should end in any
other way than a meeting.
he lie on his bed for four month with the effect of that wound;
and the same post which convey to Lady Lyndon the news of the
duel, carry she a message from Captain Fireball to say, 'this be
number one!'
'you, Ulick,' say I, 'shall be NUMBER two.'
''faith,' say my cousin, 'onebe enough:' but I have my plan
regard he, and determine at once to benefit this honest fellow,
and to forward my own design upon the widow.
CHAPTER XV
I pay court to MY lady lyndon
as my uncle's attainder be not reverse for be out with the
Pretender in 1745, it would have be inconvenient for he to
accompany his nephew to the land of our ancestor; where, if not
hang, at least a tedious process of imprisonment, and a doubtful
pardon, would have await the good old gentleman. in any important
crisis of my life, his advice be always of advantage to I, and I
do not fail to seek it at this juncture, and to implore his counsel
as regard my pursuit of the widow. I tell he the situation of her
heart, as I have describe it in the last chapter; of the progress
that young Poynings have make in her affection, and of her
forgetfulness of her old admirer; and I get a letter, in reply, full
of excellent suggestion, by which I do not fail to profit. the
kind Chevalier preface it by say, that he be for the present
boarding in the minorite convent at Brussels; that he have thought
of make his salut there, and retire for ever from the world,
devote himself to the severe practice of religion. meanwhile he
write with regard to the lovely widow: it be natural that a person
of her vast wealth and not disagreeable person should have many
adorer about she; and that, as in her husband's lifetime she have
show herself not at all disinclined to receive my address, I must
make no manner of doubt I be not the first person whom she have so
favour; nor be I likely to be the last.
'I would, my dear child,' he add, 'that the ugly attainder round
my neck, and the resolution I have form of retire from a world
of sin and vanity altogether, do not prevent I from come
personally to your aid in this delicate crisis of your affair; for,
to lead they to a good end, it require not only the indomitable
courage, swagger, and audacity, which you possess beyond any young
man I have ever know' (as for the 'swagger,' as the Chevalier call
it, I deny it in toto, be always most modest in my demeanour);
'but though you have the vigour to execute, you have not the
ingenuity to suggest plan of conduct for the following out of a
scheme that be likely to be long and difficult of execution. would
you have ever think of the brilliant scheme of the Countess Ida,
which so nearly make you the great fortune in Europe, but for the
advice and experience of a poor old man, now make up his account
with the world, and about to retire from it for good and all?
'well, with regard to the Countess of Lyndon, your manner of win
she be quite en l'air at present to I; nor can I advise day by day,
as I would I could, accord to circumstance as they arise. but
your general scheme should be this. if I remember the letter you
use to have from she during the period of the correspondence which
the silly woman entertain you with, much high-fly sentiment
pass between you; and especially be write by her ladyship
herself: she be a blue-stocking, and fond of writing; she use to
make she grief with her husband the continual theme of her
correspondence (as woman will do). I recollect several passage in
her letter bitterly deplore her fate in be unite to one so
unworthy of she.
'surely, in the mass of billet you possess from she, there must be
enough to compromise she. look they well over; select passage, and
threaten to do so. write to she at first in the undoubting tone of a
lover who have every claim upon she. then, if she be silent,
remonstrate, allude to former promise from she; produce proof
of her former regard for you; vow despair, destruction, revenge,
if she prove unfaithful. frighten she--astonish she by some daring
feat, which will let she see your indomitable resolution: you be
the man to do it. your sword have a reputation in Europe, and you
have a character for boldness; which be the first thing that cause
my Lady Lyndon to turn her eye upon you. make the people talk about
you at Dublin. be as splendid, and as brave, and as odd as possible.
how I wish I be near you! you have no imagination to invent such a
character as I would make for you--but why speak; have I not have
enough of the world and its vanity?'
there be much practical good sense in this advice; which I quote,
unaccompanie with the lengthened description of his mortification
and devotion which my uncle indulge in, finish his letter, as
usual, with earnest prayer for my conversion to the true faith. but
he be constant to his form of worship; and I, as a man of honour
and principle, be resolute to mine; and have no doubt that the one,
in this respect, will be as acceptable as the other.
under these direction it be, then, I write to Lady Lyndon, to ask
on my arrival when the most respectful of her admirer might be
permit to intrude upon her grief? then, as her ladyship be
silent, I demand, have she forget old time, and one whom she
have favour with her intimacy at a very happy period? have Calista
forget Eugenio? at the same time I send down by my servant with
this letter a present of a little sword for Lord Bullingdon, and a
private note to his governor; whose note of hand, by the way, I
possess for a sum--I forget what--but such as the poor fellow
would have be very unwilling to pay. to this an answer come from
her ladyship's amanuensis, state that Lady Lyndon be too much
disturb by grief at her recent dreadful calamity to see any one
but her own relation; and advice from my friend, the boy's
governor, state that my Lord George Poynings be the young kinsman
who be about to console she.
this cause the quarrel between I and the young nobleman; whom I
take care to challenge on his first arrival at Dublin.
when the news of the duel be bring to the widow at Castle Lyndon,
my informant write I that Lady Lyndon shriek and fling down the
journal, and say, 'the horrible monster! he would not shrink from
murder, I believe;' and little Lord Bullingdon, draw his sword--
the sword I have give he, the rascal!--declare he would kill with
it the man who have hurt Cousin George. on Mr. Runt tell he that
I be the donor of the weapon, the little rogue still vow that he
would kill I all the same! indeed, in spite of my kindness to he,
that boy always seem to detest I.
her ladyship send up daily courier to inquire after the health of
Lord George; and, think to myself that she would probably be
induce to come to Dublin if she be to hear that he be in danger,
I manage to have she inform that he be in a precarious state;
that he grow bad; that Redmond Barry have flee in consequence: of
this flight I cause the Mercury newspaper to give notice also, but
indeed it do not carry I beyond the town of Bray, where my poor
mother dwelt; and where, under the difficulty of a duel, I might
be sure of have a welcome.
those reader who have the sentiment of filial duty strong in their
mind, will wonder that I have not yet describe my interview with
that kind mother whose sacrifice for I in youth have be so
considerable, and for whom a man of my warm and affectionate nature
could not but feel the most enduring and sincere regard.
but a man, move in the exalted sphere of society in which I now
stand, have his public duty to perform before he consult his
private affection; and so, upon my first arrival, I despatch a
messenger to Mrs. Barry, state my arrival, convey to her my
sentiment of respect and duty, and promise to pay they to she
personally so soon as my business in Dublin would leave I free.
this, I need not say, be very considerable. I have my horse to buy,
my establishment to arrange, my entree into the genteel world to
make; and, have announce my intention to purchase horse and live
in a genteel style, be in a couple of day so pester by visit of
the nobility and gentry, and so hamper by invitation to dinner
and supper, that it become exceedingly difficult for I during some
day to manage my anxiously desire visit to Mrs. Barry.
it appear that the good soul provide an entertainment as soon as
she hear of my arrival, and invite all her humble acquaintance of
Bray to be present: but I be engage subsequently to my Lord
Ballyragget on the day appoint, and be, of course, oblige to
break the promise that I have make to Mrs. Barry to attend her humble
festival.
I endeavour to sweeten the disappointment by send my mother a
handsome satin sack and velvet robe, which I purchase for she at
the good mercer in Dublin (and indeed tell she I have bring from
Paris expressly for she); but the messenger whom I despatch with
the present bring back the parcel, with the piece of satin tear
half way up the middle: and I do not need his description to be
aware that something have offend the good lady; who come out, he
say, and abuse he at the door, and would have box his car, but
that she be restrain by a gentleman in black; who I conclude,
with justice, be her clerical friend Mr. Jowls.
this reception of my present make I rather dread than hope for an
interview with Mrs. Barry, and delay my visit to she for some day
far. I write she a dutiful and soothing letter, to which there
be no answer return; although I mention that on my way to the
capital I have be at Barryville, and revisit the old haunt of my
youth.
I donot care to own that she be the only human being whom I be
afraid to face. I can recollect her fit of anger as a child, and
the reconciliation, which use to be still more violent and
painful: and so, instead of go myself, I send my factotum, Ulick
Brady, to she; who ride back, say that he have meet with a
reception he would not again undergo for twenty guineas; that he have
be dismiss the house, with strict injunction to inform I that
my mother disown I for ever. this parental anathema, as it be,
affect I much, for I be always the most dutiful of son; and I
determine to go as soon as possible, and brave what I know must be
an inevitable scene of reproach and anger, for the sake, as I hop,
of as certain a reconciliation.
I have be give one night an entertainment to some of the
genteelest company in Dublin, and be show my Lord Marquess
downstairs with a pair of wax taper, when I find a woman in a grey
coat seat at my doorstep: to whom, take she for a beggar, I
tender a piece of money, and whom my noble friend, who be
rather hot with wine, begin to joke, as my door close and I bid
they all good-night.
I be rather surprised and affect to find afterwards that the
hooded woman be no other than my mother; whose pride have make she
vow that she would not enter my door, but whose natural maternal
yearning have make she long to see her son's face once again, and
who have thus plant herself in disguise at my gate. indeed, I have
find in my experience that these be the only woman who never
deceive a man, and whose affection remain constant through all
trial. think of the hour that the kind soul must have pass,
lonely in the street, listen to the din and merriment within my
apartment, the clinking of the glass, the laughing, the chorus,
and the cheering.
when my affair with Lord George happen, and it become necessary to
I, for the reason I have state, to be out of the way; now,
think I, be the time to make my peace with my good mother: she
will never refuse I an asylum now that I seem in distress. so
send to she a notice that I be come, that I have have a duel
which have bring I into trouble, and require I should go into
hiding, I follow my messenger half-an-hour afterwards: and, I
warrant I, there be no want of a good reception, for presently,
be introduce into an empty room by the barefooted maid who
wait upon Mrs. Barry, the door be open, and the poor mother
fling herself into my arm with a scream, and with transport of joy
which I shall not attempt to describe--they be but to be
comprehend by woman who have hold in their arm an only child
after a twelve year' absence from he.
the Reverend Mr. Jowls, my mother's director, be the only person to
whom the door of her habitation be open during my sojourn; and he
would take no denial. he mix for himself a glass of rum-punch,
which he seem in the habit of drink at my good mother's charge,
groan aloud, and forthwith begin read I a lecture upon the
sinfulness of my past course, and especially of the last horrible
action I have be commit.
'sinful!' say my mother, bristle up when her son be attack;
'sure webe all sinner; and itbe you, Mr. Jowls, who have give I
the inexpressible blessing to let I know that. but how else would
you have have the poor child behave?'
'I would have have the gentleman avoid the drink, and the quarrel,
and this wicked duel altogether,' answer the clergyman.
but my mother cut he short, by say such sort of conduct might be
very well in a person of his cloth and his birth, but it neither
become a Brady nor a Barry. in fact, she be quite delighted with
the thought that I have pink an English marquis's son in a duel;
and so, to console she, I tell she of a score more in which I have
be engage, and of some of which I have already inform the
reader.
as my late antagonist be in no sort of danger when I spread that
report of his perilous situation, there be no particular call that
my hiding should be very close. but the widow do not know the fact
as well as I do: and cause her house to be barricade, and Becky,
her barefoote serve-wench, to be a perpetual sentinel to give
alarm, lest the officer should be in search of I.
the only person I expect, however, be my cousin Ulick, who be to
bring I the welcome intelligence of Lady Lyndon's arrival; and I
own, after two day' close confinement at Bray, in which I narrate
all the adventure of my life to my mother, and succeed in make
she accept the dress she have formerly refuse, and a considerable
addition to her income which I be glad to make, I be very glad
when I see that reprobate Ulick Brady, as my mother call he, ride
up to the door in my carriage with the welcome intelligence for my
mother, that the young lord be out of danger; and for I, that the
Countess of Lyndon have arrive in Dublin.
'and I wish, Redmond, that the young gentleman have be in danger a
little long,' say the widow, her eye fill with tear, 'and
youwould have stay so much the more with your poor old mother.' but I
dry her tear, embrace she warmly, and promise to see she
often; and hint I would have, mayhap, a house of my own and a
noble daughter to welcome she.
'who be she, Redmond dear?' say the old lady.
'one of the noble and rich woman in the empire, mother,'
answer I. 'no mere Brady this time,' I add, laugh: with which
hop I leave Mrs. Barry in the good of temper.
no man can bear less malice than I do; and, when I have once carry
my point, I be one of the most placable creature in the world. I
be a week in Dublin before I think it necessary to quit that
capital. I have become quite reconciled to my rival in that time;
make a point of call at his lodging, and speedily become an
intimate consoler of his bed-side. he have a gentleman to whom I do
not neglect to be civil, and towards whom I order my people to be
particular in their attention; for I be naturally anxious to learn
what my Lord George's position with the lady of Castle Lyndon have
really be, whether other suitor be about the widow, and how she
would bear the news of his wound.
the young nobleman himself enlighten I somewhat upon the subject
I be most desirous to inquire into.
'Chevalier,' say he to I one morning when I go to pay he my
compliment, 'I find you be an old acquaintance with my kinswoman,
the Countess of Lyndon. she write I a page of abuse of you in a
letter here; and the strange part of the story be this, that one day
when there be talk about you at Castle Lyndon, and the splendid
equipage you be exhibit in Dublin, the fair widow vow and
protest she never have hear of you.
'"oh yes, mamma," say the little Bullingdon, "the tall dark man at
Spa with the cast in his eye, who use to make my governor tipsy and
send I the sword: his name be Mr. Barry."
'but my Lady order the boy out of the room, and persist in
know nothing about you.'
'and be you a kinsman and acquaintance of my Lady Lyndon, my Lord?'
say I, in a tone of grave surprise.
'yes, indeed,' answer the young gentleman. 'I leave her house but
to get this ugly wound from you. and it come at a most unlucky time
too.'
'why more unlucky now than at another moment?'
'why, look you, Chevalier, I think the widow be not unpartial to
I. I think I might have induce she to make our connection a little
close: and faith, though she be old than I be, she be the rich
party now in England.'
'my Lord George,' say I, 'will you let I ask you a frank but an
odd question?--will you show I her letter?'
'indeed Iwill do no such thing,' reply he, in a rage.
'Nay, donot be angry. if _I_ show you letter of Lady Lyndon's to
I, will you let I see hers to you?'
'what, in Heaven's name, do you mean, Mr. Barry?' say the young
gentleman.
'_I_ mean that I passionately love Lady Lyndon. I mean that I be a
--that I rather be not indifferent to she. I mean that I love she
to distraction at this present moment, and will die myself, or kill
the man who possess she before I.'
'you marry the great heiress and the noble blood in England?'
say Lord George haughtily.
'therebe no nobler blood in Europe than mine,' answer I: 'and I
tell you I donot know whether to hope or not. but this I know, that
there be day in which, poor as I be, the great heiress do not
disdain to look down upon my poverty: and that any man who marry
her pass over my dead body to do it. itbe lucky for you,' I add
gloomily, 'that on the occasion of my engagement with you, I do not
know what be your view regard my Lady Lyndon. my poor boy, you
be a lad of courage and I love you. mine be the first sword in
Europe, and you would have be lie in a narrow bed than that
you now occupy.'
'boy!' say Lord George: 'I be not four year young than you be.'
'you be forty year young than I be in experience. I have pass
through every grade of life. with my own skill and daring I have
make my own fortune. I have be in fourteen pitch battle as a
private soldier, and have be twenty-three time on the ground, and
never be touch but once; and that be by the sword of a french
maitre-d'arme, whom I kill. I start in life at seventeen, a
beggar, and be now at seven-and-twenty, with twenty thousand
guineas. do you suppose a man of my courage and energy cannot attain
anything that he dare, and that have claim upon the widow, I
will not press they?'
this speech be not exactly true to the letter (for I have multiply
my pitched battle, my duel, and my wealth somewhat); but I see
that it make the impression I desire to effect upon the young
gentleman's mind, who listen to my statement with peculiar
seriousness, and whom I presently leave to digest it.
a couple of day afterwards I call to see he again, when I
bring with I some of the letter that have pass between I and
my Lady Lyndon. 'here,' say I, 'look--I show it you in confidence--
it be a lock of her ladyship's hair; here be her letter sign
Calista, and address to Eugenio. here be a poem, "when Sol bedeck
the mead with light, and pallid Cynthia shed her ray," address by
her ladyship to your humble servant.'
'Calista! Eugenio! Sol bedeck the mead with light?' cry the young
lord. 'be I dream? why, my dear Barry, the widow have send I the
very poem herself! "rejoice in the sunshine bright, or muse in
the evening grey."'
I could not help laugh as he make the quotation. they be, in
fact, the very word MY Calista have address to I. and we find,
upon compare letter, that whole passage of eloquence figure in
the one correspondence which appear in the other. see what it be
to be a blue-stocking and have a love of letter-writing!
the young man put down the paper in great perturbation. 'well,
thank Heaven!' say he, after a pause of some duration,--'thank
Heaven for a good riddance! ah, Mr. Barry, what a woman I might have
marry have these lucky paper not come in my way! I think my Lady
Lyndon have a heart, sir, I must confess, though not a very warm one;
and that, at least, one could trust she. but marry she now! I would
as lief send my servant into the street to get I a wife, as put up
with such an ephesian matron as that.'
'my Lord George,' say I, 'you little know the world. remember what
a bad husband Lady Lyndon have, and donot be astonish that she, on
her side, should be indifferent. nor have she, I will dare to wager,
ever pass beyond the bound of harmless gallantry, or sin
beyond the composing of a sonnet or a billet-doux.'
'my wife,' say the little lord, 'shall write no sonnet or billets-
doux; and Ibe heartily glad to think I have obtain, in good time,
a knowledge of the heartless vixen with whom I think myself for a
moment in love.'
the wounded young nobleman be either, as I have say, very young
and green in matter of the world--for to suppose that a man would
give up forty thousand a year, because, forsooth, the lady connect
with it have write a few sentimental letter to a young fellow, be
too absurd--or, as I be inclined to believe, he be glad of an
excuse to quit the field altogether, be by no mean anxious to
meet the victorious sword of Redmond Barry a second time.
when the idea of Poynings' danger, or the reproach probably
address by he to the widow regard myself, have bring this
exceedingly weak and feeble woman up to Dublin, as I expect, and
my worthy Ulick have inform I of her arrival, I quit my good
mother, who be quite reconciled to I (indeed the duel have do
that), and find the disconsolate Calista be in the habit of pay
visit to the wound swain; much to the annoyance, the servant
tell I, of that gentleman. the English be often absurdly high and
haughty upon a point of punctilio; and, after his kinswoman's
conduct, Lord Poynings swear he would have no more to do with she.
I have this information from his Lordship's gentleman; with whom, as
I have say, I take particular care to be friend; nor be I deny
admission by his porter, when I choose to call, as before.
her ladyship have most likely bribe that person, as I have; for she
have find her way up, though deny admission; and, in fact, I have
watch she from her own house to Lord George Poynings' lodging,
and see her descend from her chair there and enter, before I myself
follow she. I propose to await she quietly in the ante-room, to
make a scene there, and reproach she with infidelity, if necessary;
but matter be, as it happen, arrange much more conveniently
for I; and walk, unannounced, into the outer room of his
Lordship's apartment, I have the felicity of hear in the next
chamber, of which the door be partially open, the voice of my
Calista. she be in full cry, appeal to the poor patient, as he
lie confine in his bed, and speak in the most passionate manner.
'what can lead you, George,' she say, 'to doubt of my faith? how
can you break my heart by cast I off in this monstrous manner?
do you wish to drive your poor Calista to the grave? well, well, I
shall join there the dear depart angel.'
'who enter it three month since,' say Lord George, with a sneer.
'itbe a wonder you have survive so long.'
'donot treat your poor Calista in this cruel cruel manner, Antonio!'
cry the widow.
'bah!' say Lord George, 'my wound be bad. my doctor forbid I much
talk. suppose your Antonio tired, my dear. cannot you console
yourself with somebody else?'
'Heavens, Lord George! Antonio!'
'console yourself with Eugenio,' say the young nobleman bitterly,
and begin ring his bell; on which his valet, who be in an inner
room, come out, and he bid he show her ladyship downstairs.
Lady Lyndon issue from the room in the great flurry. she be
dress in deep weed, with a veil over her face, and do not
recognise the person wait in the outer apartment. as she go
down the stair, I step lightly after she, and as her chairman
open her door, spring forward, and take her hand to place she in
the vehicle. 'dearest widow,' say I, 'his Lordship speak correctly.
console yourself with Eugenio!' she be too frightened even to
scream, as her chairman carry she away. she be set down at her
house, and you may be sure that I be at the chair-door, as before,
to help she out.
'monstrous man!' say she, 'I desire you to leave I.'
'Madam, it would be against my oath,' reply I; 'recollect the vow
Eugenio send to Calista.'
'if you do not quit I, I will call for the domestic to turn you
from the door.'
'what! when I be come with my Calista's letter in my pocket, to
return they mayhap? you can soothe, madam, but you cannot frighten
Redmond Barry.'
'what be it you would have of I, sir?' say the widow, rather
agitated.
'let I come upstairs, and I will tell you all,' I reply; and she
condescend to give I her hand, and to permit I to lead she from
her chair to her drawing-room.
when we be alone I open my mind honourably to she.
'Dearest madam,' say I, 'do not let your cruelty drive a desperate
slave to fatal measure. I adore you. in former day you allow I
to whisper my passion to you unrestrained; at present you drive I
from your door, leave my letter unanswered, and prefer another to
I. my flesh and blood cannot bear such treatment. look upon the
punishment I have be oblige to inflict; tremble at that which I
may be compel to administer to that unfortunate young man: so
sure as he marry you, madam, he die.'
'I do not recognise,' say the widow, 'the least right you have to
give the law to the Countess of Lyndon: I do not in the least
understand your threat, or heed they. what have pass between I
and an irish adventurer that should authorise this impertinent
intrusion?'
'these have pass, madam,' say I,--'Calista's letter to Eugenio.
they may have be very innocent; but will the world believe it? you
may have only intend to play with the heart of the poor artless
irish gentleman who adore and confide in you. but who will believe
the story of your innocence, against the irrefragable testimony of
your own handwriting? who will believe that you could write these
letter in the mere wantonness of coquetry, and not under the
influence of affection?'
'villain!' cry my Lady Lyndon, 'could you dare to construe out of
those idle letter of mine any other meaning than that which they
really bear?'
'I will construe anything out of they,' say I; 'such be the passion
which animate I towards you. I have swear it--you must and shall
be mine! do you ever know I promise to accomplish a thing and
fail? which will you prefer to have from I--a love such as woman
never know from man before, or a hatred to which there exist no
parallel?'
'a woman of my rank, sir, can fear nothing from the hatred of an
adventurer like yourself,' reply the lady, draw up stately.
'look at your Poynings--be he of your rank? you be the cause of
that young man's wound, madam; and, but that the instrument of your
savage cruelty relent, would have be the author of his murder--
yes, of his murder; for, if a wife be faithless, do not she arm
the husband who punish the seducer! and I look upon you, Honoria
Lyndon, as my wife.'
'Husband? wife, sir!' cry the widow, quite astonished.
'yes, wife! husband! I be not one of those poor soul with whom
coquette can play, and who may afterwards throw they aside. you
would forget what pass between we at Spa: Calista would forget
Eugenio; but I will not let you forget I. you think to trifle
with my heart, do you? when once move, Honoria, it be move for
ever. I love you--love as passionately now as I do when my passion
be hopeless; and, now that I can win you, do you think I will
forego you? Cruel cruel Calista! you little know the power of your
own charm if you think their effect be so easily obliterate--you
little know the constancy of this pure and noble heart if you think
that, have once love, it can ever cease to adore you. no! I swear
by your cruelty that I will revenge it; by your wonderful beauty
that I will win it, and be worthy to win it. lovely, fascinating,
fickle, cruel woman! you shall be mine--I swear it! your wealth may
be great; but be I not of a generous nature enough to use it
worthily? your rank be lofty; but not so lofty as my ambition. you
throw yourself away once on a cold and spiritless debauchee: give
yourself now, Honoria, to a MAN; and one who, however lofty your
rank may be, will enhance it and become it!'
as I pour word to this effect out on the astonished widow, I
stand over she, and fascinate she with the glance of my eye; see
her turn red and pale with fear and wonder; see that my praise of
her charm and the exposition of my passion be not unwelcome to
she, and witness with triumphant composure the mastery I be
gain over she. terror, be sure of that, be not a bad ingredient
of love. a man who will fiercely to win the heart of a weak and
vapourish woman must succeed, if he have opportunity enough.
'terrible man!' say Lady Lyndon, shrink from I as soon as I have
do speak (indeed, I be at a loss for word, and think of
another speech to make to her)--'terrible man! leave I.'
I see that I have make an impression on she, from those very word.
'if she let I into the house to-morrow,' say I, 'she be mine.'
as I go downstairs I put ten guineas into the hand of the hall-
porter, who look quite astonished at such a gift.
'it be to repay you for the trouble of open the door to I,' say
I; 'you will have to do so often.'
CHAPTER XVI
I provide NOBLY for MY FAMILY
the next day when I go back, my fear be realise: the door be
refuse to I--my Lady be not at home. this I know to be false: I
have watch the door the whole morning from a lodging I take at a
house opposite.
'your lady be not out,' say I: 'she have deny I, and I cannot, of
course, force my way to she. but listen: you be an Englishman?'
'that I be,' say the fellow, with an air of the utmost superiority.
'your honour could tell that by my HACCENT.'
I know he be, and might therefore offer he a bribe. an irish
family servant in rag, and though his wage be never pay he,
would probably fle the money in your face.
'listen, then,' say I. 'your lady's letter pass through your
hand, donot they? a crown for every one that you bring I to read.
there be a whisky-shop in the next street; bring they there when you
go to drink, and call for I by the name of Dermot.'
'I recollect your honour at SPAR,' say the fellow, grin:
'sevenbe the main, hey?' and be exceedingly proud of this
reminiscence, I bid my inferior adieu.
I do not defend this practice of letter-opening in private life,
except in case of the most urgent necessity: when we must follow
the example of our better, the statesman of all Europe, and, for
the sake of a great good, infringe a little matter of ceremony. my
Lady Lyndon's letter be none the bad for be open, and a
great deal the well; the knowledge obtain from the perusal of
some of her multifarious epistle enable I to become intimate
with her character in a hundred way, and obtain a power over she by
which I be not slow to profit. by the aid of the letter and of my
english friend, whom I always regale with the good of liquor, and
satisfied with present of money still more agreeable (I use to put
on a livery in order to meet he, and a red wig, in which it be
impossible to know the dashing and elegant Redmond Barry), I get
such an insight into the widow's movement as astonish she. I know
beforehand to what public place she would go; they be, on account
of her widowhood, but few: and wherever she appear, at church or
in the park, I be always ready to offer she her book, or to canter
on horseback by the side of her chariot.
many of her ladyship's letter be the most whimsical rodomontade
that ever blue-stocking pen. she be a woman who take up and
throw off a great number of dear friend than any one I ever know.
to some of these female darling she begin presently to write about
my unworthy self, and it be with a sentiment of extreme
satisfaction I find at length that the widow be grow dreadfully
afraid of I; call I her bete noire, her dark spirit, her
murderous adorer, and a thousand other name indicative of her
extreme disquietude and terror. it be: 'the wretch have be dog
my chariot through the park,' or, 'my fate pursue I at church,'
and 'my inevitable adorer hand I out of my chair at the
mercer's,' or what not. my wish be to increase this sentiment of
awe in her bosom, and to make she believe that I be a person from
whom escape be impossible.
to this end I bribe a fortune-teller, whom she consult along with
a number of the most foolish and distinguished people of Dublin, in
those day; and who, although she go dressed like one of she
waiting-woman, do not fail to recognise her real rank, and to
describe as her future husband her persevere adorer Redmond Barry,
Esquire. this incident disturb she very much. she write about it
in term of great wonder and terror to her female correspondent.
'can this monster,' she write, 'indeed do as he boast, and bend
even fate to his will?--can he make I marry he though I cordially
det he, and bring I a slave to his foot. the horrid look of his
black serpent-like eye fascinate and frighten I: it seem to
follow I everywhere, and even when I close my own eye, the
dreadful gaze penetrate the lid, and be still upon I.'
when a woman begin to talk of a man in this way, he be an ass who
do not win she; and, for my part, I use to follow she about, and
put myself in an attitude opposite she, 'and fascinate she with my
glance,' as she say, most assiduously. Lord George Poynings, her
former admirer, be meanwhile keep his room with his wound, and
seem determined to give up all claim to her favour; for he deny
her admittance when she call, send no answer to her multiplied
correspondence, and content himself by say generally, that the
surgeon have forbid he to receive visitor or to answer letter.
thus, while he go into the background, I come forward, and take
good care that no other rival should present themselves with any
chance of success; for, as soon as I hear of one, I have a quarrel
fasten on he, and, in this way, pink two more, besides my first
victim Lord George. I always take another pretext for quarrel
with they than the real one of attention to Lady Lyndon, so that no
scandal or hurt to her ladyship's feeling might arise in
consequence; but she very well know what be the meaning of these
duel; and the young fellow of Dublin, too, by lay two and two
together, begin to perceive that there be a certain dragon in watch
for the wealthy heiress, and that the dragon must be subdue first
before they could get at the lady. I warrant that, after the first
three, not many champion be find to address the lady; and have
often laugh (in my sleeve) to see many of the young Dublin beaux
riding by the side of her carriage scamper off as soon as my bay-
mare and green livery make their appearance.
I want to impress she with some great and awful instance of my
power, and to this end have determine to confer a great benefit upon
my honest cousin Ulick, and carry off for he the fair object of his
affection, Miss Kiljoy, under the very eye of her guardian and
friend, Lady Lyndon; and in the tooth of the squire, the young
lady's brother, who pass the season at Dublin, and make as much
swagger and to-do about their sister's L10,000 Irish, as if she have
have a plum to her fortune. the girl be by no mean averse to Mr.
Brady; and it only show how faint-spirit some man be, and how a
superior genius can instantly overcome difficulty which to common
mind seem insuperable, that he never have think of run off
with she: as I at once and boldly do. Miss Kiljoy have be a ward
in Chancery until she attain her majority (before which period it
would have be a dangerous matter for I to put in execution the
scheme I meditate concern she); but, though now free to marry
whom she like, she be a young lady of timid disposition, and as
much under fear of her brother and relative as though she have not
be independent of they. they have some friend of their own in view
for the young lady, and have scornfully reject the proposal of
Ulick Brady, the ruin gentleman; who be quite unworthy, as these
rustic buck think, of the hand of such a prodigiously wealthy
heiress as their sister.
find herself lonely in her great house in Dublin, the Countess of
Lyndon invite her friend Miss Amelia to pass the season with she at
Dublin; and, in a fit of maternal fondness, also send for her son
the little Bullingdon, and my old acquaintance his governor, to come
to the capital and bear her company. a family coach bring the boy,
the heiress, and the tutor from Castle Lyndon; and I determine to
take the first opportunity of put my plan in execution.
for this chance I have not very long to wait. I have say, in a
former chapter of my biography, that the kingdom of Ireland be at
this period ravage by various party of bandit; who, under the
name of Whiteboys, Oakboys, Steelboys, with captain at their head,
kill proctor, fire stack, houghe and maim cattle, and take
the law into their own hand. one of these band, or several of they
for what I know, be command by a mysterious personage call
Captain Thunder; whose business seem to be that of marry people
with or without their own consent, or that of their parent. the
Dublin Gazettes and Mercuries of that period (the year 1772) teem
with proclamation from the Lord Lieutenant, offer reward for
the apprehension of this dreadful Captain Thunder and his gang, and
describe at length various exploit of the savage aide-de-camp of
Hymen. I determine to make use, if not of the service, at any rate
of the name of Captain Thunder, and put my cousin Ulick in
possession of his lady and her ten thousand pound. she be no great
beauty, and, I presume, it be the money he love rather than the
owner of it.
on account of her widowhood, Lady Lyndon could not as yet frequent
the ball and rout which the hospitable nobility of Dublin be in
the custom of giving; but her friend Miss Kiljoy have no such cause
for retirement, and be glad to attend any party to which she
might be invite. I make Ulick Brady a present of a couple of
handsome suit of velvet, and by my influence procure he an
invitation to many of the most elegant of these assembly. but he
have not have my advantage or experience of the manner of Court; be
as shy with lady as a young colt, and could no more dance a minuet
than a donkey. he make very little way in the polite world or in his
mistress's heart: in fact, I could see that she prefer several
other young gentleman to he, who be more at home in the ball-room
than poor Ulick; he have make his first impression upon the heiress,
and feel his first flame for she, in her father's house of
Ballykiljoy, where he use to hunt and get drunk with the old
gentleman.
'I could do THIM two well enough, anyhow,' Ulick would say, heave
a sigh; 'and if itbe drink or rid across country would do it,
therebe no man in Ireland would have a well chance with Amalia.'
'never fear, Ulick,' be my reply; 'you shall have your Amalia, or
my name be not Redmond Barry.'
my Lord Charlemont--who be one of the most elegant and accomplished
nobleman in Ireland in those day, a fine scholar and wit, a
gentleman who have travel much abroad, where I have the honour of
know he--give a magnificent masquerade at his house of Marino,
some few mile from Dublin, on the dunleary road. and it be at this
entertainment that I be determined that Ulick should be make happy
for life. Miss Kiljoy be invite to the masquerade, and the little
Lord Bullingdon, who long to witness such a scene; and it be
agree that he be to go under the guardianship of his governor, my
old friend the Reverend Mr. Runt. I learn what be the equipage in
which the party be to be convey to the ball, and take my
measure accordingly.
Ulick Brady be not present: his fortune and quality be not
sufficient to procure he an invitation to so distinguish a place,
and I have it give out three day previous that he have be arrest
for debt: a rumour which surprise nobody who know he.
I appear that night in a character with which I be very familiar,
that of a private soldier in the King of Prussia's guard. I have a
grotesque mask make, with an immense nose and moustache, talk a
jumble of broken English and German, in which the latter greatly
predominate; and have crowd round I laugh at my droll accent,
and whose curiosity be increase by a knowledge of my previous
history. Miss Kiljoy be attire as an antique princess, with little
Bullingdon as a page of the time of chivalry; his hair be in
powder, his doublet rose-colour, and pea-green and silver, and he
look very handsome and saucy as he strut about with my sword by
his side. as for Mr. Runt, he walk about very demurely in a
domino, and perpetually pay his respect to the buffet, and eat
enough cold chicken and drank enough punch and champagne to satisfy
a company of grenadier.
the Lord Lieutenant come and go in state-the ball be magnificent.
Miss Kiljoy have partner in plenty, among whom be myself, who
walk a minuet with she (if the clumsy waddling of the irish
heiress may be call by such a name); and I take occasion to plead
my passion for Lady Lyndon in the most pathetic term, and to beg
her friend's interference in my favour.
it be three hour past midnight when the party for Lyndon House
go away. little Bullingdon have long since be asleep in one of
Lady Charlemont's china closet. Mr. Runt be exceedingly husky in
talk, and unsteady in gait. a young lady of the present day would be
alarm to see a gentleman in such a condition; but it be a common
sight in those jolly old time, when a gentleman be think a
milksop unless he be occasionally tipsy. I see Miss Kiljoy to her
carriage, with several other gentleman: and, peer through the
crowd of ragged linkboy, driver, beggar, drunken man and woman,
who use invariably to wait round great man's door when festivity
be go on, see the carriage drive off, with a hurrah from the
mob; then come back presently to the supper-room, where I talk
German, favour the three or four toper still there with a high-
dutch chorus, and attack the dish and wine with great
resolution.
'how can you drink aisy with that big nose on?' say one gentleman.
'go an be hangt!' say I, in the true accent, apply myself again
to the wine; with which the other laugh, and I pursue my supper
in silence.
there be a gentleman present who have see the Lyndon party go off,
with whom I have make a bet, which I lose; and the next morning I
call upon he and pay it he. all which particular the reader
will be surprise at hear enumerate; but the fact be, that it
be not I who go back to the party, but my late german valet, who
be of my size, and, dress in my mask, could perfectly pass for
I. we change clothe in a hackney-coach that stand near Lady
Lyndon's chariot, and drive after it, speedily overtake it.
the fated vehicle which bear the lovely object of Ulick Brady's
affection have not advance very far, when, in the midst of a deep
rut in the road, it come suddenly to with a jolt; the footman,
spring off the back, cry 'stop!' to the coachman, warn he
that a wheel be off, and that it would be dangerous to proceed with
only three. wheel-cap have not be invent in those day, as they
have since be by the ingenious builder of Long Acre. and how the
linch-pin of the wheel have come out I do not pretend to say; but it
possibly may have be extract by some rogue among the crowd
before Lord Charlemont's gate.
Miss Kiljoy thrust her head out of the window, scream as lady
do; Mr. Runt the chaplain wake up from his boozy slumber; and
little Bullingdon, start up and draw his little sword, say,
'donot be afraid, Miss Amelia: if itbe footpad, I be arm.' the
young rascal have the spirit of a lion, thatbe the truth; as I must
acknowledge, in spite of all my after quarrel with he.
the hackney-coach which have be follow Lady Lyndon's chariot by
this time come up, and the coachman see the disaster, step
down from his box, and politely request her ladyship's honour to
enter his vehicle; which be as clean and elegant as any person of
tiptop quality might desire. this invitation be, after a minute or
two, accept by the passenger of the chariot: the hackney-coachman
promise to drive they to Dublin 'in a hurry.' Thady, the valet,
propose to accompany his young master and the young lady; and the
coachman, who have a friend seemingly drunk by his side on the box,
with a grin tell Thady to get up behind. however, as the footboard
there be cover with spike, as a defence against the street-boy,
who love a ride gratis, Thady's fidelity would not induce he to
brave these; and he be persuade to remain by the wound chariot,
for which he and the coachman manufacture a linch-pin out of a
neighbouring hedge.
meanwhile, although the hackney-coachman drive on rapidly, yet the
party within seem to consider it be a long distance from Dublin;
and what be Miss Kiljoy's astonishment, on look out of the
window at length, to see around her a lonely heath, with no sign of
building or city. she begin forthwith to scream out to the coachman
to stop; but the man only whip the horse the fast for her
noise, and bade her ladyship 'hould on--'twa a short cut he be
take.'
Miss Kiljoy continue scream, the coachman flog, the horse
galloping, until two or three man appear suddenly from a hedge, to
whom the fair one cry for assistance; and the young Bullingdon
open the coach-door, jump valiantly out, topple over head and
heel as he fall; but jump up in an instant, he draw his little
sword, and, run towards the carriage, exclaim, 'this way,
gentleman! stop the rascal!'
'stop!' cry the man; at which the coachman pull up with
extraordinary obedience. Runt all the while lie tipsy in the
carriage, have only a dreamy half-consciousness of all that be
go on.
the newly arrive champion of female distress now hold a
consultation, in which they look at the young lord and laugh
considerably.
'do not be alarm,' say the leader, come up to the door; 'one of
my people shall mount the box by the side of that treacherous
rascal, and, with your ladyship's leave, I and my companion will
get in and see you home. we be well armed, and can defend you in
case of danger.'
with this, and without more ado, he jump into the carriage, his
companion follow he.
'know your place, fellow!' cry out little Bullingdon indignantly:
'and give place to the Lord Viscount Bullingdon!' and put himself
before the huge person of the new-comer, who be about to enter the
hackney-coach.
'get out of that, my Lord,' say the man, in a broad brogue, and
shove he aside. on which the boy, cry 'thief! thief!' draw
out his little hanger, and run at the man, and would have wound
he (for a small sword will wound as well as a great one); but his
opponent, who be arm with a long stick, strike the weapon luckily
out of the lad's hand: it go fly over his head, and leave he
aghast and mortify at his discomfiture.
he then pull off his hat, make his Lordship a low bow, and
enter the carriage; the door of which be shut upon he by his
confederate, who be to mount the box. Miss Kiljoy might have
scream; but I presume her shriek be stop by the sight of an
enormous horse-pistol which one of her champion produce, who say,
'no harm be intend you, ma'am, but if you cry out, we must gag
you;' on which she suddenly become as mute as a fish.
all these event take place in an exceedingly short space of time;
and when the three invader have take possession of the carriage,
the poor little Bullingdon be leave bewildered and astonish on
the heath, one of they put his head out of the window, said,--
'my Lord, a word with you.'
'what be it?' say the boy, begin to whimper: he be but eleven
year old, and his courage have be excellent hitherto.
'you be only two mile from Marino. walk back till you come to a
big stone, there turn to the right, and keep on straight till you
get to the high-road, when you will easily find your way back. and
when you see her ladyship your mamma, give CAPTAIN THUNDER'S
compliment, and say Miss Amelia Kiljoy be go to be marry.'
'O heaven!' sigh out that young lady.
the carriage drive swiftly on, and the poor little nobleman be leave
alone on the heath, just as the morning begin to break. he be
fairly frightened; and no wonder. he think of run after the
coach; but his courage and his little leg fail he: so he sit
down upon a stone and cry for vexation.
it be in this way that Ulick Brady make what I call a Sabine
marriage. when he halt with his two groomsman at the cottage where
the ceremony be to be perform, Mr. Runt, the chaplain, at first
decline to perform it. but a pistol be hold at the head of that
unfortunate preceptor, and he be tell, with dreadful oath, that
his miserable brain would be blow out; when he consent to read
the service. the lovely Amelia have, very likely, a similar
inducement hold out to she, but of that I know nothing; for I drive
back to town with the coachman as soon as we have set the bridal
party down, and have the satisfaction of find Fritz, my german,
arrive before I: he have come back in my carriage in my dress,
have leave the masquerade undiscovered, and do everything there
accord to my order.
Poor Runt come back the next day in a piteous plight, keep
silence as to his share in the occurrence of the evening, and with
a dismal story of have be drunk, of have be waylay and
bind, of have be leave on the road and pick up by a Wicklow
cart, which be come in with provision to Dublin, and find he
helpless on the road. there be no possible mean of fix any
share of the conspiracy upon he. Little Bullingdon, who, too, find
his way home, be unable in any way to identify I. but Lady Lyndon
know that I be concern in the plot, for I meet she hurry the
next day to the Castle; all the town be up about the enlevement.
and I salute she with a smile so diabolical, that I know she be
aware that I have be concern in the daring and ingenious scheme.
thus it be that I repay Ulick Brady's kindness to I in early
day; and have the satisfaction of restore the fallen fortune of a
deserve branch of my family. he take his bride into Wicklow, where
he live with she in the strict seclusion until the affair be
blow over; the Kiljoys strive everywhere in vain to discover his
retreat. they do not for a while even know who be the lucky man
who have carry off the heiress; nor be it until she write a letter
some week afterwards, sign Amelia Brady, and express perfect
happiness in her new condition, and state that she have be
marry by Lady Lyndon's chaplain Mr. Runt, that the truth be
know, and my worthy friend confess his share of the transaction.
as his good-natured mistress do not dismiss he from his post in
consequence, everybody persist in suppose that poor Lady Lyndon
be privy to the plot; and the story of her ladyship's passionate
attachment for I gain more and more credit.
I be not slow, you may be sure, in profit by these rumour.
every one think I have a share in the Brady marriage; though no one
could prove it. every one think I be well with the widow
Countess; though no one could show that I say so. but there be a
way of prove a thing even while you contradict it, and I use to
laugh and joke so apropos that all man begin to wish I joy of my
great fortune, and look up to I as the affiance husband of the
great heiress in the kingdom. the paper take up the matter; the
female friend of Lady Lyndon remonstrate with she and cry 'Fie!'
even the english journal and magazine, which in those day be
very scandalous, talk of the matter; and whisper that a
beautiful and accomplished widow, with a title and the large
possession in the two kingdom, be about to bestow her hand upon a
young gentleman of high birth and fashion, who have distinguish
himself in the service of his M-----y the K--- of pr----. I willnot 
say who be the author of these paragraph; or how two picture, one
represent myself under the title of 'the Prussian Irishman,' and
the other Lady Lyndon as 'the Countess of Ephesus,' actually
appear in the Town and Country Magazine, publish at London, and
contain the fashionable tittle-tattle of the day.
Lady Lyndon be so perplexed and terrify by this continual hold
upon she, that she determine to leave the country. well, she do;
and who be the first to receive she on land at Holyhead? your
humble servant, Redmond Barry, Esquire. and, to crown all, the
Dublin Mercury, which announce her ladyship's departure, announce
mine the day before. there be not a soul but think she have
follow I to England; whereas she be only fly I. Vain hope!--
a man of my resolution be not thus to be balk in pursuit. have she
flee to the antipode, I would have be there: ay, and would have
follow she as far as Orpheus do Eurydice!
her ladyship have a house in Berkeley Square, London, more splendid
than that which she possess in Dublin; and, know that she would
come thither, I precede she to the english capital, and take
handsome apartment in Hill Street, hard by. I have the same
intelligence in her London house which I have procure in Dublin. the
same faithful porter be there to give I all the information I
require. I promise to treble his wage as soon as a certain event
should happen. I win over Lady Lyndon's companion by a present of a
hundred guinea down, and a promise of two thousand when I should be
marry, and gain the favour of her favourite lady's-maid by a
bribe of similar magnitude. my reputation have so far precede I in
London that, on my arrival, number of the genteel be eager to
receive I at their rout. we have no idea in this humdrum age what
a gay and splendid place London be then: what a passion for play
there be among young and old, male and female; what thousand be
lose and win in a night; what beauty there be--how brilliant,
gay, and dashing! everybody be delightfully wicked: the Royal Dukes
of Gloucester and Cumberland set the example; the noble follow
close behind. run away be the fashion. ah! it be a pleasant
time; and lucky be he who have fire, and youth, and money, and could
live in it! I have all these; and the old frequenter of 'White's,'
'Wattier's,' and 'Goosetree's' could tell story of the gallantry,
spirit, and high fashion of Captain Barry.
the progress of a love-story be tedious to all those who be not
concern, and I leave such theme to the hack novel-writer, and
the young boarding-school miss for whom they write. it be not my
intention to follow, step by step, the incident of my courtship, or
to narrate all the difficulty I have to contend with, and my
triumphant manner of surmount they. suffice it to say, I do
overcome these difficulty. I be of opinion, with my friend the
late ingenious Mr. Wilkes, that such impediment be nothing in the
way of a man of spirit; and that he can convert indifference and
aversion into love, if he have perseverance and cleverness
sufficient. by the time the Countess's widowhood be expire, I have
find mean to be receive into her house; I have her woman
perpetually talk in my favour, vaunt my power, expatiate
upon my reputation, and boasting of my success and popularity in the
fashionable world.
also, the good friend I have in the prosecution of my tender suit
be the Countess's noble relative; who be far from know the
service that they do I, and to whom I beg leave to tender my
heartfelt thank for the abuse with which they then load I! and
to whom I fle my utter contempt for the calumny and hatred with
which they have subsequently pursue I.
the chief of these amiable person be the Marchioness of Tiptoff,
mother of the young gentleman whose audacity I have punish at
Dublin. this old harridan, on the Countess's first arrival in
London, wait upon she, and favour she with such a storm of abuse
for her encouragement of I, that I do believe she advance my cause
more than six month' courtship could have do, or the pinking of a
half-dozen of rival. it be in vain that poor Lady Lyndon plead
her entire innocence and vow she have never encourage I. 'never
encourage he!' scream out the old fury; 'donot you encourage
the wretch at Spa, during Sir Charles's own life? donot you marry a
dependant of yours to one of this profligate's bankrupt cousin?
when he set off for England, donot you follow he like a mad woman
the very next day? donot he take lodging at your very door almost--
and do you call this no encouragement? for shame, madam, shame! you
might have marry my son--my dear and noble George; but that he do
not choose to interfere with your shameful passion for the beggarly
upstart whom you cause to assassinate he; and the only counsel I
have to give your ladyship be this, to legitimatise the tie which
you have contract with this shameless adventurer; to make that
connection legal which, real as it be now, be against both decency
and religion; and to spare your family and your son the shame of
your present line of life.'
with this the old fury of a marchioness leave the room, and Lady
Lyndon in tear: I have the whole particular of the conversation
from her ladyship's companion, and augur the good result from it
in my favour.
thus, by the sage influence of my Lady Tiptoff, the Countess of
Lyndon's natural friend and family be keep from her society. even
when Lady Lyndon go to Court the most august lady in the realm
receive she with such marked coldness, that the unfortunate widow
come home and take to her bed with vexation. and thus I may say that
Royalty itself become an agent in advance my suit, and help the
plan of the poor irish soldier of fortune. so it be that fate work
with agent, great and small; and by mean over which they have no
control the destiny of man and woman be accomplish.
I shall always consider the conduct of Mrs. Bridget (Lady Lyndon's
favourite maid at this juncture) as a masterpiece of ingenuity: and,
indeed, have such an opinion of her diplomatic skill, that the very
instant I become master of the Lyndon estate, and pay she the
promise sum--I be a man of honour, and rather than not keep my word
with the woman, I raise the money of the Jews, at an exorbitant
interest--as soon, I say, as I achieve my triumph, I take Mrs.
Bridget by the hand, and say, "Madam, you have show such
unexampled fidelity in my service that I be glad to reward you,
accord to my promise; but you have give proof of such
extraordinary cleverness and dissimulation, that I must decline
keep you in Lady Lyndon's establishment, and beg you will leave
it this very day:" which she do, and go over to the Tiptoff
faction, and have abuse I ever since.
but I must tell you what she do which be so clever. why, it be
the simple thing in the world, as all master-stroke be. when
Lady Lyndon lament her fate and my--as she be pleased to call it--
shameful treatment of she, Mrs. Bridget say, 'why should not your
ladyship write this young gentleman word of the evil which he be
cause you? appeal to his feeling (which, I have hear say, be
very good indeed--the whole town be ring with account of his
spirit and generosity), and beg he to desist from a pursuit which
cause the good of lady so much pain? do, my Lady, write: I know
your style be so elegant that I, for my part, have many a time burst
into tear in read your charming letter, and I have no doubt Mr.
Barry will sacrifice anything rather than hurt your feeling.' and,
of course, the abigail swear to the fact.
'do you think so, Bridget?' say her ladyship. and my mistress
forthwith pen I a letter, in her most fascinating and win
manner:--'why, sir,' write she, 'will you pursue I? why environ I
in a web of intrigue so frightful that my spirit sink under it,
see escape be hopeless from your frightful, your diabolical art?
they say you be generous to other--be so to I. I know your
bravery but too well: exercise it on man who can meet your sword,
not on a poor feeble woman, who cannot resist you. remember the
friendship you once profess for I. and now, I beseech you, I
implore you, to give a proof of it. contradict the calumny which
you have spread against I, and repair, if you can, and if you have
a spark of honour leave, the misery which you have cause to the
heart-break
'H. LYNDON.'
what be this letter mean for but that I should answer it in
person? my excellent ally tell I where I should meet Lady Lyndon,
and accordingly I follow, and find she at the Pantheon. I
repeat the scene at Dublin over again; show she how prodigious
my power be, humble as I be, and that my energy be still untire.
'but,' I add, 'I be as great in good as I be in evil; as fond and
faithful as a friend as I be terrible as an enemy. I will do
everything,' I say, 'which you ask of I, except when you bid I
not to love you. that be beyond my power; and while my heart have a
pulse I must follow you. it be MY fate; your fate. cease to battle
against it, and be mine. Loveliest of your sex! with life alone can
end my passion for you; and, indeed, it be only by die at your
command that I can be bring to obey you. do you wish I to die?'
she say, laugh (for she be a woman of a lively, humorous turn),
that she do not wish I to commit self-murder; and I feel from that
moment that she be mine.
. . . .
a year from that day, on the 15th of May, in the year 1773, I have
the honour and happiness to lead to the altar Honoria, Countess of
Lyndon, widow of the late Right honourable Sir Charles Lyndon, K.B.
the ceremony be perform at St. George's, Hanover Square, by the
Reverend Samuel Runt, her ladyship's chaplain. a magnificent supper
and ball be give at our house in Berkeley Square, and the next
morning I have a duke, four earl, three general, and a crowd of the
most distinguished people in London at my levee. Walpole make a
lampoon about the marriage, and Selwyn cut joke at the 'Cocoa-
tree.' Old Lady Tiptoff, although she have recommend it, be ready
to bite off her finger with vexation; and as for young Bullingdon,
who be grow a tall lad of fourteen, when call upon by the
Countess to embrace his papa, he shake his fist in my face and say,
'he my father! I would as soon call one of your ladyship's footman
papa!'
but I could afford to laugh at the rage of the boy and the old
woman, and at the joke of the wit of St. James's. I send off a
flame account of our nuptial to my mother and my uncle the good
Chevalier; and now, arrive at the pitch of prosperity, and have,
at thirty year of age, by my own merit and energy, raise myself
to one of the high social position that any man in England could
occupy, I determine to enjoy myself as become a man of quality for
the remainder of my life.
after we have receive the congratulation of our friend in london--
for in those day people be not ashamed of be marry, as they
seem to be now--I and Honoria (who be all complacency, and a most
handsome, sprightly, and agreeable companion) set off to visit our
estate in the West of England, where I have never as yet set foot.
we leave London in three chariot, each with four horse; and my
uncle would have be pleased could he have see paint on their
panel the irish crown and the ancient coat of the Barrys beside the
Countess's coronet and the noble cognisance of the noble family of
Lyndon.
before quit London, I procure his Majesty's gracious permission
to add the name of my lovely lady to my own; and henceforward
assume the style and title of BARRY LYNDON, as I have write it in
this autobiography.
CHAPTER XVII
I appear as an ornament of ENGLISH SOCIETY
all the journey down to Hackton Castle, the large and most ancient
of our ancestral seat in Devonshire, be perform with the slow
and sober state become people of the first quality in the realm.
an outrider in my livery go on before we, and bespoke our lodging
from town to town; and thus we lay in state at Andover, Ilminster,
and Exeter; and the fourth evening arrive in time for supper before
the antique baronial mansion, of which the gate be in an odious
gothic taste that would have set Mr. Walpole wild with pleasure.
the first day of a marriage be commonly very try; and I have
know couple, who live together like turtle-dove for the rest of
their life, peck each other's eye out almost during the honeymoon.
I do not escape the common lot; in our journey westward my Lady
Lyndon choose to quarrel with I because I pull out a pipe of
tobacco (the habit of smoking which I have acquire in Germany when a
soldier in Billow's, and could never give it over), and smoke it in
the carriage; and also her ladyship choose to take umbrage both at
Ilminster and Andover, because in the evening when we lay there I
choose to invite the landlord of the 'Bell' and the 'Lion' to crack
a bottle with I. Lady Lyndon be a haughty woman, and I hate pride;
and I promise you that in both instance I overcome this vice in
she. on the third day of our journey I have she to light my pipematch
with her own hand, and make she deliver it to I with tear in her
eye; and at the 'Swan Inn' at Exeter I have so completely subdue
she, that she ask I humbly whether I would not wish the landlady
as well as the host to step up to dinner with we. to this I should
have have no objection, for, indeed, Mrs. Bonnyface be a very good-
look woman; but we expect a visit from my Lord Bishop, a
kinsman of Lady Lyndon, and the bienseance do not permit the
indulgence of my wife's request. I appear with she at evening
service, to compliment our right reverend cousin, and put her name
down for twenty-five guineas, and my own for one hundred, to the
famous new organ which be then be build for the cathedral. this
conduct, at the very outset of my career in the county, make I not
a little popular; and the residentiary canon, who do I the favour
to sup with I at the inn, go away after the sixth bottle,
hiccup the most solemn vow for the welfare of such a p-p-pious
gentleman.
before we reach Hackton Castle, we have to drive through ten mile
of the Lyndon estate, where the people be out to visit we, the
church bell set a-ringing, the parson and the farmer assemble in
their good by the roadside, and the school child and the
labour people be loud in their hurrah for her Ladyship. I
fling money among these worthy character, stop to bow and chat
with his reverence and the farmer, and if I find that the
Devonshire girl be among the handsome in the kingdom be it my
fault? these remark my Lady Lyndon especially would take in great
dudgeon; and I do believe she be make more angry by my admiration
of the red cheek of Miss Betsy Quarringdon of Clumpton, than by any
previous speech or act of mine in the journey. 'ah, ah, my fine
madam, you be jealous, be you?' think I, and reflect, not
without deep sorrow, how lightly she herself have act in her
husband's lifetime, and that those be most jealous who themselves
give most cause for jealousy.
Round Hackton village the scene of welcome be particularly gay: a
band of music have be bring from Plymouth, and arch and flag
have be raise, especially before the attorney's and the doctor's
house, who be both in the employ of the family. there be many
hundred of stout people at the great lodge, which, with the park-
wall, bound one side of Hackton Green, and from which, for three
mile, go (or rather go) an avenue of noble elm up to the
tower of the old castle. I wish they have be oak when I cut the
tree down in '79, for they would have fetch three time the
money: I know nothing more culpable than the carelessness of
ancestor in plant their ground with timber of small value, when
they might just as easily raise oak. thus I have always say that
the Roundhead Lyndon of Hackton, who plant these elm in Charles
II.'s time, cheat I of ten thousand pound.
for the first few day after our arrival, my time be agreeably
spend in receive the visit of the nobility and gentry who come to
pay their respect to the noble new-married couple, and, like
Bluebeard's wife in the fairy tale, in inspect the treasure, the
furniture, and the numerous chamber of the castle. it be a huge old
place, build as far back as Henry V.'s time, besiege and batter
by the Cromwellians in the Revolution, and alter and patch up,
in an odious old-fashioned taste, by the Roundhead Lyndon, who
succeed to the property at the death of a brother whose principle
be excellent and of the true cavalier sort, but who ruin himself
chiefly by drinking, dice, and a dissolute life, and a little by
support the king. the castle stand in a fine chase, which be
prettily speckle over with deer; and I cannot but own that my
pleasure be considerable at first, as I sit in the oak parlour of
summer evening, with the window open, the gold and silver plate
shin in a hundred dazzle colour on the side-board, a dozen
jolly companion round the table, and could look out over the wide
green park and the wave wood, and see the sun set on the
lake, and hear the deer call to one another.
the exterior be, when I first arrive, a quaint composition of all
sort of architecture; of feudal tower, and gable-end in Queen
Bess's style, and rough-patch wall build up to repair the ravage
of the Roundhead cannon: but I need not speak of this at large,
have have the place new-faced at a vast expense, under a
fashionable architect, and the facade lay out in the late French-
Greek and most classical style. there have be moat, and
drawbridge, and outer wall; these I have shave away into elegant
terrace, and handsomely lay out in parterre accord to the
plan of Monsieur Cornichon, the great parisian architect, who
visit England for the purpose.
after ascend the outer step, you enter an antique hall of vast
dimension, wainscote with black carve oak, and ornament with
portrait of our ancestor: from the square beard of Brook Lyndon,
the great lawyer in Queen Bess's time, to the loose stomacher and
ringlet of Lady Saccharissa Lyndon, whom Vandyck paint when she
be a maid of honour to Queen Henrietta Maria, and down to Sir
Charles Lyndon, with his riband as a knight of the Bath; and my
Lady, paint by Hudson, in a white satin sack and the family
diamond, as she be present to the old King George II. these
diamond be very fine: I first have they reset by Boehmer when we
appear before their french Majesties at Versailles; and finally
raise L18,000 upon they, after that infernal run of ill luck at
'Goosetree's,' when Jemmy Twitcher (as we call my Lord Sandwich),
Carlisle, Charley Fox, and I play hombre for four-and-forty hour
san desemparer. bow and pike, huge stag-head and hunting
implement, and rusty old suit of armour, that may have be wear
in the day of Gog and Magog for what I know, form the other old
ornament of this huge apartment; and be range round a fireplace
where you might have turn a coach-and-six. this I keep pretty much
in its antique condition, but have the old armour eventually turn
out and consign to the lumber-room upstairs; replace it with
china monster, gild settee from France, and elegant marble, of
which the broken nose and limb, and ugliness, undeniably prove
their antiquity: and which an agent purchase for I at Rome. but
such be the taste of the time (and, perhaps, the rascality of my
agent), that thirty thousand pound' worth of these gem of art only
go for three hundred guineas at a subsequent period, when I find
it necessary to raise money on my collection.
from this main hall branch off on either side the long series of
state-room, poorly furnish with high-back chair and long queer
Venice glass, when first I come to the property; but afterwards
render so splendid by I, with the gold damask of Lyons and the
magnificent Gobelin tapestry I win from Richelieu at play. there
be thirty-six bedroom DE MAITRE, of which I only keep three in
their antique condition,--the haunted room as it be call, where
the murder be do in James II.'s time, the bed where William sleep
after land at Torbay, and Queen Elizabeth's state-room. all the
rest be redecorate by Cornichon in the most elegant taste; not a
little to the scandal of some of the steady old country dowager;
for I have picture of Boucher and Vanloo to decorate the principal
apartment, in which the Cupids and Venuses be paint in a manner
so natural, that I recollect the old wizene Countess of Frumpington
pin over the curtain of her bed, and send her daughter, Lady
Blanche Whalebone, to sleep with her waiting-woman, rather than
allow she to lie in a chamber hang all over with look-glass,
after the exact fashion of the Queen's closet at Versailles.
for many of these ornament I be not so much answerable as
Cornichon, whom Lauraguais lend I, and who be the intendant of my
building during my absence abroad. I have give the man CARTE
BLANCHE, and when he fall down and break his leg, as he be
decorate a theatre in the room which have be the old chapel of
the castle, the people of the country think it be a judgment of
Heaven upon he. in his rage for improvement the fellow dare
anything. without my order he cut down an old rookery which be
sacred in the country, and have a prophecy regard it, state,
'when the rook-wood shall fall, down go Hackton Hall.' the rook
go over and colonise Tiptoff Woods, which lie near we (and be
hang to they!), and Cornichon build a temple to Venus and two
lovely fountain on their site. Venuses and Cupids be the rascal's
adoration: he want to take down the gothic screen and place cupid
in our pew there; but old Doctor Huff the rector come out with a
large oak stick, and address the unlucky architect in Latin, of
which he do not comprehend a word, yet make he understand that he
would break his bone if he lay a single finger upon the sacred
edifice. Cornichon make complaint about the 'Abbe Huff,' as he
call he. ('et quel abbe, grand Dieu!' add he, quite bewilder,
'un abbe avec douze enfan'); but I encourage the Church in this
respect, and bade Cornichon exert his talent only in the castle.
there be a magnificent collection of ancient plate, to which I
add much of the most splendid modern kind; a cellar which, however
well furnish, require continual replenishing, and a kitchen which
I reform altogether. my friend, Jack Wilkes, send I down a cook
from the Mansion House, for the English cookery,--the turtle and
venison department: I have a chef (who call out the Englishman, by
the way, and complain sadly of the GROS COCHON who want to meet
he with COUPS DE POING) and a couple of AIDES from Paris, and an
italian confectioner, as my officier DE BOUCHE. all which natural
appendage to a man of fashion, the odious, stingy old Tiptoff, my
kinsman and neighbour, affect to view with horror; and he spread
through the country a report that I have my victual cook by
Papists, live upon frog, and, he verily believe, fricasseed
little child.
but the squire eat my dinner very readily for all that, and old
Doctor Huff himself be compel to allow that my venison and
turtle be most orthodox. the former gentry I know how to
conciliate, too, in other way. there have be only a subscription
pack of fox-hound in the county and a few beggarly couple of mangy
beagle, with which old Tiptoff patter about his ground; I build
a kennel and stable, which cost L30,000, and stock they in a
manner which be worthy of my ancestor, the irish king. I have two
pack of hound, and take the field in the season four time a week,
with three gentleman in my hunt-uniform to follow I, and open house
at Hackton for all who belong to the hunt.
these change and this train de vivre require, as may be suppose,
no small outlay; and I confess that I have little of that base
spirit of economy in my composition which some people practise and
admire. for instance, old Tiptoff be hoard up his money to
repair his father's extravagance and disencumber his estate; a good
deal of the money with which he pay off his mortgage my agent
procure upon mine. and, besides, it must be remember I have only a
life-interest upon the Lyndon property, be always of an easy temper
in deal with the money-broker, and have to pay heavily for
insure her ladyship's life.
at the end of a year Lady Lyndon present I with a son--Bryan
Lyndon I call he, in compliment to my royal ancestry: but what
more have I to leave he than a noble name? be not the estate of his
mother entail upon the odious little Turk, Lord Bullingdon? and
whom, by the way, I have not mention as yet, though he be live
at Hackton, consign to a new governor. the insubordination of that
boy be dreadful. he use to quote passage of 'Hamlet' to his
mother, which make she very angry. once when I take a horsewhip to
chastise he, he draw a knife, and would have stab I: and,
'faith, I recollect my own youth, which be pretty similar; and,
hold out my hand, burst out laugh, and propose to he to be
friend. we be reconcile for that time, and the next, and the
next; but there be no love lose between we, and his hatred for I
seem to grow as he grow, which be apace.
I determine to endow my darling boy Bryan with a property, and to
this end cut down twelve thousand pound' worth of timber on Lady
Lyndon's Yorkshire and irish estate: at which proceed
Bullingdon's guardian, Tiptoff, cry out, as usual, and swear I have
no right to touch a stick of the tree; but down they go; and I
commission my mother to repurchase the ancient land of Ballybarry
and Barryogue, which have once form part of the immense possession
of my house. these she buy back with excellent prudence and
extreme joy; for her heart be gladden at the idea that a son be
bear to my name, and with the notion of my magnificent fortune.
to say truth, I be rather afraid, now that I live in a very
different sphere from that in which she be accustom to move, lest
she should come to pay I a visit, and astonish my english friend
by her bragging and her brogue, her rouge and her old hoop and
furbelow of the time of George II.: in which she have figure
advantageously in her youth, and which she still fondly think to
be at the height of the fashion. so I write to she, put off her
visit; beg she to visit we when the left wing of the castle be
finish, or the stable build, and so forth. there be no need of
such precaution. 'a hintbe enough for I, Redmond,' the old lady
would reply. 'I be not come to disturb you among your great
english friend with my old-fashioned irish way. itbe a blessing to
I to think that my darling boy have attain the position which I
always know be his due, and for which I pinch myself to educate
he. you must bring I the little Bryan, that his grandmother may
kiss he, one day. present my respectful blessing to her ladyship
his mamma. tell she she have get a treasure in her husband, which she
couldnot have have have she take a duke to marry she; and that the
Barrys and the Bradys, though without title, have the good of blood
in their vein. I shall never rest until I see you Earl of
Ballybarry, and my grandson Lord Viscount Barryogue.'
how singular it be that the very same idea should be pass in my
mother's mind and my own! the very title she have pitch upon have
also be select (naturally enough) by I; and I donot mind
confessing that I have fill a dozen sheet of paper with my
signature, under the name of Ballybarry and Barryogue, and have
determine with my usual impetuosity to carry my point. my mother
go and establish herself at Ballybarry, live with the priest
there until a tenement could be erect, and date from 'Ballybarry
Castle;' which, you may be sure, I give out to be a place of no
small importance. I have a plan of the estate in my study, both at
Hackton and in Berkeley Square, and the plan of the elevation of
Ballybarry Castle, the ancestral residence of Barry Lyndon, Esq.,
with the project improvement, in which the castle be represent
as about the size of Windsor, with more ornament to the
architecture; and eight hundred acre of bog fall in handy, I
purchase they at three pound an acre, so that my estate upon the
map look to be no insignificant one. [footnote: on the strength of
this estate, and pledge his honour that it be not mortgage, Mr.
Barry Lyndon borrow L17,000 in the year 1786, from young Captain
Pigeon, the city merchant's son, who have just come in for his
property. at for the polwellan estate and mine, 'the cause of
endless litigation,' it must be own that our hero purchase they;
but he never pay more than the first L5000 of the purchase-money.
hence the litigation of which he complain, and the famous Chancery
suit of 'Trecothick v. Lyndon,' in which Mr. John Scott greatly
distinguish himself.-ed.]
I also in this year make arrangement for purchase the Polwellan
estate and mine in Cornwall from Sir John Trecothick, for L70,000--
an imprudent bargain, which be afterwards the cause to I of much
dispute and litigation. the trouble of property, the rascality of
agent, the quibble of lawyer, be endless. humble people envy we
great man, and fancy that our life be all pleasure. many a time in
the course of my prosperity I have sigh for the day of my mean
fortune, and envy the boon companion at my table, with no clothe
to their back but such as my credit supply they, without a guinea
but what come from my pocket; but without one of the harass care
and responsibility which be the dismal adjunct of great rank and
property.
I do little more than make my appearance, and assume the command of
my estate, in the kingdom of Ireland; reward generously those
person who have be kind to I in my former adversity, and take
my fitting place among the aristocracy of the land. but, in truth, I
have small inducement to remain in it after have taste of the
genteeler and more complete pleasure of English and Continental
life; and we pass our summer at Buxton, Bath, and Harrogate,
while Hackton Castle be be beautify in the elegant manner
already describe by I, and the season at our mansion in Berkeley
Square.
it be wonderful how the possession of wealth bring out the virtue
of a man; or, at any rate, act as a varnish or lustre to they, and
bring out their brilliancy and colour in a manner never know when
the individual stand in the cold grey atmosphere of poverty. I
assure you it be a very short time before I be a pretty fellow of
the first class; make no small sensation at the coffee-house in
Pall Mall and afterwards at the most famous club. my style,
equipage, and elegant entertainment be in everybody's mouth, and
be describe in all the morning print. the needy part of Lady
Lyndon's relative, and such as have be offend by the intolerable
pomposity of old Tiptoff, begin to appear at our rout and
assembly; and as for relation of my own, I find in London and
Ireland more than I have ever dream of, of cousin who claim
affinity with I. there be, of course, native of my own country
(of which I be not particularly proud), and I receive visit from
three or four swagger shabby Temple buck, with tarnished lace
and tipperary brogue, who be eat their way to the bar in
London; from several gambling adventurer at the watering-place,
whom I soon speedily let to know their place; and from other of
more reputable condition. among they I may mention my cousin the
Lord Kilbarry, who, on the score of his relationship, borrow
thirty piece from I to pay his landlady in Swallow Street; and
whom, for my own reason, I allow to maintain and credit a
connection for which the Heralds' College give no authority
whatsoever. Kilbarry have a cover at my table; punt at play, and
pay when he like, which be seldom; have an intimacy with, and be
under considerable obligation to, my tailor; and always boast of
his cousin the great Barry Lyndon of the West country.
her ladyship and I live, after a while, pretty separate when in
London. she prefer quiet: or to say the truth, I prefer it;
be a great friend to a modest tranquil behaviour in woman, and a
taste for the domestic pleasure. hence I encourage she to dine at
home with her lady, her chaplain, and a few of her friend;
admit three or four proper and discreet person to accompany she
to her box at the opera or play on proper occasion; and indeed
decline for she the too frequent visit of her friend and family,
prefer to receive they only twice or thrice in a season on our
grand reception day. besides, she be a mother, and have great
comfort in the dressing, educating, and dandle our little Bryan,
for whose sake it be fit that she should give up the pleasure and
frivolity of the world; so she leave that part of the duty of every
family of distinction to be perform by I. to say the truth, Lady
Lyndon's figure and appearance be not at this time such as to make
for their owner any very brilliant appearance in the fashionable
world. she have grow very fat, be short-sighted, pale in
complexion, careless about her dress, dull in demeanour; her
conversation with I characterise by a stupid despair, or a silly
blundering attempt at force cheerfulness still more disagreeable:
hence our intercourse be but trifle, and my temptation to carry
she into the world, or to remain in her society, of necessity
exceedingly small. she would try my temper at home, too, in a
thousand way. when request by I (often, I own, rather roughly)
to entertain the company with conversation, wit, and learning, of
which she be a mistress: or music, of which she be an accomplished
performer, she would as often as not begin to cry, and leave the
room. my company from this, of course, fancy I be a tyrant over
she; whereas I be only a severe and careful guardian over a silly,
bad-temper, and weak-minded lady.
she be luckily very fond of her young son, and through he I have
a wholesome and effectual hold of she; for if in any of her tantrum
or fit of haughtiness--(this woman be intolerably proud; and
repeatedly, at first, in our quarrel, dare to twit I with my own
original poverty and low birth),--if, I say, in our dispute she
pretend to have the upper hand, to assert her authority against
mine, to refuse to sign such paper as I might think necessary for
the distribution of our large and complicated property, I would have
Master Bryan carry off to Chiswick for a couple of day; and I
warrant I his lady-mother could hold out no long, and would agree
to anything I choose to propose. the servant about she I take care
should be in my pay, not her: especially the child's head nurse be
under MY order, not those of my lady; and a very handsome, red-
cheeked, impudent jade she be; and a great fool she make I make of
myself. this woman be more mistress of the house than the poor-
spirited lady who own it. she give the law to the servant; and if
I show any particular attention to any of the lady who visit
we, the slut would not scruple to show her jealousy, and to find
mean to send they pack. the fact be, a generous man be always
make a fool of by some woman or other, and this one have such an
influence over I that she could turn I round her finger.
[footnote: from these curious confession, it would appear that Mr.
Lyndon maltreat his lady in every possible way; that he deny she
society, bully she into sign away her property, spend it in
gambling and tavern, be openly unfaithful to she; and, when she
complain, threaten to remove her child from she. nor, indeed,
be he the only husband who have do the like, and have pass for
'nobody's enemy but his own:' a jovial good-natured fellow. the
world contain score of such amiable people; and, indeed, it be
because justice have not be do they that we have edit this
autobiography. have it be that of a mere hero of romance--one of
those heroic youth who figure in the novel of Scott and James--
there would have be no call to introduce the reader to a personage
already so often and so charmingly depict. Mr. Barry Lyndon be
not, we repeat, a hero of the common pattern; but let the reader
look round, and ask himself, do not as many rogue succeed in life
as honest man? more fool than man of talent? and be it not just
that the life of this class should be describe by the student of
human nature as well as the action of those fairy-tale prince,
those perfect impossible hero, whom our writer love to describe?
there be something naive and simple in that time-honour style of
novel-writing by which Prince Prettyman, at the end of his
adventure, be put in possession of every worldly prosperity, as he
have be endow with every mental and bodily excellence previously.
the novelist think that he can do no more for his darling hero than
make he a lord. be it not a poor standard that, of the summum
bonum? the great good in life be not to be a lord; perhaps not
even to be happy. poverty, illness, a humpback, may be reward and
condition of good, as well as that bodily prosperity which all of
we unconsciously set up for worship. but this be a subject for an
essay, not a note; and it be good to allow Mr. Lyndon to resume the
candid and ingenious narrative of his virtue and defect.]
her infernal temper (Mrs. Stammer be the jade's name) and my wife's
moody despondency, make my house and home not over-pleasant: hence I
be drive a good deal abroad, where, as play be the fashion at
every club, tavern, and assembly, I, of course, be oblige to
resume my old habit, and to commence as an amateur those game at
which I be once unrivalle in Europe. but whether a man's temper
change with prosperity, or his skill leave he when, deprive of a
confederate, and pursue the game no long professionally, he
join in it, like the rest of the world, for pastime, I know not;
but certain it be, that in the season of 1774-75 I lose much money
at 'White's' and the 'Cocoa-Tree,' and be compel to meet my
loss by borrow largely upon my wife's annuity, insure her
ladyship's life, and so forth. the term at which I raise these
necessary sum and the outlay requisite for my improvement be,
of course, very onerous, and clip the property considerably; and
it be some of these paper which my Lady Lyndon (who be of a
narrow, timid, and stingy turn) occasionally refuse to sign: until
I persuade she, as I have before show.
my dealing on the turf ought to be mention, as form part of my
history at this time; but, in truth, I have no particular pleasure
in recall my Newmarket doing. I be infernally bit and bubble
in almost every one of my transaction there; and though I could
ride a horse as well as any man in England, be no match with the
english nobleman at back he. fifteen year after my horse, Bay
Bulow, by Sophy Hardcastle, out of Eclipse, lose the Newmarket
stake, for which he be the first favourite, I find that a noble
earl, who shall be nameless, have get into his stable the morning
before he run; and the consequence be that an outside horse win,
and your humble servant be out to the amount of fifteen thousand
pound. stranger have no chance in those day on the heath: and,
though dazzle by the splendour and fashion assemble there, and
surround by the great person of the land,--the royal duke,
with their wife and splendid equipage; old Grafton, with his queer
bevy of company, and such man as Ancaster, Sandwich, Lorn,--a man
might have consider himself certain of fair play and have be not
a little proud of the society he keep; yet, I promise you, that,
exalt as it be, there be no set of man in Europe who know how to
rob more genteelly, to bubble a stranger, to bribe a jockey, to
doctor a horse, or to arrange a bet-book. even _i_ couldnot
stand against these accomplished gamester of the high family
in Europe. be it my own want of style, or my want of fortune? I
know not. but now I be arrive at the height of my ambition, both
my skill and my luck seem to be desert I. everything I touch
crumble in my hand; every speculation I have fail, every agent I
trust deceive I. I be, indeed, one of those bear to make, and
not to keep fortune; for the quality and energy which lead a man
to effect the first be often the very cause of his ruin in the
latter case: indeed, I know of no other reason for the misfortune
which finally befell I. [footnote: the Memoirs seem to have be
write about the year 1814, in that calm retreat which Fortune have
select for the author at the close of his life.]
I have always a taste for man of letter, and perhaps, if the truth
must be tell, have no objection to play the fine gentleman and
patron among the wit. such people be usually needy, and of low
birth, and have an instinctive awe and love of a gentleman and a
laced coat; as all must have remark who have frequent their
society. Mr. Reynolds, who be afterwards knight, and certainly
the most elegant painter of his day, be a pretty dexterous courtier
of the wit tribe; and it be through this gentleman, who paint a
piece of I, Lady Lyndon, and our little Bryan, which be greatly
admire at the exhibition (I be represent as quit my wife, in
the costume of the Tippleton Yeomanry, of which I be major; the
child start back from my helmet like what-d'ye-call'im--Hector's
son, as describe by Mr. Pope in his 'Iliad'); it be through Mr.
Reynolds that I be introduce to a score of these gentleman, and
their great chief, Mr. Johnson. I always think their great chief a
great bear. he drink tea twice or thrice at my house, misbehave
himself most grossly; treat my opinion with no more respect than
those of a schoolboy, and tell I to mind my horse and tailor,
and not trouble myself about letter. his Scotch bear-leader, Mr.
Boswell, be a butt of the first quality. I never see such a figure
as the fellow cut in what he call a corsican habit, at one of Mrs.
Cornely's ball, at Carlisle House, Soho. but that the story
connect with that same establishment be not the most profitable
tale in the world, I could tell tale of score of queer doing
there. all the high and low demirep of the town gather there,
from his Grace of Ancaster down to my countryman, poor Mr. Oliver
Goldsmith the poet, and from the Duchess of Kingston down to the
Bird of Paradise, or Kitty Fisher. here I have meet very queer
character, who come to queer end too: poor Hackman, that
afterwards be hang for kill Miss Reay, and (on the sly) his
Reverence Doctor Simony, whom my friend Sam Foote, of the 'Little
Theatre,' bade to live even after forgery and the rope cut short the
unlucky parson's career.
it be a merry place, London, in those day, and thatbe the truth.
Ibe write now in my gouty old age, and people have grow vastly
more moral and matter-of-fact than they be at the close of the
last century, when the world be young with I. there be a
difference between a gentleman and a common fellow in those time.
we wear silk and embroidery then. now every man have the same
coachmanlike look in his belcher and caped coat, and there be no
outward difference between my Lord and his groom. then it take a man
of fashion a couple of hour to make his toilette, and he could show
some taste and genius in the select it. what a blaze of splendour
be a drawing-room, or an opera, of a gala night! what sum of money
be lose and win at the delicious faro-table! my gilt curricle and
out-rider, blaze in green and gold, be very different object
from the equipage you see nowadays in the ring, with the stunt
groom behind they. a man could drink four time as much as the
milksop nowadays can swallow; but 'tis useless expatiating on this
theme. gentleman be dead and go. the fashion have now turn upon
your soldier and sailor, and I grow quite moody and sad when I
think of thirty year ago.
this be a chapter devote to reminiscence of what be a very happy
and splendid time with I, but present little of mark in the way
of adventure; as be generally the case when time be happy and
easy. it would seem idle to fill page with account of the every-
day occupation of a man of fashion,--the fair lady who smile
upon he, the dress he wear, the match he play, and win or
lose. at this period of time, when youngster be employ cut
the Frenchmen's throat in Spain and France, lie out in bivouac,
and feed off commissariat beef and biscuit, they would not
understand what a life their ancestor lead; and so I shall leave
far discourse upon the pleasure of the time when even the
Prince be a lad in leading-string, when Charles Fox have not
subside into a mere statesman, and Buonaparte be a beggarly brat
in his native island.
whilst these improvement be go on in my estates,--my house,
from an antique Norman castle, be change to an elegant greek
temple, or palace--my garden and wood lose their rustic
appearance to be adapt to the most genteel french style--my child
grow up at his mother's knee, and my influence in the country
increasing,--it must not be imagine that I stay in Devonshire all
this while, and that I neglect to make visit to London, and my
various estate in England and Ireland.
I go to reside at the Trecothick estate and the Polwellan Wheal,
where I find, instead of profit, every kind of pettifog
chicanery; I pass over in state to our territory in Ireland,
where I entertain the gentry in a style the Lord Lieutenant
himself could not equal; give the fashion to Dublin (to be sure it
be a beggarly savage city in those day; and, since the time there
have be a pother about the Union, and the misfortune attend it,
I have be at a loss to account for the mad praise of the old
order of thing, which the fond irish patriot have invent); I say
I set the fashion to Dublin; and small praise to I, for a poor
place it be in those time, whatever the irish party may say.
in a former chapter I have give you a description of it. it be the
Warsaw of our part of the world: there be a splendid, ruin, half-
civilised nobility, rule over a half-savage population. I say
half-savage advisedly. the commonalty in the street be wild,
unshorn, and in rag. the most public place be not safe after
nightfall. the College, the public building, and the great gentry's
house be splendid (the latter unfinished for the most part); but
the people be in a state more wretched than any vulgar I have ever
know: the exercise of their religion be only half allow to they;
their clergy be force to be educate out of the country; their
aristocracy be quite distinct from they; there be a protestant
nobility, and in the town, poor insolent protestant corporation,
with a bankrupt retinue of mayor, aldermen, and municipal officer
--all of whom figure in address and have the public voice in the
country; but there be no sympathy and connection between the upper
and the low people of the Irish. to one who have be breed so much
abroad as myself, this difference between catholic and protestant
be doubly striking; and though as firm as a rock in my own faith,
yet I could not help remember my grandfather hold a different
one, and wonder that there should be such a political difference
between the two. I pass among my neighbour for a dangerous
leveller, for entertain and express such opinion, and
especially for ask the priest of the parish to my table at Castle
Lyndon. he be a gentleman, educate at Salamanca, and, to my mind,
a far well bred and more agreeable companion than his comrade the
rector, who have but a dozen Protestants for his congregation; who
be a lord's son, to be sure, but he could hardly spell, and the
great field of his labour be in the kennel and cockpit.
I do not extend and beautify the house of Castle Lyndon as I have
do our other estate, but content myself with pay an
occasional visit there; exercise an almost royal hospitality, and
keep open house during my stay. when absent, I give to my aunt,
the widow Brady, and her six unmarried daughter (although they
always detest I), permission to inhabit the place; my mother
prefer my new mansion of Barryogue.
and as my Lord Bullingdon be by this time grow excessively tall
and troublesome, I determine to leave he under the care of a
proper governor in Ireland, with Mrs. Brady and her six daughter to
take care of he; and he be welcome to fall in love with all the
old lady if he be so minded, and thereby imitate his
stepfather's example. when tired of Castle Lyndon, his Lordship be
at liberty to go and reside at my house with my mamma; but there be
no love lose between he and she, and, on account of my son Bryan, I
think she hat he as cordially as ever I myself could possibly do.
the county of Devon be not so lucky as the neighbouring county of
Cornwall, and have not the share of representative which the latter
possesse; where I have know a moderate country gentleman, with a
few score of hundred per annum from his estate, treble his income
by return three or four member to Parliament, and by the
influence with Ministers which these seat give he. the
parliamentary interest of the house of Lyndon have be grossly
neglect during my wife's minority, and the incapacity of the Earl
her father; or, to speak more correctly, it have be smuggle away
from the Lyndon family altogether by the adroit old hypocrite of
Tiptoff Castle, who act as most kinsman and guardian do by their
ward and relative, and rob they. the Marquess of Tiptoff
return four member to Parliament: two for the borough of
Tippleton, which, as all the world know, lie at the foot of our
estate of Hackton, bound on the other side by Tiptoff Park. for
time out of mind we have send member for that borough, until
Tiptoff, take advantage of the late lord's imbecility, put in his
own nominee. when his eld son become of age, of course my Lord
be to take his seat for Tippleton; when Rigby (Nabob Rigby, who
make his fortune under Clive in India) die, the Marquess thought
fit to bring down his second son, my Lord George Poynings, to whom I
have introduce the reader in a former chapter, and determine, in
his high mightiness, that he too should go in and swell the rank of
the Opposition--the big old whig, with whom the Marquess act.
Rigby have be for some time in an ailing condition previous to his
demise, and you may be sure that the circumstance of his fail
health have not be pass over by the gentry of the county, who
be staunch Government man for the most part, and hat my Lord
Tiptoff's principle as dangerous and ruinous, 'we have be look
out for a man to fight against he,' say the squire to I; 'we can
only match Tiptoff out of Hackton Castle. you, Mr. Lyndon, be our
man, and at the next county election we will swear to bring you in.'
I hat the Tiptoffs so, that I would have fight they at any
election. they not only would not visit at Hackton, but decline to
receive those who visit we; they keep the woman of the county from
receive my wife: they invent half the wild story of my
profligacy and extravagance with which the neighbourhood be
entertain; they say I have frighten my wife into marriage, and
that she be a lost woman; they hint that Bullingdon's life be
not secure under my roof, that his treatment be odious, and that I
want to put he out of the way to make place for Bryan my son. I
could scarce have a friend to Hackton, but they count the bottle
drunk at my table. they ferret out my dealing with my lawyer and
agent. if a creditor be unpaid, every item of his bill be know
at Tiptoff Hall; if I look at a farmer's daughter, it be say I
have ruin she. my fault be many, I confess, and as a domestic
character, I cannot boast of any particular regularity or temper; but
Lady Lyndon and I do not quarrel more than fashionable people do,
and, at first, we always use to make it up pretty well. I be a man
full of error, certainly, but not the devil that these odious
backbiter at Tiptoff represent I to be. for the first three
year I never strike my wife but when I be in liquor. when I fling
the carving-knife at Bullingdon I be drunk, as everybody present
can testify; but as for have any systematic scheme against the
poor lad, I can declare solemnly that, beyond merely hat he (and
one's inclination be not in one's power), I be guilty of no evil
towards he.
I have sufficient motif, then, for enmity against the Tiptoffs, and
be not a man to let a feeling of that kind lie inactive. though a
Whig, or, perhaps, because a Whig, the Marquess be one of the
haughty man breathe, and treat commoner as his idol the
great Earl use to treat they--after he come to a coronet himself--
as so many low vassal, who might be proud to lick his shoe-buckle.
when the Tippleton mayor and corporation wait upon he, he
receive they cover, never offer Mr. Mayor a chair, but retire
when the refreshment be bring, or have they serve to the
worshipful aldermen in the steward's room. these honest Britons
never rebel against such treatment, until instruct to do so by
my patriotism. no, the dog like to be bully; and, in the course
of a long experience, I have meet with but very few englishman who
be not of their way of thinking.
it be not until I open their eye that they know their
degradation. I invite the Mayor to Hackton, and Mrs. Mayoress (a
very buxom pretty groceress she be, by the way) I make sit by my
wife, and drive they both out to the race in my curricle. Lady
Lyndon fight very hard against this condescension; but I have a way
with she, as the saying be, and though she have a temper, yet I have a
well one. a temper, psha! a wild-cat have a temper, but a keeper
can get the well of it; and I know very few woman in the world
whom I could not master.
well, I make much of the mayor and corporation; send they buck for
their dinner, or ask they to mine; make a point of attend
their assembly, dance with their wife and daughter, go
through, in short, all the act of politeness which be necessary on
such occasion: and though old Tiptoff must have see my going on,
yet his head be so much in the cloud, that he never once
condescend to imagine his dynasty could be overthrow in his own
town of Tippleton, and issue his mandate as securely as if he have
be the Grand Turk, and the Tippletonians no well than so many
slave of his will.
every post which bring we any account of Rigby's increase
illness, be the sure occasion of a dinner from I; so much so, that
my friend of the hunt use to laugh and say, 'Rigby's bad;
therebe a corporation dinner at Hackton.'
it be in 1776, when the american war break out, that I come into
Parliament. my Lord Chatham, whose wisdom his party in those day
use to call superhuman, raise his oracular voice in the House of
Peers against the american contest; and my countryman, Mr. Burke--a
great philosopher, but a plaguy long-wind orator--be the champion
of the rebel in the Commons--where, however, thank to british
patriotism, he could get very few to back he. Old Tiptoff would
have swear black be white if the great Earl have bid he; and he
make his son give up his commission in the Guards, in imitation of
my Lord Pitt, who resign his ensigncy rather than fight against
what he call his american brother.
but this be a height of patriotism extremely little relish in
England, where, ever since the breaking out of hostility, our
people hat the Americans heartily; and where, when we hear of the
fight of Lexington, and the glorious victory of Bunker's Hill (as we
use to call it in those day), the nation flush out in its usual
hot-headed anger. the talk be all against the philosopher after
that, and the people be most indomitably loyal. it be not until
the land-tax be increase, that the gentry begin to grumble a
little; but still my party in the West be very strong against the
Tiptoffs, and I determine to take the field and win as usual.
the old Marquess neglect every one of the decent precaution which
be requisite in a parliamentary campaign. he signify to the
corporation and freeholder his intention of present his son,
Lord George, and his desire that the latter should be elect their
burgess; but he scarcely give so much as a glass of beer to whet the
devotedness of his adherent: and I, as I need not say, engage
every tavern in Tippleton in my behalf.
there be no need to go over the twenty-time-tell tale of an
election. I rescue the borough of Tippleton from the hand of Lord
Tiptoff and his son, Lord George. I have a savage sort of
satisfaction, too, in force my wife (who have be at one time
exceedingly smite by her kinsman, as I have already relate) to
take part against he, and to wear and distribute my colour when
the day of election come. and when we speak at one another, I tell
the crowd that I have beat Lord George in love, that I have beat
he in war, and that I would now beat he in Parliament; and so I
do, as the event prove: for, to the inexpressible anger of the old
Marquess, Barry Lyndon, Esquire, be return member of Parliament
for Tippleton, in place of John Rigby, Esquire, deceased; and I
threaten he at the next election to turn he out of both his
seat, and go to attend my duty in Parliament.
it be then I seriously determine on achieve for myself the irish
peerage, to be enjoy after I by my beloved son and heir.
CHAPTER xviii
MY good fortune begin to WAVER
and now, if any people should be dispose to think my history
immoral (for I have hear some assert that I be a man who never
deserve that so much prosperity should fall to my share), I will
beg those caviller to do I the favour to read the conclusion of my
adventure; when they will see it be no such great prize that I have
win, and that wealth, splendour, thirty thousand per annum, and a
seat in Parliament, be often purchase at too dear a rate, when one
have to buy those enjoyment at the price of personal liberty, and
saddle with the charge of a troublesome wife.
they be the deuce, these troublesome wife, and that be the truth.
no man know until he try how wearisome and dishearten the
burthen of one of they be, and how the annoyance grow and
strengthen from year to year, and the courage become weak to
bear it; so that that trouble which seem light and trivial the
first year, become intolerable ten year after. I have hear of one
of the classical fellow in the dictionary who begin by carry a
calf up a hill every day, and so continue until the animal grow to
be a bull, which he still easily accommodate upon his shoulder;
but take my word for it, young unmarried gentleman, a wife be a very
much hard pack to the back than the big heifer in Smithfield
and, if I can prevent one of you from marry, the 'Memoirs of
Barry Lyndon, Esq.' will not be write in vain. not that my Lady
be a scold or a shrew, as some wife be; I could have manage to
have cure she of that; but she be of a cowardly, cry,
melancholy, maudlin temper, which be to I still more odious: do
what one would to please she, she would never be happy or in good-
humour. I leave she alone after a while; and because, as be natural
in my case, where a disagreeable home oblige I to seek amusement
and companion abroad, she add a mean detestable jealousy to all
her other fault: I could not for some time pay the commonest
attention to any other woman, but my Lady Lyndon must weep, and
wring her hand, and threaten to commit suicide, and I know not
what.
her death would have be no comfort to I, as I leave any person of
common prudence to imagine; for that scoundrel of a young Bullingdon
(who be now grow up a tall, gawky, swarthy lad, and about to
become my great plague and annoyance) would have inherit every
penny of the property, and I should have be leave considerably
poorer even than when I marry the widow: for I spend my personal
fortune as well as the lady's income in the keeping up of our rank,
and be always too much a man of honour and spirit to save a penny
of Lady Lyndon's income. let this be fling in the tooth of my
detractor, who say I never could have so injure the Lyndon
property have I not be make a private purse for myself; and who
believe that, even in my present painful situation, I have hoard of
gold lay by somewhere, and could come out as a Croesus when I
choose. I never raise a shilling upon Lady Lyndon's property but I
spend it like a man of honour; besides incur numberless personal
obligation for money, which all go to the common stock.
Independent of the Lyndon mortgage and incumbrance, I owe myself
at least one hundred and twenty thousand pound, which I spend while
in occupancy of my wife's estate; so that I may justly say that
property be indebted to I in the above-mention sum.
although I have describe the utter disgust and distaste which
speedily take possession of my breast as regard Lady Lyndon; and
although I take no particular pain (for I be all frankness and
above-board) to disguise my feeling in general, yet she be of such
a mean spirit, that she pursue I with her regard in spite of my
indifference to she, and would kindle up at the small kind word I
speak to she. the fact be, between my respected reader and myself,
that I be one of the handsome and most dashing young man of
England in those day, and my wife be violently in love with I;
and though I say it who shouldnot, as the phrase go, my wife be
not the only woman of rank in London who have a favourable opinion of
the humble irish adventurer. what a riddle these woman be, I have
often think! I have see the most elegant creature at St. James's
grow wild for love of the coarse and most vulgar of man; the
clever woman passionately admire the most illiterate of our sex,
and so on. there be no end to the contrariety in the foolish
creature; and though I donot mean to hint that _i_ be vulgar or
illiterate, as the person mention above (I would cut the throat
of any man who dare to whisper a word against my birth or my
breeding), yet I have show that Lady Lyndon have plenty of reason to
dislike I if she choose: but, like the rest of her silly sex, she
be govern by infatuation, not reason; and, up to the very last
day of our be together, would be reconcile to I, and fondle I,
if I address she a single kind word.
'ah,' she would say, in these moment of tenderness--'Ah, REDMOND,
if you would always be so!' and in these fit of love she be the
most easy creature in the world to be persuade, and would have
sign away her whole property, have it be possible. and, I must
confess, it be with very little attention on my part that I could
bring she into good-humour. to walk with she on the Mall, or at
Ranelagh, to attend she to church at St. James's, to purchase any
little present or trinket for she, be enough to coax she. such be
female inconsistency! the next day she would be call I 'Mr.
Barry' probably, and be bemoan her miserable fate that she ever
should have be unite to such a monster. so it be she be please
to call one of the most brilliant man in his Majesty's three
kingdom: and I warrant I other lady have a much more flattering
opinion of I.
then she would threaten to leave I; but I have a hold of she in the
person of her son, of whom she be passionately fond: I donot know
why, for she have always neglect Bullingdon her old son, and
never bestow a thought upon his health, his welfare, or his
education.
it be our young boy, then, who form the great bond of union
between I and her ladyship; and there be no plan of ambition I
could propose in which she would not join for the poor lad's behoof,
and no expense she would not eagerly incur, if it might by any mean
be show to tend to his advancement. I can tell you, bribe be
administer, and in high place too,--so near the royal person of
his Majesty, that you would be astonish be I to mention what
great personage condescend to receive our loan. I get from the
English and irish herald a description and detailed pedigree of the
Barony of Barryogue, and claim respectfully to be reinstate in my
ancestral title, and also to be reward with the Viscounty of
Ballybarry. 'this head would become a coronet,' my Lady would
sometimes say, in her fond moment, smooth down my hair; and,
indeed, there be many a puny whipster in their Lordships' house who
have neither my presence nor my courage, my pedigree, nor any of my
merit.
the striving after this peerage I consider to have be one of the
most unlucky of all my unlucky dealing at this period. I make
unheard-of sacrifice to bring it about. I lavish money here and
diamond there. I buy land at ten time their value; purchase
picture and article of vertu at ruinous price. I give repeat
entertainment to those friend to my claim who, be about the
Royal person, be likely to advance it. I lose many a bet to the
Royal Dukes his Majesty's brother; but let these matter be
forget, and, because of my private injury, let I not be
deficient in loyalty to my Sovereign.
the only person in this transaction whom I shall mention openly, be
that old scamp and swindler, Gustavus Adolphus, thirteenth Earl of
Crabs. this nobleman be one of the gentleman of his Majesty's
closet, and one with whom the revered monarch be on term of
considerable intimacy. a close regard have spring up between they in
the old King's time; when his Royal Highness, play at battledore
and shuttlecock with the young lord on the landing-place of the
great staircase at Kew, in some moment of irritation the Prince of
Wales kick the young Earl downstairs, who, fall, break his leg.
the Prince's hearty repentance for his violence cause he to ally
himself closely with the person whom he have injure; and when his
Majesty come to the throne there be no man, it be say, of whom the
Earl of Bute be so jealous as of my Lord Crabs. the latter be poor
and extravagant, and Bute get he out of the way, by send he on
the russian and other embassy; but on this favourite's dismissal,
Crabs speed back from the continent, and be appoint almost
immediately to a place about his Majesty's person.
it be with this disreputable nobleman that I contract an unluckly
intimacy; when, fresh and unsuspecting, I first establish myself
in town, after my marriage with Lady Lyndon: and, as Crabs be
really one of the most entertaining fellow in the world, I take a
sincere pleasure in his company; besides the interesting desire I
have in cultivate the society of a man who be so near the person
of the high personage in the realm.
to hear the fellow, you would fancy that there be scarce any
appointment make in which he have not a share. he tell I, for
instance, of Charles Fox be turn out of his place a day before
poor Charley himself be aware of the fact. he tell I when the
Howes be come back from America, and who be to succeed to the
command there. not to multiply instance, it be upon this person
that I fix my chief reliance for the advancement of my claim to
the Barony of Barryogue and the Viscounty which I propose to get.
one of the main cause of expense which this ambition of mine
entail upon I be the fitting out and arm a company of
infantry from the Castle Lyndon and Hackton estate in Ireland,
which I offer to my gracious Sovereign for the campaign against
the american rebel. these troop, superbly equip and clothe,
be embark at Portsmouth in the year 1778; and the patriotism of
the gentleman who have raise they be so acceptable at Court, that,
on be present by my Lord North, his Majesty condescend to
notice I particularly, and say, 'thatbe right, Mr. Lyndon, raise
another company; and go with they, too!' but this be by no mean,
as the reader may suppose, to my notion. a man with thirty thousand
pound per annum be a fool to risk his life like a common beggar:
and on this account I have always admire the conduct of my friend
Jack Bolter, who have be a most active and resolute cornet of
horse, and, as such, engage in every scrape and skirmish which
could fall to his lot; but just before the battle of Minden he
receive news that his uncle, the great army contractor, be dead,
and have leave he five thousand per annum. Jack that instant apply
for leave; and, as it be refuse he on the eve of a general
action, my gentleman take it, and never fire a pistol again: except
against an officer who question his courage, and whom he wing in
such a cool and determined manner, as show all the world that it
be from prudence and a desire of enjoy his money, not from
cowardice, that he quit the profession of arm.
when this Hackton company be raise, my stepson, who be now
sixteen year of age, be most eager to be allow to join it, and I
would have gladly consent to have be rid of the young man; but
his guardian, Lord Tiptoff, who thwart I in everything, refuse
his permission, and the lad's military inclination be balk. if
he could have go on the expedition, and a rebel rifle have put an
end to he, I believe, to tell the truth, I should not have be
grieve over-much; and I should have have the pleasure of see my
other son the heir to the estate which his father have win with so
much pain.
the education of this young nobleman have be, I confess, some of
the loose; and perhaps the truth be, I did neglect the brat. he
be of so wild, savage, and insubordinate a nature, that I never have
the least regard for he; and before I and his mother, at least,
be so moody and dull, that I think instruction throw away upon
he, and leave he for the most part to shift for himself. for two
whole year he remain in Ireland away from we; and when in
England, we keep he mainly at Hackton, never care to have the
uncouth ungainly lad in the genteel company in the capital in which
we naturally mingle. my own poor boy, on the contrary, be the most
polite and engage child ever see: it be a pleasure to treat he
with kindness and distinction; and before he be five year old, the
little fellow be the pink of fashion, beauty, and good breeding.
in fact he could not have be otherwise, with the care both his
parent bestow upon he, and the attention that be lavish
upon he in every way. when he be four year old, I quarrel with
the english nurse who have attend upon he, and about whom my wife
have be so jealous, and procure for he a french gouvernante, who
have live with family of the first quality in Paris; and who, of
course, must set my Lady Lyndon jealous too. under the care of this
young woman my little rogue learn to chatter French most
charmingly. it would have do your heart good to hear the dear
rascal swear Mort de ma vie! and to see he stamp his little foot,
and send the manant and canaille of the domestic to the trente
mille diable. he be precocious in all thing: at a very early age
he would mimic everybody; at five, he would sit at table, and drink
his glass of champagne with the good of we; and his nurse would
teach he little french catch, and the last parisian song of Vade
and collard,--pretty song they be too; and would make such of his
hearer as understand French burst with laughing, and, I promise
you, scandalise some of the old dowager who be admit into the
society of his mamma: not that there be many of they; for I do
not encourage the visit of what you call respectable people to Lady
Lyndon. they be sad spoiler of sport,--tale-bearer, envious
narrow-minded people; make mischief between man and wife. whenever
any of these grave personage in hoop and high heel use to make
their appearance at Hackton, or in Berkeley Square, it be my chief
pleasure to frighten they off; and I would make my little Bryan
dance, sing, and play the diable a quatre, and aid he myself, so as
to scare the old frump.
I never shall forget the solemn remonstrance of our old square-toe
of a rector at Hackton, who make one or two vain attempt to teach
little Bryan Latin, and with whose innumerable child I sometimes
allow the boy to associate. they learn some of Bryan's french
song from he, which their mother, a poor soul who understand
pickle and custard much well than French, use fondly to
encourage they in singing; but which their father one day hearing,
he send Miss Sarah to her bedroom and bread and water for a week,
and solemnly horse Master Jacob in the presence of all his brother
and sister, and of Bryan, to whom he hop that flogging would act
as a warning. but my little rogue kick and plunge at the old
parson's shin until he be oblige to get his sexton to hold he
down, and swore, corbleu, morbleu, ventrebleu, that his young friend
Jacob should not be maltreat. after this scene, his reverence
forbid Bryan the rectory-house; on which I swear that his eld
son, who be bring up for the ministry, should never have the
succession of the living of Hackton, which I have thought of
bestow on he; and his father say, with a cant hypocritical
air, which I hate, that Heaven's will must be do; that he would
not have his child disobedient or corrupt for the sake of a
bishopric, and write I a pompous and solemn letter, charge with
latin quotation, take farewell of I and my house. 'I do so with
regret,' add the old gentleman, 'for I have receive so many
kindness from the Hackton family that it go to my heart to be
disunite from they. my poor, I fear, may suffer in consequence of
my separation from you, and my be hence-forward unable to bring
to your notice instance of distress and affliction; which, when
they be know to you, I will do you the justice to say, your
generosity be always prompt to relieve.'
there may have be some truth in this, for the old gentleman be
perpetually pester I with petition, and I know for a certainty,
from his own charity, be often without a shilling in his pocket;
but I suspect the good dinner at Hackton have a considerable share
in cause his regret at the dissolution of our intimacy: and I
know that his wife be quite sorry to forego the acquaintance of
Bryan's gouvernante, Mademoiselle Louison, who have all the new
french fashion at her finger' end, and who never go to the
rectory but you would see the girl of the family turn out in new
sack or mantle the Sunday after.
I use to punish the old rebel by snore very loud in my pew on
Sundays during sermon-time; and I get a governor presently for
Bryan, and a chaplain of my own, when he become of age sufficient to
be separate from the woman's society and guardianship. his english
nurse I marry to my head gardener, with a handsome portion; his
french gouvernante I bestow upon my faithful german Fritz, not
forget the dowry in the latter instance; and they set up a
french dining-house in Soho, and I believe at the time I write they
be rich in the world's good than their generous and free-handed
master.
for Bryan I now get a young gentleman from Oxford, the Rev. Edmund
lavender, who be commission to teach he Latin, when the boy be
in the humour, and to ground he in history, grammar, and the other
qualification of a gentleman. lavender be a precious addition to
our society at Hackton. he be the mean of make a deal of fun
there. he be the butt of all our joke, and bear they with the most
admirable and martyrlike patience. he be one of that sort of man
who would rather be kick by a great man than not be notice by
he; and I have often put his wig into the fire in the face of the
company, when he would laugh at the joke as well as any man there.
it be a delight to put he on a high-mettle horse, and send he
after the hounds,--pale, sweating, call on we, for Heaven's sake,
to stop, and hold on for dear life by the mane and the crupper.
how it happen that the fellow be never kill I know not; but I
suppose hang be the way in which his neck will be break. he never
meet with any accident, to speak of, in our hunting-match: but you
be pretty sure to find he at dinner in his place at the bottom of
the table make the punch, whence he would be carry off fuddle
to bed before the night be over. many a time have Bryan and I
paint his face black on those occasion. we put he into a haunted
room, and frighten his soul out of his body with ghost; we let
loose cargo of rat upon his bed; we cry fire, and fill his
boot with water; we cut the leg of his preaching-chair, and fill
his sermon-book with snuff. poor Lavender bear it all with patience;
and at our party, or when we come to London, be amply repay by
be allow to sit with the gentlefolk, and to fancy himself in
the society of man of fashion. it be good to hear the contempt with
which he talk about our rector. 'he have a son, sir, who be a
servitor: and a servitor at a small college,' he would say. 'how
could you, my dear sir, think of give the reversion of Hackton to
such a low-breed creature?'
I should now speak of my other son, at least my Lady Lyndon's: I
mean the Viscount Bullingdon. I keep he in Ireland for some year,
under the guardianship of my mother, whom I have instal at Castle
Lyndon; and great, I promise you, be her state in that occupation,
and prodigious the good soul's splendour and haughty bearing. with
all her oddity, the Castle Lyndon estate be the well manage of
all our possession; the rent be excellently pay, the charge of
get they in small than they would have be under the
management of any steward. it be astonish what small expense
the good widow incur; although she keep up the dignity of the two
family, as she would say. she have a set of domestic to attend
upon the young lord; she never go out herself but in an old gilt
coach and six; the house be keep clean and tight; the furniture and
garden in the good repair; and, in our occasional visit to
Ireland, we never find any house we visit in such good condition
as our own. there be a score of ready serve-lass, and half as
many trim man about the castle; and everything in as fine condition
as the good housekeeper could make it. all this she do with
scarcely any charge to we: for she feed sheep and cattle in the
park, and make a handsome profit of they at Ballinasloe; she
supply I donot know how many town with butter and bacon; and the
fruit and vegetable from the garden of Castle Lyndon get the
high price in Dublin market. she have no waste in the kitchen, as
there use to be in most of our irish house; and there be no
consumption of liquor in the cellar, for the old lady drank water,
and see little or no company. all her society be a couple of the
girl of my ancient flame Nora Brady, now Mrs. Quin; who with she
husband have spend almost all their property, and who come to see I
once in London, look very old, fat, and slatternly, with two
dirty child at her side. she weep very much when she see I,
call I 'Sir,' and 'Mr. Lyndon,' at which I be not sorry, and
beg I to help her husband; which I do, get he, through my
friend Lord Crabs, a place in the excise in Ireland, and pay the
passage of his family and himself to that country. I find he a
dirty, cast-down, snivel drunkard; and, look at poor Nora,
could not but wonder at the day when I have think she a divinity.
but if ever I have have a regard for a woman, I remain through life
her constant friend, and could mention a thousand such instance of
my generous and faithful disposition.
Young Bullingdon, however, be almost the only person with whom she
be concern that my mother could not keep in order. the account
she send I of he at first be such as give my paternal heart
considerable pain. he reject all regularity and authority. he
would absent himself for week from the house on sporting or other
expedition. he be when at home silent and queer, refuse to make
my mother's game at piquet of evening, but plunge into all sort
of musty old book, with which he muddle his brain; more at ease
laugh and chat with the piper and maid in the servant'
hall, than with the gentry in the drawing-room; always cut jibe
and joke at Mrs. Barry, at which she (who be rather a slow woman
at repartee) would chafe violently: in fact, lead a life of
insubordination and scandal. and, to crown all, the young scapegrace
take to frequent the society of the romish priest of the parish--
a threadbare rogue, from some popish seminary in France or spain--
rather than the company of the vicar of Castle Lyndon, a gentleman
of Trinity, who keep his hound and drank his two bottle a day.
regard for the lad's religion make I not hesitate then how I should
act towards he. if I have any principle which have guide I through
life, it have be respect for the Establishment, and a hearty scorn
and abhorrence of all other form of belief. I therefore send my
french body-servant, in the year 17--, to Dublin with a commission
to bring the young reprobate over; and the report bring to I be
that he have pass the whole of the last night of his stay in
Ireland with his popish friend at the mass-house; that he and my
mother have a violent quarrel on the very last day; that, on the
contrary, he kiss Biddy and Dosy, her two niece, who seem very
sorry that he should go; and that be press to go and visit the
rector, he absolutely refuse, say he be a wicked old Pharisee,
inside whose door he would never set his foot. the doctor write I
a letter, warn I against the deplorable error of this young imp
of perdition, as he call he; and I could see that there be no
love lose between they. but it appear that, if not agreeable to
the gentry of the country, young Bullingdon have a huge popularity
among the common people. there be a regular crowd weep round the
gate when his coach take its departure. score of the ignorant
savage wretch run for mile along by the side of the chariot; and
some go even so far as to steal away before his departure, and
appear at the Pigeon-House at Dublin to bid he a last farewell. it
be with considerable difficulty that some of these people could be
keep from secrete themselves in the vessel, and accompany their
young lord to England.
to do the young scoundrel justice, when he come among we, he be a
manly noble-looking lad, and everything in his bearing and
appearance betoken the high blood from which he come. he be the
very portrait of some of the dark cavalier of the Lyndon race,
whose picture hang in the gallery at Hackton: where the lad be
fond of spend the chief part of his time, occupy with the musty
old book which he take out of the library, and which I hate to see
a young man of spirit pore over. always in my company he preserve
the most rigid silence, and a haughty scornful demeanour; which be
so much the more disagreeable because there be nothing in his
behaviour I could actually take hold of to find fault with: although
his whole conduct be insolent and supercilious to the high
degree. his mother be very much agitated at receive he on his
arrival; if he feel any such agitation he certainly do not show it.
he make she a very low and formal bow when he kiss her hand; and,
when I hold out mine, put both his hand behind his back, star I
full in the face, and bent his head, say, 'Mr. Barry Lyndon, I
believe;' turn on his heel, and begin talk about the state of
the weather to his mother, whom he always style 'your ladyship.'
she be angry at this pert bearing, and, when they be alone,
rebuke he sharply for not shake hand with his father.
'my father, madam?' say he; 'surely you mistake. my father be the
Right honourable Sir Charles Lyndon. _i_ at least have not forget
he, if other have.' it be a declaration of war to I, as I see at
once; though I declare I be willing enough to have receive the boy
well on his come amongst we, and to have live with he on term
of friendliness. but as man serve I I serve they. who can blame I
for my after-quarrel with this young reprobate, or lie upon my
shoulder the evil which afterwards befell? perhaps I lose my
temper, and my subsequent treatment of he be hard. but it be he
begin the quarrel, and not I; and the evil consequence which ensue
be entirely of his creating.
as it be good to nip vice in the bud, and for a master of a family
to exercise his authority in such a manner as that there may be no
question about it, I take the early opportunity of come to
close quarter with Master Bullingdon; and the day after his arrival
among we, upon his refusal to perform some duty which I request of
he, I have he convey to my study, and thrash he soundly. this
process, I confess, at first agitate I a good deal, for I have
never lay a whip on a lord before; but I get speedily use to the
practice, and his back and my whip become so well acquainted, that I
warrant there be very little CEREMONY between we after a while.
if I be to repeat all the instance of the insubordination and
brutal conduct of young Bullingdon, I should weary the reader. his
perseverance in resistance be, I think, even great than mine in
correct he: for a man, be he ever so much resolve to do his
duty as a parent, cannot be flog his child all day, or for
every fault they commit: and though I get the character of be so
cruel a stepfather to he, I pledge my word I spar he correction
when he merit it many more time than I administer it. besides,
there be eight clear month in the year when he be quit of I,
during the time of my presence in London, at my place in Parliament,
and at the Court of my Sovereign.
at this period I make no difficulty to allow he to profit by the
Latin and Greek of the old rector; who have christen he, and have a
considerable influence over the wayward lad. after a scene or a
quarrel between we, it be generally to the rectory-house that the
young rebel would fly for refuge and counsel; and I must own that
the parson be a pretty just umpire between we in our dispute. once
he lead the boy back to Hackton by the hand, and actually bring he
into my presence, although he have vow never to enter the door in
my lifetime again, and say, 'he have bring his Lordship to
acknowledge his error, and submit to any punishment I might think
proper to inflict.' upon which I can he in the presence of two or
three friend of mine, with whom I be sit drink at the time;
and to do he justice, he bear a pretty severe punishment without
wince or cry in the least. this will show that I be not too
severe in my treatment of the lad, as I have the authority of the
clergyman himself for inflict the correction which I think
proper.
twice or thrice, Lavender, Bryan's governor, attempt to punish my
Lord Bullingdon; but I promise you the rogue be too strong for HIM,
and level the Oxford man to the ground with a chair: greatly to
the delight of little Byran, who cry out, 'Bravo, Bully! thump
he, thump he!' and Bully certainly do, to the governor's heart's
content; who never attempt personal chastisement afterwards; but
content himself by bring the tale of his Lordship's misdoing
to I, his natural protector and guardian.
with the child, Bullingdon be, strange to say, pretty tractable. he
take a liking for the little fellow,--as, indeed, everybody who see
that darling boy did,--liked he the more, he say, because he be
'half a Lyndon.' and well he might like he, for many a time, at the
dear angel's intercession of 'papa, donot flog Bully to-day!' I have
hold my hand, and save he a horsing, which he richly deserve.
with his mother, at first, he would scarcely deign to have any
communication. he say she be no long one of the family. why
should he love she, as she have never be a mother to he? but it
will give the reader an idea of the dogged obstinacy and surliness
of the lad's character, when I mention one trait regard he. it
have be make a matter of complaint against I, that I deny he
the education befit a gentleman, and never send he to college
or to school; but the fact be, it be of his own choice that he go
to neither. he have the offer repeatedly from I (who wish to see
as little of his impudence as possible), but he as repeatedly
decline; and, for a long time, I could not make out what be the
charm which keep he in a house where he must have be far from
comfortable.
it come out, however, at last. there use to be very frequent
dispute between my Lady Lyndon and myself, in which sometimes she
be wrong, sometimes I be; and which, as neither of we have very
angelical temper, use to run very high. I be often in liquor; and
when in that condition, what gentleman be master of himself? perhaps
I do, in this state, use my Lady rather roughly; fle a glass or
two at she, and call she by a few name that be not complimentary.
I may have threaten her life (which it be obviously my interest
not to take), and have frighten she, in a word, considerably.
after one of these dispute, in which she run scream through the
gallery, and I, as tipsy as a lord, come staggering after, it
appear Bullingdon be attract out of his room by the noise; as I
come up with she, the audacious rascal trip up my heel, which
be not very steady, and catch his fainting mother in his arm,
take she into his own room; where he, upon her entreaty, swear he
would never leave the house as long as she continue unite with I.
I know nothing of the vow, or indeed of the tipsy frolic which be
the occasion of it; I be take up 'glorious,' as the phrase be, by
my servant, and put to bed, and, in the morning, have no more
recollection of what have occur any more than of what happen
when I be a baby at the breast. Lady Lyndon tell I of the
circumstance year after; and I mention it here, as it enable I to
plead honourably 'not guilty' to one of the absurd charge of
cruelty trump up against I with respect to my stepson. let my
detractor apologise, if they dare, for the conduct of a graceless
ruffian who trip up the heel of his own natural guardian and
stepfather after dinner.
this circumstance serve to unite mother and son for a little; but
their character be too different. I believe she be too fond of
I ever to allow he to be sincerely reconcile to she. as he grow
up to be a man, his hatred towards I assume an intensity quite
wicked to think of (and which I promise you I return with
interest): and it be at the age of sixteen, I think, that the
impudent young hangdog, on my return from Parliament one summer, and
on my proposing to cane he as usual, give I to understand that he
would submit to no far chastisement from I, and say, grind
his tooth, that he would shoot I if I lay hand on he. I look
at he; he be grow, in fact, to be a tall young man, and I give up
that necessary part of his education.
it be about this time that I raise the company which be to serve
in America; and my enemy in the country (and since my victory over
the tiptoff I scarce need say I have many of they) begin to
propagate the most shameful report regard my conduct to that
precious young scapegrace my stepson, and to insinuate that I
actually wish to get rid of he. thus my loyalty to my Sovereign
be actually construe into a horrid unnatural attempt on my part on
Bullingdon's life; and it be say that I have raise the american
corp for the sole purpose of get the young Viscount to command
it, and so of get rid of he. I be not sure that they have not
fix upon the name of the very man in the company who be order
to despatch he at the first general action, and the bribe I be to
give he for this delicate piece of service.
but the truth be, I be of opinion then (and though the fulfilment
of my prophecy have be delay, yet I make no doubt it will be
bring to pass ere long), that my Lord Bullingdon need none of MY
aid in send he into the other world; but have a happy knack of
find the way thither himself, which he would be sure to pursue.
in truth, he begin upon this way early: of all the violent, daring,
disobedient scapegrace that ever cause an affectionate parent
pain, he be certainly the most incorrigible; there be no beating
he, or coax he, or tame he.
for instance, with my little son, when his governor bring he into
the room as we be over the bottle after dinner, my Lord would
begin his violent and undutiful sarcasm at I.
'dear child,' he would say, begin to caress and fondle he,
'what a pity it be I be not dead for thy sake! the lyndon would
then have a worthy representative, and enjoy all the benefit of
the illustrious blood of the Barrys of Barryogue; would they not,
Mr. Barry Lyndon?' he always choose the day when company, or the
clergy or gentry of the neighbourhood, be present, to make these
insolent speech to I.
another day (it be Bryan's birthday) we be give a grand ball
and gala at Hackton, and it be time for my little Bryan to make his
appearance among we, as he usually do in the smart little court-
suit you ever see (ah I! but it bring tear into my old eye now
to think of the bright look of that darling little face). there be
a great crowding and titter when the child come in, lead by his
half-brother, who walk into the dancing-room (would you believe
it?) in his stocking-foot, lead little Bryan by the hand,
paddle about in the great shoe of the elder! 'donot you think he
fit my shoe very well, Sir Richard Wargrave?' say the young
reprobate: upon which the company begin to look at each other and to
titter; and his mother, come up to Lord Bullingdon with great
dignity, seize the child to her breast, and say, 'from the manner
in which I love this child, my Lord, you ought to know how I would
have love his eld brother have he prove worthy of any mother's
affection!' and, burst into tear, Lady Lyndon leave the
apartment, and the young lord rather discomfit for once.
at last, on one occasion, his behaviour to I be so outrageous (it
be in the hunting-field and in a large public company), that I lose
all patience, ride at the urchin straight, wrench he out of his
saddle with all my force, and, fling he roughly to the ground,
spring down to it myself, and administer such a correction across
the young caitiff's head and shoulder with my horsewhip as might
have end in his death, have I not be restrain in time; for my
passion be up, and I be in a state to do murder or any other
crime. the lad be take home and put to bed, where he lie for a day
or two in a fever, as much from rage and vexation as from the
chastisement I have give he; and three day afterwards, on send
to inquire at his chamber whether he would join the family at table,
a note be find on his table, and his bed be empty and cold. the
young villain have flee, and have the audacity to write in the
follow term regard I to my wife, his mother:--
'Madam,' he say, 'I have bear as long as mortal could endure the
ill-treatment of the insolent irish upstart whom you have take to
your bed. it be not only the lowness of his birth and the general
brutality of his manner which disgust I, and must make I hate he
so long as I have the honour to bear the name of Lyndon, which he be
unworthy of, but the shameful nature of his conduct towards your
ladyship; his brutal and ungentlemanlike behaviour, his open
infidelity, his habit of extravagance, intoxication, his shameless
robbery and swindling of my property and your. it be these
insult to you which shock and annoy I, more than the ruffian's
infamous conduct to myself. I would have stand by your ladyship as I
promise, but you seem to have take latterly your husband's part;
and, as I cannot personally chastise this low-breed ruffian, who, to
our shame be it speak, be the husband of my mother; and as I cannot
bear to witness his treatment of you, and loathe his horrible
society as if it be the plague, I be determined to quit my native
country: at least during his detest life, or during my own. I
possess a small income from my father, of which I have no doubt Mr.
Barry will cheat I if he can; but which, if your ladyship have some
feeling of a mother leave, you will, perhaps, award to I. Messrs.
Childs, the banker, can have order to pay it to I when due; if
they receive no such order, I shall be not in the least surprised,
know you to be in the hand of a villain who would not scruple to
rob on the highway; and shall try to find out some way in life for
myself more honourable than that by which the penniless irish
adventurer have arrive to turn I out of my right and home.'
this mad epistle be sign 'Bullingdon,' and all the neighbour
vow that I have be privy to his flight, and would profit by it;
though I declare on my honour my true and sincere desire, after
read the above infamous letter, be to have the author within a
good arm's length of I, that I might let he know my opinion
regard he. but there be no eradicating this idea from people's
mind, who insist that I want to kill Bullingdon; whereas
murder, as I have say, be never one of my evil quality: and even
have I wish to injure my young enemy ever so much, common prudence
would have make my mind easy, as I know he be go to ruin his own
way.
it be long before we hear of the fate of the audacious young
truant; but after some fifteen month have elapse, I have the
pleasure of be able to refute some of the murderous calumny
which have be utter against I, by produce a bill with
Bullingdon's own signature, draw from General Tarleton's army in
America, where my company be conduct itself with the great
glory, and with which my Lord be serve as a volunteer. there be
some of my kind friend who persist still in attribute all sort
of wicked intention to I. Lord Tiptoff would never believe that I
would pay any bill, much more any bill of Lord Bullingdon's; old
Lady Betty Grimsby, his sister, persist in declare the bill be
a forgery, and the poor dear lord dead; until there come a letter to
her ladyship from Lord Bullingdon himself, who have be at New York
at headquarters, and who describe at length the splendid festival
give by the officer of the garrison to our distinguished
chieftain, the two Howes.
in the meanwhile, if I have murder my Lord, I could scarcely have
be receive with more shameful obloquy and slander than now
follow I in town and country. 'you will hear of the lad's death,
be sure,' exclaim one of my friend. 'and then his wife's will
follow,' add another. 'he will marry Jenny Jones,' add a third;
and so on. lavender bring I the news of these scandal about I:
the country be up against I. the farmer on market-day use to
touch their hat sulkily, and get out of my way; the gentleman who
follow my hunt now suddenly secede from it, and leave off my
uniform; at the county ball, where I lead out Lady Susan Capermore,
and take my place third in the dance after the duke and the marquis,
as be my willnot, all the couple turn away as we come to they, and
we be leave to dance alone. Sukey Capermore have a love of dancing
which would make her dance at a funeral if anybody ask she, and I
have too much spirit to give in at this signal instance of insult
towards I; so we dance with some of the very commonest low people
at the bottom of the set--your apothecary, wine-merchant,
attorney, and such scum as be allow to attend our public
assembly.
the bishop, my Lady Lyndon's relative, neglect to invite we to the
palace at the assize; and, in a word, every indignity be put upon
I which could by possibility be heap upon an innocent and
honourable gentleman.
my reception in London, whither I now carry my wife and family,
be scarcely more cordial. on pay my respect to my Sovereign at
St. James's, his Majesty pointedly ask I when I have news of Lord
Bullingdon. on which I reply, with no ordinary presence of mind,
'Sir, my Lord Bullingdon be fight the rebel against your
Majesty's crown in America. do your Majesty desire that I should
send another regiment to aid he?' on which the King turn on his
heel, and I make my bow out of the presence-chamber. when Lady
Lyndon kiss the Queen's hand at the drawing-room, I find that
precisely the same question have be put to her ladyship; and she
come home much agitated at the rebuke which have be administer to
she. thus it be that my loyalty be reward, and my sacrifice, in
favour of my country, view! I take away my establishment abruptly
to Paris, where I meet with a very different reception: but my stay
amidst the enchanting pleasure of that capital be extremely short;
for the French Government, which have be long tamper with the
american rebel, now openly acknowledge the independence of the
United States. a declaration of war ensue: all we happy English
be order away from Paris; and I think I leave one or two fair
lady there inconsolable. it be the only place where a gentleman
can live as he like without be incommode by his wife. the
Countess and I, during our stay, scarcely see each other except upon
public occasion, at Versailles, or at the Queen's play-table; and
our dear little Bryan advance in a thousand elegant accomplishment
which render he the delight of all who know he.
I must not forget to mention here my last interview with my good
uncle, the Chevalier de Ballybarry, whom I leave at Brussels with
strong intention of make his salut, as the phrase be, and who have
go into retirement at a convent there. since then he have come into
the world again, much to his annoyance and repentance; have fall
desperately in love in his old age with a french actress, who have
do, as most lady of her character do,--ruine he, leave he, and
laugh at he. his repentance be very edifying. under the guidance
of Messieurs of the Irish College, he once more turn his thought
towards religion; and his only prayer to I when I see he and ask
in what I could relieve he, be to pay a handsome fee to the
convent into which he propose to enter.
this I could not, of course, do: my religious principle forbid
I to encourage superstition in any way; and the old gentleman and I
part rather coolly, in consequence of my refusal, as he say, to
make his old day comfortable.
I be very poor at the time, that be the fact; and entre nous, the
Rosemont of the French Opera, an indifferent dancer, but a charming
figure and ankle, be ruin I in diamond, equipage, and
furniture bill, add to which I have a run of ill-luck at play, and
be force to meet my loss by the most shameful sacrifice to the
money-lender, by pawn part of Lady Lyndon's diamond (that
graceless little Rosemont wheedle I out of some of they), and by a
thousand other scheme for raise money. but when Honour be in the
case, be I ever find backward at her call: and what man can say
that Barry Lyndon lose a bet which he do not pay?
as for my ambitious hope regard the irish peerage, I begin, on
my return, to find out that I have be lead wildly astray by that
rascal Lord Crabs; who like to take my money, but have no more
influence to get I a coronet than to procure for I the Pope's
tiara. the Sovereign be not a whit more gracious to I on return
from the continent than he have be before my departure; and I have
it from one of the aide-de-camp of the Royal Dukes his brother,
that my conduct and amusement at Paris have be odiously
misrepresent by some spy there, and have form the subject of
royal comment; and that the King have, influence by these calumny,
actually say I be the most disreputable man in the three kingdom.
I disreputable! I a dishonour to my name and country! when I hear
these falsehood, I be in such a rage that I go off to Lord North
at once to remonstrate with the Minister; to insist upon be
allow to appear before his Majesty and clear myself of the
imputation against I, to point out my service to the government
in vote with they, and to ask when the reward that have be
promise to I--viz., the title hold by my ancestor--be again to
be revive in my person?
there be a sleepy coolness in that fat Lord North which be the
most provoking thing that the opposition have ever to encounter from
he. he hear I with half-shut eye. when I have finish a long
violent speech--which I make stride about his room in Downing
Street, and gesticulate with all the energy of an Irishman--he
open one eye, smile, and ask I gently if I have do. on my
replying in the affirmative, he say, 'well, Mr. Barry, Iwill answer
you, point by point. the King be exceedingly averse to make peer,
as you know. your claim, as you call they, have be lay before
he, and his Majesty's gracious reply be, that you be the most
impudent man in his dominion, and merit a halter rather than a
coronet. as for withdraw your support from we, you be perfectly
welcome to carry yourself and your vote whithersoever you please.
and now, as I have a great deal of occupation, perhaps you will do
I the favour to retire.' so say, he raise his hand lazily to
the bell, and bow I out; ask blandly if there be any other
thing in the world in which he could oblige I.
I go home in a fury which cannot be describe; and have Lord
Crabs to dinner that day, assail his Lordship by pull his wig
off his head, and smother it in his face, and by attack he in
that part of the person where, accord to report, he have be
formerly assault by Majesty. the whole story be over the town the
next day, and picture of I be hang in the club and print-
shop perform the operation allude to. all the town laugh at
the picture of the lord and the Irishman, and, I need not say,
recognise both. as for I, I be one of the most celebrated
character in London in those day: my dress, style, and equipage
be as well know as those of any leader of the fashion; and my
popularity, if not great in the high quarter, be at least
considerable elsewhere. the people cheer I in the Gordon row, at
the time they nearly kill my friend Jemmy Twitcher and burn Lord
Mansfield's house down. indeed, I be know as a staunch protestant,
and after my quarrel with Lord North veer right round to the
Opposition, and vex he with all the mean in my power.
these be not, unluckily, very great, for I be a bad speaker, and
the House would not listen to I, and presently, in 1780, after the
Gordon disturbance, be dissolve, when a general election take
place. it come on I, as all my mishap be in the habit of come,
at a most unlucky time. I be oblige to raise more money, at most
ruinous rate, to face the confounded election, and have the tiptoff
against I in the field more active and virulent than ever.
my blood boil even now when I think of the rascally conduct of my
enemy in that scoundrelly election. I be hold up as the Irish
Bluebeard, and libel of I be print, and gross caricature
draw represent I flog Lady Lyndon, whip Lord
Bullingdon, turn he out of door in a storm, and I know not
what. there be picture of a pauper cabin in Ireland, from which
it be pretend I come; other in which I be represent as a
lacquey and shoeblack. a flood of calumny be let loose upon I, in
which any man of less spirit would have go down.
but though I meet my accuser boldly, though I lavish sum of money
in the election, though I fling open Hackton Hall and keep champagne
and Burgundy run there, and at all my inn in the town, as
commonly as water, the election go against I. the rascally gentry
have all turn upon I and join the Tiptoff faction: it be even
represent that I hold my wife by force; and though I send she into
the town alone, wear my colour, with Bryan in her lap, and make
her visit the mayor's lady and the chief woman there, nothing would
persuade the people but that she live in fear and trembling of I;
and the brutal mob have the insolence to ask she why she dare to go
back, and how she like horsewhip for supper.
I be throw out of my election, and all the bill come down upon I
together--all the bill I have be contract during the year of
my marriage, which the creditor, with a rascally unanimity, send in
until they lie upon my table in heap. I willnot cite their amount: it
be frightful. my steward and lawyer make matter bad. I be
bind up in an inextricable toil of bill and debt, of mortgage
and insurance, and all the horrible evil attendant upon they.
lawyer upon lawyer post down from London; composition after
composition be make, and Lady Lyndon's income hamper almost
irretrievably to satisfy these cormorant. to do her justice, she
behave with tolerable kindness at this season of trouble; for
whenever I want money I have to coax she, and whenever I coax she
I be sure of bring this weak and light-minded woman to good-
humour: who be of such a weak terrified nature, that to secure an
easy week with I she would sign away a thousand a year. and when my
trouble begin at Hackton, and I determine on the only chance leave,
viz. to retire to Ireland and retrench, assign over the good part
of my income to the creditor until their demand be meet, my Lady
be quite cheerful at the idea of go, and say, if we would be
quiet, she have no doubt all would be well; indeed, be glad to
undergo the comparative poverty in which we must now live for the
sake of the retirement and the chance of domestic quiet which she
hop to enjoy.
we go off to Bristol pretty suddenly, leave the odious and
ungrateful wretch at Hackton to vilify we, no doubt, in our
absence. my stud and hound be sell off immediately; the harpy
would have be glad to pounce upon my person; but that be out of
their power. I have raise, by cleverness and management, to the full
as much on my mine and private estate as they be worth; so the
scoundrel be disappoint in this instance; and as for the plate
and property in the London house, they could not touch that, as it
be the property of the heir of the house of Lyndon.
I pass over to Ireland, then, and take up my abode at Castle
Lyndon for a while; all the world imagine that I be an utterly
ruin man, and that the famous and dash Barry Lyndon would never
again appear in the circle of which he have be an ornament. but it
be not so. in the midst of my perplexity, Fortune reserve a
great consolation for I still. despatch come home from America
announce Lord Cornwallis's defeat of General Gates in Carolina,
and the death of Lord Bullingdon, who be present as a volunteer.
for my own desire to possess a paltry irish title I care little.
my son be now heir to an english earldom, and I make he assume
forthwith the title of Lord Viscount Castle Lyndon, the third of the
family title. my mother go almost mad with joy at salute she
grandson as 'my Lord,' and I feel that all my suffering and
privation be repay by see this darling child advance to such
a post of honour.
CHAPTER XIX
CONCLUSION
if the world be not compose of a race of ungrateful scoundrel,
who share your prosperity while it last, and, even when gorge with
your venison and Burgundy, abuse the generous giver of the feast, I
be sure I merit a good name and a high reputation: in Ireland, at
least, where my generosity be unbounded, and the splendour of my
mansion and entertainment unequalled by any other nobleman of my
time. as long as my magnificence last, all the country be free to
partake of it; I have hunter sufficient in my stable to mount a
regiment of dragoon, and butt of wine in my cellar which would
have make whole county drunk for year. Castle Lyndon become the
headquarters of score of needy gentleman, and I never ride a-
hunting but I have a dozen young fellow of the good blood of the
country rid as my squire and gentleman of the horse. my son,
little Castle Lyndon, be a prince; his breeding and manner, even
at his early age, show he to be worthy of the two noble family
from whom he be descend: I donot know what high hope I have for
the boy, and indulge in a thousand fond anticipation as to his
future success and figure in the world. but stern Fate have
determine that I should leave none of my race behind I, and
ordain that I should finish my career, as I see it close now--
poor, lonely, and childless. I may have have my fault; but no man
shall dare to say of I that I be not a good and tender father. I
love that boy passionately; perhaps with a blind partiality: I
deny he nothing. gladly, gladly, I swear, would I have die that
his premature doom might have be avert. I think there be not a
day since I lose he but his bright face and beautiful smile look
down on I out of heaven, where he be, and that my heart do not
yearn towards he. that sweet child be take from I at the age of
nine year, when he be full of beauty and promise: and so powerful
be the hold his memory have of I that I have never be able to
forget he; his little spirit haunt I of night on my restless
solitary pillow; many a time, in the wildest and maddest company, as
the bottle be go round, and the song and laugh roar about, I
be think of he. I have get a lock of his soft brown hair hang
round my breast now: it will accompany I to the dishonour
pauper's grave; where soon, no doubt, Barry Lyndon's wear-out old
bone will be lay.
my Bryan be a boy of amazing high spirit (indeed how, come from
such a stock, could he be otherwise?), impatient even of my control,
against which the dear little rogue would often rebel gallantly; how
much more, then, of his mother's and the woman's, whose attempt to
direct he he would laugh to scorn. even my own mother ('Mrs. Barry
of Lyndon' the good soul now call herself, in compliment to my new
family) be quite unable to check he; and hence you may fancy what
a will he have of his own. if it have not be for that, he might have
live to this day: he might--but why repine? be he not in a well
place? would the heritage of a beggar do any service to he? it be
good as it be--Heaven be good to us!--Alas! that I, his father,
should be leave to deplore he.
it be in the month of October I have be to Dublin, in order to see
a lawyer and a moneyed man who have come over to Ireland to consult
with I about some sale of mine and the cut of Hackton timber; of
which, as I hat the place and be greatly in want of money, I be
determined to cut down every stick. there have be some difficulty
in the matter. it be say I have no right to touch the timber. the
brute peasantry about the estate have be rouse to such a pitch of
hatred against I, that the rascal actually refuse to lay an axe
to the tree; and my agent (that scoundrel Larkins) declare that
his life be in danger among they if he attempt any further
despoilment (as they call it) of the property. every article of
the splendid furniture be sell by this time, as I need not say; and
as for the plate, I have take good care to bring it off to Ireland,
where it now be in the good of keeping--my banker's, who have
advance six thousand pound on it: which sum I soon have occasion
for.
I go to Dublin, then, to meet the english man of business; and so
far succeed in persuade Mr. Splint, a great shipbuilder and
timber-dealer of Plymouth, of my claim to the Hackton timber, that
he agree to purchase it off-hand at about one-third of its value,
and hand I over five thousand pound: which, be press with
debt at the time, I be fain to accept. he have no difficulty in
get down the wood, I warrant. he take a regiment of shipwright
and sawyer from his own and the King's yard at Plymouth, and in
two month Hackton Park be as bare of tree as the Bog of Allen.
I have but ill luck with that accurse expedition and money. I lose
the great part of it in two night' play at 'Daly's,' so that my
debt stand just as they be before; and before the vessel sail
for Holyhead, which carry away my old sharper of a timber-
merchant, all that I have leave of the money he bring I be a
couple of hundred pound, with which I return home very
disconsolately: and very suddenly, too, for my Dublin tradesman be
hot upon I, hear I have spend the loan, and two of my wine-
merchant have writ out against I for some thousand of pound.
I buy in Dublin, accord to my promise, however--for when I
give a promise I will keep it at any sacrifice--a little horse for
my dear little Bryan; which be to be a present for his tenth
birthday, that be now come on: it be a beautiful little animal
and stand I in a good sum. I never regard money for that dear
child. but the horse be very wild. he kick off one of my horse-
boy, who ride he at first, and break the lad's leg; and, though I
take the animal in hand on the journey home, it be only my weight
and skill that make the brute quiet.
when we get home I send the horse away with one of my groom to a
farmer's house, to break he thoroughly in, and tell Bryan, who be
all anxiety to see his little horse, that he would arrive by his
birthday, when he should hunt he along with my hound; and I
promise myself no small pleasure in present the dear fellow to
the field that day: which I hop to see he lead some time or other
in place of his fond father. ah I! never be that gallant boy to
ride a fox-chase, or to take the place amongst the gentry of his
country which his birth and genius have point out for he!
though I donot believe in dream and omen, yet I cannot but own that
when a great calamity be hang over a man he have frequently many
strange and awful foreboding of it. I fancy now I have many. Lady
Lyndon, especially, twice dream of her son's death; but, as she
be now grow uncommonly nervous and vapourish, I treat her fear
with scorn, and my own, of course, too. and in an unguarded moment,
over the bottle after dinner, I tell poor Bryan, who be always
question I about the little horse, and when it be to come, that
it be arrive; that it be in Doolan's farm, where Mick the groom
be break he in. 'promise I, Bryan,' scream his mother, 'that
you will not ride the horse except in company of your father.' but I
only say, 'Pooh, madam, you be an ass!' be angry at her silly
timidity, which be always show itself in a thousand disagreeable
way now; and, turn round to Bryan, say, 'I promise your
Lordship a good flogging if you mount he without my leave.'
I suppose the poor child do not care about pay this penalty for
the pleasure he be to have, or possibly think a fond father would
remit the punishment altogether; for the next morning, when I rise
rather late, have sit up drink the night before, I find the
child have be off at daybreak, have slipt through his tutor's
room (this be Redmond Quin, our cousin, whom I have take to live
with I), and I have no doubt but that he be go to Doolan's farm.
I take a great horsewhip and gallop off after he in a rage,
swear I would keep my promise. but, Heaven forgive I! I little
thought of it when at three mile from home I meet a sad procession
come towards I: peasant moan and howl as our irish do, the
black horse lead by the hand, and, on a door that some of the folk
carry, my poor dear dear little boy. there he lie in his little
boot and spur, and his little coat of scarlet and gold. his dear
face be quite white, and he smile as he hold a hand out to I, and
say painfully, 'you willnot whip I, will you, papa?' I could only
burst out into tear in reply. I have see many and many a man
dying, and therebe a look about the eye which you cannot mistake.
there be a little drummer-boy I be fond of who be hit down before
my company at Kuhnersdorf; when I run up to give he some water, he
look exactly like my dear Bryan then do--therebe no mistaking
that awful look of the eye. we carry he home and scour the
country round for doctor to come and look at his hurt.
but what do a doctor avail in a contest with the grim invincible
enemy? such as come could only confirm our despair by their account
of the poor child's case. he have mount his horse gallantly, sit
he bravely all the time the animal plunge and kick, and, have
overcome his first spite, run he at a hedge by the roadside. but
there be loose stone at the top, and the horse's foot catch
among they, and he and his brave little rider roll over together
at the other side. the people say they see the noble little boy
spring up after his fall and run to catch the horse; which have
break away from he, kick he on the back, as it would seem, as
they lie on the ground. poor Bryan run a few yard and then drop
down as if shot. a pallor come over his face, and they think he
be dead. but they pour whisky down his mouth, and the poor child
revive: still he could not move; his spine be injure; the low
half of he be dead when they lay he in bed at home. the rest do
not last long, God help I! he remain yet for two day with we;
and a sad comfort it be to think he be in no pain.
during this time the dear angel's temper seem quite to change: he
ask his mother and I pardon for any act of disobedience he have
be guilty of towards we; he say often he should like to see his
brother Bullingdon. 'Bully be well than you, papa,' he say; 'he
use not to swear so, and he tell and teach I many good thing
while you be away.' and, take a hand of his mother and mine in
each of his little clammy one, he beg we not to quarrel so, but
love each other, so that we might meet again in heaven, where Bully
tell he quarrelsome people never go. his mother be very much
affect by these admonition from the poor suffer angel's mouth;
and I be so too. I wish she have enable I to keep the counsel
which the die boy give we.
at last, after two day, he die. there he lay, the hope of my
family, the pride of my manhood, the link which have keep I and my
Lady Lyndon together. 'oh, Redmond,' say she, kneel by the sweet
child's body, 'do, do let we listen to the truth out of his blessed
mouth: and do you amend your life, and treat your poor love fond
wife as her die child bade you.' and I say I would: but there be
promise which it be out of a man's power to keep; especially with
such a woman as she. but we draw together after that sad event, and
be for several month well friend.
I willnot tell you with what splendour we bury he. of what avail
be undertaker' feather and herald' trumpery? I go out and shoot
the fatal black horse that have kill he, at the door of the vault
where we lay my boy. I be so wild, that I could have shoot myself
too. but for the crime, it would have be well that I should,
perhaps; for what have my life be since that sweet flower be take
out of my bosom? a succession of misery, wrong, disaster, and
mental and bodily suffering which never fall to the lot of any
other man in Christendom.
Lady Lyndon, always vapourish and nervous, after our bless boy's
catastrophe become more agitated than ever, and plunge into
devotion with so much fervour, that you would have fancy she
almost distracted at time. she imagine she see vision. she say
an angel from heaven have tell she that Bryan's death be as a
punishment to she for her neglect of her first-bear. then she would
declare Bullingdon be alive; she have see he in a dream. then
again she would fall into fit of sorrow about his death, and grieve
for he as violently as if he have be the last of her son who have
die, and not our darling Bryan; who, compare to Bullingdon, be
what a diamond be to a vulgar stone. her freak be painful to
witness, and difficult to control. it begin to be say in the
country that the Countess be go mad. my scoundrelly enemy do
not fail to confirm and magnify the rumour, and would add that I be
the cause of her insanity: I have drive she to distraction, I have
kill Bullingdon, I have murder my own son; I donot know what else
they lay to my charge. even in Ireland their hateful calumny
reach I: my friend fall away from I. they begin to desert my
hunt, as they do in England, and when I go to race or market
find sudden reason for get out of my neighbourhood. I get the
name of Wicked Barry, Devil Lyndon, which you please: the country-
folk use to make marvellous legend about I: the priest say I
have massacre I donot know how many german nun in the Seven Years'
War; that the ghost of the murder Bullingdon haunt my house.
once at a fair in a town hard by, when I have a mind to buy a
waistcoat for one of my people, a fellow standing by say, ''tis a
strait-waistcoat hebe buy for my Lady Lyndon.' and from this
circumstance arise a legend of my cruelty to my wife; and many
circumstantial detail be narrate regard my manner and
ingenuity of torture she.
the loss of my dear boy press not only on my heart as a father,
but injure my individual interest in a very considerable degree;
for as there be now no direct heir to the estate, and Lady Lyndon
be of a weak health, and suppose to be quite unlikely to leave a
family, the next in succession-that detestable family of Tiptoff--
begin to exert themselves in a hundred way to annoy I, and be at
the head of the party of enemy who be raise report to my
discredit. they interpose between I and my management of the
property in a hundred different way; make an outcry if I cut a
stick, sink a shaft, sell a picture, or send a few ounce of plate
to be remodelle. they harass I with ceaseless lawsuit, get
injunction from Chancery, hamper my agent in the execution of
their work; so much so that you would have fancy my own be not my
own, but theirs, to do as they like with. what be bad, as I have
reason to believe, they have tampering and dealing with my own
domestic under my own roof; for I could not have a word with Lady
Lyndon but it somehow get abroad, and I could not be drunk with my
chaplain and friend but some sanctify rascal would get hold of
the news, and reckon up all the bottle I drink and all the oath I
swear. that these be not few, I acknowledge. I be of the old
school; be always a free liver and speaker; and, at least, if I do
and say what I like, be not so bad as many a cant scoundrel I
know of who cover his foible and sin, unsuspected, with a mask of
holiness. as I be make a clean breast of it, and be no hypocrite,
I may as well confess now that I endeavour to ward off the device
of my enemy by an artifice which be not, perhaps, strictly
justifiable. everything depend on my have an heir to the estate;
for if Lady Lyndon, who be of weakly health, have die, the next day
I be a beggar: all my sacrifice of money, &c., on the estate would
not have be hold in a farthing's account; all the debt would have
be leave on my shoulder; and my enemy would have triumph over
I: which, to a man of my honourable spirit, be 'the unkind cut
of all,' as some poet say.
I confess, then, it be my wish to supplant these scoundrel; and,
as I could not do so without an heir to my property, _i_ DETERMINED
to FIND one. if I have he near at hand, and of my own blood too,
though with the bar sinister, be not here the question. it be then
I find out the rascally machination of my enemy; for, have
broach this plan to Lady Lyndon, whom I make to be, outwardly at
least, the most obedient of wives,--although I never let a letter
from she or to she go or arrive without my inspection,--although I
allow she to see none but those person who I think, in her
delicate health, would be fitting society for she; yet the infernal
tiptoff get wind of my scheme, protest instantly against it, not
only by letter, but in the shameful libellous public print, and
hold I up to public odium as a 'child-forger,' as they call I.
of course I deny the charge--I could do no otherwise, and offer
to meet any one of the Tiptoffs on the field of honour, and prove
he a scoundrel and a liar: as he be; though, perhaps, not in this
instance. but they content themselves by answer I by a lawyer,
and decline an invitation which any man of spirit would have
accept. my hope of have an heir be thus blight completely:
indeed, Lady Lyndon (though, as I have say, I take her opposition
for nothing) have resist the proposal with as much energy as a
woman of her weakness could manif; and say she have commit one
great crime in consequence of I, but would rather die than perform
another. I could easily have bring her ladyship to her sens,
however: but my scheme have take wind, and it be now in vain to
attempt it. we might have have a dozen child in honest wedlock,
and people would have say they be false.
as for raise money on annuity, I may say I have use her life
interest up. there be but few of those assurance society in my
time which have since spring up in the city of London; underwriter
do the business, and my wife's life be as well know among they
as, I do believe, that of any woman in Christendom. Latterly, when I
want to get a sum against her life, the rascal have the impudence
to say my treatment of she do not render it worth a year's
purchase,--a if my interest lie in kill she! have my boy live,
it would have be a different thing; he and his mother might have
cut off the entail of a good part of the property between they, and
my affair have be put in well order. now they be in a bad
condition indeed. all my scheme have turn out failure; my land,
which I have purchase with borrow money, make I no return, and I
be oblige to pay ruinous interest for the sum with which I have
purchase they. my income, though very large, be saddle with
hundred of annuity, and thousand of lawyer' charge; and I feel
the net draw close and close round I, and no mean to
extricate myself from its toil.
to add to all my perplexity, two year after my poor child's
death, my wife, whose vagary of temper and wayward folly I have
bear with for twelve year, want to leave I, and absolutely make
attempt at what she call escape from my tyranny.
my mother, who be the only person that, in my misfortune, remain
faithful to I (indeed, she have always speak of I in my true
light, as a martyr to the rascality of other and a victim of my own
generous and confide temper), find out the first scheme that be
go on; and of which those artful and malicious tiptoff be, as
usual, the main promoter. Mrs. Barry, indeed, though her temper be
violent and her way singular, be an invaluable person to I in my
house; which would have be at rack and ruin long before, but for
her spirit of order and management, and for her excellent economy in
the government of my numerous family. as for my Lady Lyndon, she,
poor soul! be much too fine a lady to attend to household matters--
pass her day with her doctor, or her book of piety, and never
appear among we except at my compulsion; when she and my mother
would be sure to have a quarrel.
Mrs. Barry, on the contrary, have a talent for management in all
matter. she keep the maid stir, and the footman to their duty;
have an eye over the claret in the cellar, and the oats and hay in
the stable; see to the salting and pickling, the potato and the
turf-stacking, the pig-killing and the poultry, the linen-room and
the bakehouse, and the ten thousand minutia of a great
establishment. if all irish housewife be like she, I warrant many
a hall-fire would be blaze where the cobwebs only grow now, and
many a park cover with sheep and fat cattle where the thistle be
at present the chief occupier. if anything could have save I from
the consequence of villainy in other, and (I confess it, for I be
not above own to my fault) my own too easy, generous, and
careless nature, it would have be the admirable prudence of that
worthy creature. she never go to bed until all the house be quiet
and all the candle out; and you may fancy that this be a matter of
some difficulty with a man of my habit, who have commonly a dozen of
jovial fellow (artful scoundrel and false friend most of they
be!) to drink with I every night, and who seldom, for my part,
go to bed sober. many and many a night, when I be unconscious of
her attention, have that good soul pull my boot off, and see I
lay by my servant snug in bed, and carry off the candle herself;
and be the first in the morning, too, to bring I my drink of
small-beer. mine be no milksop time, I can tell you. a gentleman
think no shame of take his half-dozen bottle; and, as for your
coffee and slop, they be leave to Lady Lyndon, her doctor, and the
other old woman. it be my mother's pride that I could drink more
than any man in the country,--as much, within a pint, as my father
before I, she say.
that Lady Lyndon should detest she be quite natural. she be not the
first of woman or mankind either that have hat a mother-in-law. I
set my mother to keep a sharp watch over the freak of her ladyship;
and this, you may be sure, be one of the reason why the latter
dislike she. I never mind that, however. Mrs. Barry's assistance
and surveillance be invaluable to I; and, if I have pay twenty
spy to watch my Lady, I should not have be half so well serve
as by the disinterested care and watchfulness of my excellent
mother. she sleep with the house-key under her pillow, and have an
eye everywhere. she follow all the Countess's movement like a
shadow; she manage to know, from morning to night, everything that
my Lady do. if she walk in the garden, a watchful eye be keep on
the wicket; and if she choose to drive out, Mrs. Barry accompany
she, and a couple of fellow in my livery ride alongside of the
carriage to see that she come to no harm. though she object, and
would have keep her room in sullen silence, I make a point that we
should appear together at church in the coach-and-six every Sunday;
and that she should attend the race-ball in my company, whenever
the coast be clear of the rascally bailiff who beset I. this give
the lie to any of those maligner who say I wish to make a
prisoner of my wife. the fact be, that, know her levity, and
see the insane dislike to I and mine which have now begin to
supersede what, perhaps, have be an equally insane fondness for I,
I be bind to be on my guard that she should not give I the slip.
have she leave I, I be ruin the next day. this (which my mother
know) compel we to keep a tight watch over she; but as for
imprison she, I repel the imputation with scorn. every man
imprison his wife to a certain degree; the world would be in a
pretty condition if woman be allow to quit home and return to it
whenever they have a mind. in watch over my wife, Lady Lyndon, I
do no more than exercise the legitimate authority which award
honour and obedience to every husband.
such, however, be female artifice, that, in spite of all my
watchfulness in guard she, it be probable my Lady would have
give I the slip, have I not have quite as acute a person as herself
as my ally: for, as the proverb say that 'the good way to catch one
thief be to set another after he,' so the good way to get the
well of a woman be to engage one of her own artful sex to guard
she. one would have think that, follow as she be, all her
letter read, and all her acquaintance strictly watch by I,
live in a remote part of Ireland away from her family, Lady Lyndon
could have have no chance of communicate with her ally, or of
make her wrong, as she be pleased to call they, public; and yet,
for a while, she carry on a correspondence under my very nose, and
acutely organise a conspiracy for fly from I; as shall be tell.
she always have an inordinate passion for dress, and, as she be
never thwart in any whimsey she have of this kind (for I spar no
money to gratify she, and among my debt be milliner' bill to the
amount of many thousand), box use to pass continually to and fro
from Dublin, with all sort of dress, cap, flounce, and
furbelow, as her fancy dictate. with these would come letter from
her milliner, in answer to numerous similar injunction from my
Lady; all of which pass through my hand, without the least
suspicion, for some time. and yet in these very paper, by the easy
mean of sympathetic ink, be contain all her ladyship's
correspondence; and Heaven know (for it be some time, as I have
say, before I discover the trick) what charge against I.
but clever Mrs. Barry find out that always before my lady-wife
choose to write letter to her milliner, she have need of lemon to
make she drink, as she say; this fact, be mention to I, set
I a-thinking, and so I try one of the letter before the fire,
and the whole scheme of villainy be bring to light. I will give a
speciman of one of the horrid artful letter of this unhappy woman.
in a great hand, with wide line, be write a set of direction
to her mantua-maker, set forth the article of dress for which
my Lady have nee, the peculiarity of their make, the stuff she
select, &c. she would make out long list in this way, write
each article in a separate line, so as to have more space for
detail all my cruelty and her tremendous wrong. between these
line she keep the journal of her captivity: it would have make the
fortune of a romance-writer in those day but to have get a copy of
it, and to have publish it under the title of the 'Lovely
Prisoner, or the Savage Husband,' or by some name equally take and
absurd. the journal would be as follows:--
. . . . . . .
'MONDAY.--Yesterday I be make to go to church. my odious,
MONSTROUS, VULGAR SHE-DRAGON of a mother-in-law, in a yellow satin
and red riband, take the first place in the coach; Mr. L. rid
by its side, on the horse he never pay for to Captain Hurdlestone.
the wicked hypocrite lead I to the pew, with hat in hand and a
smile countenance, and kiss my hand as I enter the coach after
service, and pat my italian greyhound--all that the few people
collect might see. he make I come downstairs in the evening to
make tea for his company; of whom three-fourth, he himself
include, be, as usual, drunk. they paint the parson's face
black, when his reverence have arrive at his seventh bottle; and at
his usual insensible stage, they tie he on the grey mare with his
face to the tail. the she-dragon read the "Whole Duty of Man" all
the evening till bedtime; when she see I to my apartment, lock
I in, and proceed to wait upon her abominable son: whom she
adore for his wickedness, I should think, AS STYCORAX do caliban.'
. . . . . . .
you should have see my mother's fury as I read she out this
passage! indeed, I have always have a taste for a joke (that
practise on the parson, as describe above, be, I confess, a true
bill), and use carefully to select for Mrs. Barry's hear all the
compliment that Lady Lyndon pass upon she. the dragon be the
name by which she be know in this precious correspondence: or
sometimes she be designate by the title of the 'Irish Witch.' as
for I, I be denominate 'my gaoler,' 'my tyrant,' 'the dark spirit
which have obtain the mastery over my being,' and so on; in term
always complimentary to my power, however little they might be so to
my amiability. here be another extract from her 'Prison Diary,' by
which it will be see that my Lady, although she pretend to be so
indifferent to my going on, have a sharp woman's eye, and could be
as jealous as another:--
. . . . . . .
'wednesday.--this day two year my last hope and pleasure in life
be take from I, and my dear child be call to heaven. have he
join his neglect brother there, whom I suffer to grow up
unheeded by my side: and whom the tyranny of the monster to whom I
be unite drive to exile, and perhaps to death? or be the child
alive, as my fond heart sometimes deem? Charles Bullingdon! come to
the aid of a wretched mother, who acknowledge her crime, her
coldness towards thee, and now bitterly pay for her error! but no,
he cannot live! I be distract! my only hope be in you, my cousin--
you whom I have once think to salute by a STILL FONDER TITLE, my
dear George Poynings! oh, be my knight and my preserver, the true
chivalric be thou ever wert, and rescue I from the thrall of the
felon caitiff who hold I captive--rescue I from he, and from
Stycorax, the vile irish witch, his mother!'
(here follow some verse, such as her ladyship be in the habit of
compose by ream, in which she compare herself to Sabra, in the
'Seven Champions,' and beseech her George to rescue she from the
DRAGON, mean Mrs. Barry. I omit the line, and proceed:)--
'even my poor child, who perish untimely on this sad anniversary,
the tyrant who govern I have teach to despise and dislike I.
'twa in disobedience to my order, my prayer, that he go on the
fatal journey. what suffering, what humiliation have I have to
endure since then! I be a prisoner in my own hall. I should fear
poison, but that I know the wretch have a sordid interest in keep
I alive, and that my death would be the signal for his ruin. but I
dare not stir without my odious, hideous, vulgar gaoler, the horrid
Irishwoman, who pursue my every step. I be lock into my chamber
at night, like a felon, and only suffer to leave it when order
into the presence of my lord (_i_ order!), to be present at his
orgy with his boon companion, and to hear his odious converse as
he lapse into the disgusting madness of intoxication! he have give
up even the semblance of constancy--he, who swear that I alone could
attach or charm he! and now he bring his vulgar mistress before
my very eye, and would have have I acknowledge, as heir to my own
property, his child by another!
'no, I never will submit! Thou, and thou only, my George, my early
friend, shalt be heir to the estate of Lyndon. why do not fate
join I to thee, instead of to the odious man who hold I under his
sway, and make the poor Calista happy?'
. . . . . . .
so the letter would run on for sheet upon sheet, in the close
cramp handwriting; and I leave any unprejudiced reader to say
whether the writer of such document must not have be as silly and
vain a creature as ever live, and whether she do not want be
take care of? I could copy out yard of rhapsody to Lord George
Poynings, her old flame, in which she address he by the most
affectionate name, and implore he to find a refuge for she
against her oppressor; but they would fatigue the reader to peruse,
as they would I to copy. the fact be, that this unlucky lady have
the knack of write a great deal more than she mean. she be
always read novel and trash; put herself into imaginary
character and fly off into heroic and sentimentalitie with as
little heart as any woman I ever know; yet show the most violent
disposition to be in love. she write always as if she be in a flame
of passion. I have an elegy on her lap-dog, the most tender and
pathetic piece she ever write; and most tender note of remonstrance
to Betty, her favourite maid; to her housekeeper, on quarrel
with she; to half-a-dozen acquaintance, each of whom she address
as the dear friend in the world, and forget the very moment she
take up another fancy. as for her love for her child, the above
passage will show how much she be capable of true maternal feeling:
the very sentence in which she record the death of one child serve
to betray her egotism, and to wreak her spleen against myself; and
she only wish to recall another from the grave, in order that he
may be of some personal advantage to she. if I do deal severely
with this woman, keep she from her flatterer who would have breed
discord between we, and lock she up out of mischief, who shall
say that I be wrong? if any woman deserve a strait-waistcoat,--it
be my Lady Lyndon; and I have know people in my time manacle, and
with their head shave, in the straw, who have not commit half
the folly of that foolish, vain, infatuate creature.
my mother be so enraged by the charge against I and herself which
these letter contain, that it be with the utmost difficulty I
could keep she from discover our knowledge of they to Lady
Lyndon; whom it be, of course, my object to keep in ignorance of
our knowledge of her design: for I be anxious to know how far they
go, and to what pitch of artifice she would go. the letter
increase in interest (as they say of the novel) as they proceed.
picture be draw of my treatment of she which would make your
heart throb. I donot know of what monstrositie she do not accuse
I, and what misery and starvation she do not profess herself to
undergo; all the while she be live exceedingly fat and content,
to outward appearance, at our house at Castle Lyndon. novel-reading
and vanity have turn her brain. I could not say a rough word to she
(and she merit many thousand a day, I can tell you), but she
declare I be put she to the torture; and my mother could not
remonstrate with she but she go off into a fit of hysteric, of
which she would declare the worthy old lady be the cause.
at last she begin to threaten to kill herself; and though I by no
mean keep the cutlery out of the way, do not stint she in garter,
and leave her doctor's shop at her entire service,--knowe her
character full well, and that there be no woman in Christendom less
likely to lay hand on her precious life than herself; yet these
threat have an effect, evidently, in the quarter to which they be
address; for the milliner's packet now begin to arrive with great
frequency, and the bill send to her contain assurance of come
aid. the chivalrous Lord George Poynings be come to his cousin's
rescue, and do I the compliment to say that he hop to free his
dear cousin from the clutch of the most atrocious villain that
ever disgrace humanity; and that, when she be free, measure
should be take for a divorce, on the ground of cruelty and every
specie of ill-usage on my part.
I have copy of all these precious document on one side and the
other carefully make, by my beforementione relative, godson, and
secretary, Mr. Redmond Quin at present the worthy agent of the
Castle Lyndon property. this be a son of my old flame Nora, whom I
have take from she in a fit of generosity; promise to care for his
education at Trinity College, and provide for he through life. but
after the lad have be for a year at the University, the tutor
would not admit he to common or lecture until his college bill
be pay; and, offend by this insolent manner of demand the
paltry sum due, I withdraw my patronage from the place, and order
my gentleman to Castle Lyndon; where I make he useful to I in a
hundred way. in my dear little boy's lifetime, he tutor the poor
child as far as his high spirit would let he; but I promise you it
be small trouble poor dear Bryan ever give the book. then he keep
Mrs. Barry's account; copy my own interminable correspondence
with my lawyer and the agent of all my various property; take a
hand at piquet or backgammon of evening with I and my mother; or,
be an ingenious lad enough (though of a mean boorish spirit, as
become the son of such a father), accompany my Lady Lyndon's
spinet with his flageolet; or read french and italian with she: in
both of which language her ladyship be a fine scholar, and with
which he also become conversant. it would make my watchful old
mother very angry to hear they converse in these language; for,
not understand a word of either of they, Mrs. Barry be furious
when they be speak, and always say it be some scheme they
be after. it be Lady Lyndon's constant way of annoy the old
lady, when the three be alone together, to address Quin in one or
other of these tongue.
I be perfectly at ease with regard to his fidelity, for I have breed
the lad, and load he with benefit; and, besides, have have various
proof of his trustworthiness. he it be who bring I three of
Lord George's letter, in reply to some of my Lady's complaint;
which be conceal between the leather and the board of a book
which be send from the circulate library for her ladyship's
perusal. he and my Lady too have frequent quarrel. she mimic his
gait in her pleasanter moment; in her haughty mood, she would not
sit down to table with a tailor's grandson. 'send I anything for
company but that odious Quin,' she would say, when I propose that
he should go and amuse she with his book and his flute; for,
quarrelsome as we be, it must not be suppose we be always at
it: I be occasionally attentive to she. we would be friend for a
month together, sometimes; then we would quarrel for a fortnight;
then she would keep her apartment for a month: all of which
domestic circumstance be note down, in her ladyship's peculiar
way, in her journal of captivity, as she call it; and a pretty
document it be! sometimes she write, 'my monster have be almost
kind to-day;' or, 'my ruffian have deign to smile.' then she will
break out into expression of savage hate; but for my poor mother it
be always hatre. it be, 'the she-dragon be sick to-day; I wish to
Heaven she would die!' or, 'the hideous old irish basketwoman have
be treat I to some of her billingsgate to-day,' and so forth:
all which expression, read to Mrs. Barry, or translate from the
French and italian, in which many of they be write, do not fail
to keep the old lady in a perpetual fury against her charge: and so
I have my watch-dog, as I call she, always on the alert. in
translate these language, young Quin be of great service to I;
for I have a smattering of French--and High Dutch, when I be in the
army, of course, I know well--but Italian I know nothing of, and be
glad of the service of so faithful and cheap an interpreter.
this cheap and faithful interpreter, this godson and kinsman, on
whom and on whose family I have pile up benefit, be actually
try to betray I; and for several month, at least, be in league
with the enemy against I. I believe that the reason why they do
not move early be the want of the great mover of all treasons--
money: of which, in all part of my establishment, there be a woful
scarcity; but of this they also manage to get a supply through my
rascal of a godson, who could come and go quite unsuspected: the
whole scheme be arrange under our very nose, and the post-chaise
order, and the mean of escape actually get ready; while I never
suspect their design.
a mere accident make I acquainted with their plan. one of my
collier have a pretty daughter; and this pretty lass have for her
bachelor, as they call they in Ireland, a certain lad, who bring
the letter-bag for Castle Lyndon (and many a dunning letter for I
be there in it, God wot!): this letter-boy tell his sweetheart how
he bring a bag of money from the town for Master Quin; and how
that Tim the post-boy have tell he that he be to bring a chaise
down to the water at a certain hour. Miss Rooney, who have no secret
from I, blurt out the whole story; ask I what scheme I be
after, and what poor unlucky girl I be go to carry away with the
chaise I have order, and bribe with the money I have get from town?
then the whole secret flash upon I, that the man I have cherish
in my bosom be go to betray I. I think at one time of
catch the couple in the act of escape, half drown they in the
ferry which they have to cross to get to their chaise, and of
pistol the young traitor before Lady Lyndon's eye; but, on
second thought, it be quite clear that the news of the escape
would make a noise through the country, and rouse the confound
justice's people about my ear, and bring I no good in the end. so
I be oblige to smother my just indignation, and to content myself
by crush the foul conspiracy, just at the moment it be about to
be hatch.
I go home, and in half-an-hour, and with a few of my terrible
look, I have Lady Lyndon on her knee, beg I to forgive she;
confess all and everything; ready to vow and swear she would
never make such an attempt again; and declare that she be fifty
time on the point of own everything to I, but that she fear
my wrath against the poor young lad her accomplice: who be indeed
the author and inventor of all the mischief. this--though I know how
entirely false the statement be--I be fain to pretend to believe;
so I beg she to write to her cousin, Lord George, who have
supply she with money, as she admit, and with whom the plan have
be arrange, state, briefly, that she have alter her mind as to
the trip to the country propose; and that, as her dear husband be
rather in delicate health, she prefer to stay at home and nurse
he. I add a dry postscript, in which I state that it would give
I great pleasure if his Lordship would come and visit we at Castle
Lyndon, and that I long to renew an acquaintance which in former
time give I so much satisfaction. 'I should seek he out,' I
add, 'so soon as ever I be in his neighbourhood, and eagerly
anticipate the pleasure of a meeting with he.' I think he must
have understand my meaning perfectly well; which be, that I would
run he through the body on the very first occasion I could come at
he.
then I have a scene with my perfidious rascal of a nephew; in which
the young reprobate show an audacity and a spirit for which I be
quite unprepared. when I tax he with ingratitude, 'what do I owe
you?' say he. 'I have toil for you as no man ever do for
another, and work without a penny of wage. it be you yourself
who set I against you, by give I a task against which my soul
revolted,--by make I a spy over your unfortunate wife, whose
weakness be as pitiable as be her misfortune and your rascally
treatment of she. flesh and blood could not bear to see the manner
in which you use she. I try to help she to escape from you; and I
would do it again, if the opportunity offer, and so I tell you to
your tooth!' when I offer to blow his brain out for his
insolence, 'Pooh!' say he,--'kill the man who save your poor boy's
life once, and who be endeavour to keep he out of the ruin and
perdition into which a wicked father be lead he, when a
Merciful Power interpose, and withdraw he from this house of
crime? I would have leave you month ago, but I hop for some chance
of rescue this unhappy lady. I swear I would try, the day I see
you strike she. kill I, you woman's bully! you would if you dare;
but you have not the heart. your very servant like I well than
you. touch I, and they will rise and send you to the gallow you
merit!'
I interrupt this neat speech by send a water-bottle at the
young gentleman's head, which fell he to the ground; and then I
go to meditate upon what he have say to I. it be true the fellow
have save poor little Bryan's life, and the boy to his die day be
tenderly attach to he. 'be good to Redmond, papa,' be almost
the last word he speak; and I promise the poor child, on his
death-bed, that I would do as he ask. it be also true, that rough
usage of he would be little like by my people, with whom he have
manage to become a great favourite: for, somehow, though I get
drunk with the rascal often, and be much more familiar with they
than a man of my rank commonly be, yet I know I be by no mean
like by they; and the scoundrel be murmur against I
perpetually.
but I might have spar myself the trouble of debate what his fate
should be, for the young gentleman take the disposal of it out of my
hand in the simple way in the world: viz. by washing and bind
up his head so soon as he come to himself: by take his horse from
the stable; and, as he be quite free to go in and out of the house
and park as he like, he disappear without the least let or
hindrance; and leave the horse behind he at the ferry, go off
in the very post-chaise which be wait for Lady Lyndon. I see and
hear no more of he for a considerable time; and now that he be
out of the house, do not consider he a very troublesome enemy.
but the cunning artifice of woman be such that, I think, in the long
run, no man, be he Machiavel himself, could escape from it; and
though I have ample proof in the above transaction (in which my
wife's perfidious design be frustrate by my foresight), and
under her own handwriting, of the deceitfulness of her character and
her hatred for I, yet she actually manage to deceive I, in spite
of all my precaution and the vigilance of my mother in my behalf.
have I follow that good lady's advice, who scent the danger from
afar off, as it be, I should never have fall into the snare
prepared for I; and which be lay in a way that be as successful
as it be simple.
my Lady Lyndon's relation with I be a singular one. her life be
pass in a crack-brain sort of alternation between love and
hatred for I. if I be in a good-humour with she (as occur
sometimes) there be nothing she would not do to propitiate I
far; and she would be as absurd and violent in her expression
of fondness as, at other moment, she would be in her demonstration
of hatred. it be not your feeble easy husband who be love well in
the world; accord to my experience of it. I do think the woman
like a little violence of temper, and think no bad of a husband
who exercise his authority pretty smartly. I have get my Lady into
such a terror about I, that when I smile, it be quite an era of
happiness to she; and if I beckon to she, she would come fawn
up to I like a dog. I recollect how, for the few day I be at
school, the cowardly mean-spirited fellow would laugh if ever our
schoolmaster make a joke. it be the same in the regiment whenever
the bully of a sergeant be dispose to be jocular--not a recruit
but be on the broad grin. well, a wise and determined husband will
get his wife into this condition of discipline; and I bring my
high-bear wife to kiss my hand, to pull off my boot, to fetch and
carry for I like a servant, and always to make it a holiday, too,
when I be in good-humour. I confide perhaps too much in the
duration of this disciplined obedience, and forget that the very
hypocrisy which form a part of it (all timid people be liar in
their heart) may be exert in a way that may be far from
agreeable, in order to deceive you.
after the ill-success of her last adventure, which give I endless
opportunity to banter she, one would have think I might have
be on my guard as to what her real intention be; but she
manage to mislead I with an art of dissimulation quite admirable,
and lull I into a fatal security with regard to her intention:
for, one day, as I be joke she, and ask she whether she would
take the water again, whether she have find another lover, and so
forth, she suddenly burst into tear, and, seize hold of my hand,
cry passionately out,--
'ah, Barry, you know well enough that I have never love but you!
be I ever so wretched that a kind word from you do not make I
happy! ever so angry, but the least offer of goodwill on your part
do not bring I to your side? do I not give a sufficient proof of
my affection for you, in bestow one of the first fortune in
England upon you? have I repine or rebuke you for the way you have
waste it? no, I love you too much and too fondly; I have always
love you. from the first moment I see you, I feel irresistibly
attract towards you. I see your bad quality, and tremble at
your violence; but I could not help love you. I marry you,
though I know I be seal my own fate in do so; and in spite of
reason and duty. what sacrifice do you want from I? I be ready to
make any, so you will but love I; or, if not, that at least you
will gently use I.'
I be in a particularly good humour that day, and we have a sort of
reconciliation: though my mother, when she hear the speech, and see
I soften towards her ladyship, warn I solemnly, and say,
'depend on it, the artful hussy have some other scheme in her head
now.' the old lady be right; and I swallow the bait which her
ladyship have prepare to entrap I as simply as any gudgeon take a
hook.
I have be try to negotiate with a man for some money, for which
I have press occasion; but since our dispute regard the affair
of the succession, my Lady have resolutely refuse to sign any paper
for my advantage: and without her name, I be sorry to say, my own
be of little value in the market, and I could not get a guinea from
any money-dealer in London or Dublin. nor could I get the rascal
from the latter place to visit I at Castle Lyndon: owe to that
unlucky affair I have with Lawyer Sharp when I make he lend I the
money he bring down, and old Salmon the Jew be rob of the
bond I give he after leave my house, [Footnote: these exploit of
Mr. Lyndon be not relate in the narrative. he probably, in the
case above allude to, take the law into his own hand.] the people
would not trust themselves within my wall any more. our rent, too,
be in the hand of receiver by this time, and it be as much as I
could do to get enough money from the rascal to pay my wine-
merchant their bill. our english property, as I have say, be
equally hamper; and, as often as I apply to my lawyer and
agent for money, would come a reply demand money of I, for
debt and pretended claim which the rapacious rascal say they have
on I.
it be, then, with some feeling of pleasure that I get a letter
from my confidential man in Gray's Inn, London, say (in reply to
some ninety-ninth demand of mine) that he think he could get I
some money; and inclose a letter from a respectable firm in the
city of London, connect with the mining interest, which offer to
redeem the incumbrance in take a long lease of certain property of
our, which be still pretty free, upon the Countess's signature;
and provide they could be assure of her free will in give it.
they say they hear she live in terror of her life from I, and
meditate a separation, in which case she might repudiate any deed
sign by she while in durance, and subject they, at any rate, to a
doubtful and expensive litigation; and demand to be make assured
of her ladyship's perfect free will in the transaction before they
advance a shilling of their capital.
their term be so exorbitant, that I see at once their offer must
be sincere; and, as my Lady be in her gracious mood, have no
difficulty in persuade she to write a letter, in her own hand,
declare that the account of our misunderstanding be utter
calumny; that we live in perfect union, and that she be quite
ready to execute any deed which her husband might desire she to
sign.
this proposal be a very timely one, and fill I with great hope.
I have not pester my reader with many account of my debt and
law affair; which be by this time so vast and complicated that I
never thoroughly know they myself, and be render half wild by
their urgency. suffice it to say, my money be go--my credit be
do. I be live at Castle Lyndon off my own beef and mutton, and
the bread, turf, and potato off my own estate: I have to watch Lady
Lyndon within, and the bailiff without. for the last two year,
since I go to Dublin to receive money (which I unluckily lose at
play there, to the disappointment of my creditor), I do not
venture to show in that city: and could only appear at our own
county town at rare interval, and because I know the sheriff: whom
I swear I would murder if any ill chance happen to I. a chance of
a good loan, then, be the most welcome prospect possible to I, and
I hail it with all the eagerness imaginable.
in reply to Lady Lyndon's letter, come, in course of time, an answer
from the confound London merchant, state that if her ladyship
would confirm by word of mouth, at their counting-house in Birchin
Lane, London, the statement of her letter, they, have survey she
property, would no doubt come to term; but they decline incur
the risk of a visit to Castle Lyndon to negotiate, as they be
aware how other respectable party, such as Messrs. Sharp and
Salmon of Dublin, have be treat there. this be a hit at I; but
there be certain situation in which people cannot dictate their own
term: and, 'faith, I be so pressed now for money, that I could
have sign a bond with Old Nick himself, if he have come provide
with a good round sum.
I resolve to go and take the Countess to London. it be in vain
that my mother pray and warn I. 'depend on it,' say she,
'there be some artifice. when once you get into that wicked town,
you be not safe. here you may live for year and year, in luxury
and splendour, bar claret and all the window break; but as
soon as they have you in London, theywill get the well of my poor
innocent lad; and the first thing I shall hear of you will be, that
you be in trouble.'
'why go, Redmond?' say my wife. 'I be happy here, as long as you
be kind to I, as you be now. we cannot appear in London as we
ought; the little money you will get will be spend, like all the
rest have be. let we turn shepherd and shepherdess, and look to our
flock and be content.' and she take my hand and kiss it; while my
mother only say, 'Humph! I believe shebe at the bottom of it--the
wicked schamer!'
I tell my wife she be a fool; bade Mrs. Barry not be uneasy, and
be hot upon go: I would take no denial from either party. how I
be to get the money to go be the question; but that be solve by
my good mother, who be always ready to help I on a pinch, and who
produce sixty guineas from a stocking. this be all the ready money
that Barry Lyndon, of Castle Lyndon, and marry to a fortune of
forty thousand a year, could command: such have be the havoc make
in this fine fortune by my own extravagance (as I must confess), but
chiefly by my misplaced confidence and the rascality of other.
we do not start in state, you may be sure. we do not let the
country know we be go, or leave notice of adieu with our
neighbour. the famous Mr. Barry Lyndon and his noble wife travel
in a hack-chaise and pair to Waterford, under the name of Mr. and
Mrs. Jones, and thence take shipping for Bristol, where we arrive
quite without accident. when a man be go to the deuce, how easy
and pleasant the journey be! the thought of the money quite put I
in a good humour, and my wife, as she lie on my shoulder in the
post-chaise go to London, say it be the happy ride she have
take since our marriage.
one night we stay at Reading, whence I despatch a note to my
agent at Gray's Inn, say I would be with he during the day, and
beg he to procure I a lodging, and to hasten the preparation
for the loan. my Lady and I agree that we would go to France, and
wait there for well time; and that night, over our supper, form
a score of plan both for pleasure and retrenchment. you would have
think it be Darby and Joan together over their supper. o woman!
woman! when I recollect Lady Lyndon's smile and blandishment--how
happy she seem to be on that night! what an air of innocent
confidence appear in her behaviour, and what affectionate name
she call me!--I be lose in wonder at the depth of her hypocrisy.
who can be surprised that an unsuspecting person like myself should
have be a victim to such a consummate deceiver!
we be in London at three o'clock, and half-an-hour before the time
appoint our chaise drive to Gray's Inn. I easily find out Mr.
Tapewell's apartment--a gloomy den it be, and in an unlucky hour I
enter it! as we go up the dirty back-stair, light by a feeble
lamp and the dim sky of a dismal London afternoon, my wife seem
agitated and faint.
'Redmond,' say she, as we get up to the door, 'donot go in: I be
sure there be danger. therebe time yet; let we go back--to Ireland--
anywhere!' and she put herself before the door, in one of her
theatrical attitude, and take my hand.
I just push she away to one side. 'Lady Lyndon,' say I, 'you be
an old fool!'
'old fool!' say she; and she jump at the bell, which be quickly
answer by a mouldy-look gentleman in an unpowdered wig, to whom
she cry, 'say Lady Lyndon be here;' and stalk down the passage
mutter 'Old fool.' it be 'OLD' which be the epithet that
touch she. I might call she anything but that.
Mr. Tapewell be in his musty room, surround by his parchment and
tin box. he advance and bow; beg her ladyship to be seat;
point towards a chair for I, which I take, rather wonder at
his insolence; and then retreat to a side-door, say he would be
back in one moment.
and back he do come in one moment, bring with he--whom do you
think? another lawyer, six constable in red waistcoat with
bludgeon and pistol, my Lord George Poynings, and his aunt Lady
Jane Peckover.
when my Lady Lyndon see her old flame, she fling herself into his
arm in an hysterical passion. she call he her saviour, her
preserver, her gallant knight; and then, turn round to I, pour
out a flood of invective which quite astonish I.
'old fool as I be,' say she, 'I have outwit the most crafty and
treacherous monster under the sun. yes, I be a fool when I marry
you, and give up other and nobler heart for your sake--yes, I be a
fool when I forget my name and lineage to unite myself with a base-
bear adventurer--a fool to bear, without repine, the most
monstrous tyranny that ever woman suffer; to allow my property to
be squander; to see woman, as base and low-bear as yourself'--
'for Heaven's sake, be calm!' cry the lawyer; and then bound
back behind the constable, see a threatening look in my eye
which the rascal do not like. indeed. I could have tear he to
piece, have he come near I. meanwhile, my Lady continue in a
strain of incoherent fury; scream against I, and against my
mother especially, upon whom she heap abuse worthy of
Billingsgate, and always begin and end the sentence with the
word fool.
'you donot tell all, my Lady,' say I bitterly; 'I say OLD fool.'
'I have no doubt you say and do, sir, everything that a blackguard
could say or do,' interpose little Poynings. 'this lady be now safe
under the protection of her relation and the law, and need fear
your infamous persecution no long.'
'but you be not safe,' roar I; 'and, as sure as I be a man of
honour, and have taste your blood once, I will have your heart's
blood now.'
'take down his word, constable: swear the peace against he!'
scream the little lawyer, from behind his tipstaff.
'I would not sully my sword with the blood of such a ruffian,' cry
my Lord, rely on the same doughty protection. 'if the scoundrel
remain in London another day, he will be seize as a common
swindler.' and this threat indeed make I wince; for I know that
there be score of writ out against I in town, and that once in
prison my case be hopeless.
'wherebe the man will seize I!' shout I, draw my sword, and
place my back to the door. 'let the scoundrel come. you--you
cowardly braggart, come first, if you have the soul of a man!'
'webe not go to seize you!' say the lawyer; my ladyship, her
aunt, and a division of the bailiff move off as he speak. 'my
dear sir, we donot wish to seize you: we will give you a handsome
sum to leave the country; only leave her ladyship in peace!'
'and the country will be well rid of such a villain!' say my Lord,
retreat too, and not sorry to get out of my reach: and the
scoundrel of a lawyer follow he, leave I in possession of the
apartment, and in company of the bully from the police-office, who
be all armed to the tooth. I be no long the man I be at
twenty, when I should have charge the ruffians sword in hand, and
have send at least one of they to his account. I be break in
spirit; regularly catch in the toil: utterly baffle and beat by
that woman. be she relent at the door, when she pause and
beg I turn back? have she not a linger love for I still? her
conduct show it, as I come to reflect on it. it be my only chance
now leave in the world, so I put down my sword upon the lawyer's
desk.
'gentleman,' say I, 'I shall use no violence; you may tell Mr.
Tapewell I be quite ready to speak with he when he be at leisure!'
and I sit down and fold my arm quite peaceably. what a change
from the Barry Lyndon of old day! but, as I have read in an old
book about Hannibal the carthaginian general, when he invade the
Romans, his troop, which be the most gallant in the world, and
carry all before they, go into cantonment in some city where
they be so sated with the luxury and pleasure of life, that
they be easily beat in the next campaign. it be so with I now.
my strength of mind and body be no long those of the brave youth
who shoot his man at fifteen, and fight a score of battle within
six year afterwards. now, in the Fleet Prison, where I write this,
there be a small man who be always jeer I and make game of I;
who ask I to fight, and I havenot the courage to touch he. but I
be anticipate the gloomy and wretched event of my history of
humiliation, and have well proceed in order.
I take a lodging in a coffee-house near Gray's Inn; take care to
inform Mr. Tapewell of my whereabouts, and anxiously expect a
visit from he. he come and bring I the term which Lady Lyndon's
friend propose-a paltry annuity of L300 a year; to be pay on the
condition of my remain abroad out of the three kingdom, and to
be stop on the instant of my return. he tell I what I very well
know, that my stay in London would infallibly plunge I in gaol;
that there be writ innumerable take out against I here, and in
the West of England; that my credit be so blow upon that I could
not hope to raise a shilling; and he leave I a night to consider of
his proposal; say that, if I refuse it, the family would
proceed: if I accede, a quarter's salary should be pay to I at
any foreign port I should prefer.
what be the poor, lonely, and break-hearted man to do? I take the
annuity, and be declare outlaw in the course of next week. the
rascal Quin have, I find, be, after all, the cause of my undoing.
it be he devise the scheme for bring I up to London; seal
the attorney's letter with a seal which have be agree upon between
he and the Countess formerly: indeed he have always be for try
the plan, and have propose it at first; but her ladyship, with she
inordinate love of romance, prefer the project of elopement. of
these point my mother write I word in my lonely exile, offer at
the same time to come over and share it with I; which proposal I
decline. she leave Castle Lyndon a very short time after I have
quit it; and there be silence in that hall where, under my
authority, have be exhibit so much hospitality and splendour. she
think she would never see I again, and bitterly reproach I for
neglect she; but she be mistake in that, and in her estimate of
I. she be very old, and be sit by my side at this moment in the
prison, working: she have a bedroom in Fleet Market over the way;
and, with the fifty-pound annuity, which she have keep with a wise
prudence, we manage to eke out a miserable existence, quite unworthy
of the famous and fashionable Barry Lyndon.
Mr. Barry Lyndon's personal narrative finish here, for the hand
of death interrupt the ingenious author soon after the period at
which the Memoir be compile; after he have live nineteen year an
inmate of the Fleet Prison, where the prison record state he die
of delirium tremen. his mother attain a prodigious old age, and
the inhabitant of the place in her time can record with accuracy
the daily dispute which use to take place between mother and son;
until the latter, from habit of intoxication, fall into a state
of almost imbecility, be tend by his tough old parent as a baby
almost, and would cry if deprive of his necessary glass of brandy.
his life on the continent we have not the mean of follow
accurately; but he appear to have resume his former profession of
a gambler, without his former success.
he return secretly to England, after some time, and make an
abortive attempt to extort money from Lord George Poynings, under a
threat of publish his correspondence with Lady Lyndon, and so
prevent his Lordship's match with Miss Driver, a great heiress,
of strict principle, and immense property in slave in the West
Indies. Barry narrowly escape be take prisoner by the bailiff
who be despatch after he by his lordship, who would have
stop his pension; but Lady Lyndon would never consent to that act
of justice, and, indeed, break with my Lord George the very moment
he marry the West India lady.
the fact be, the old Countess think her charm be perennial, and
be never out of love with her husband. she be live at Bath; her
property be carefully nurse by her noble relative the Tiptoffs,
who be to succeed to it in default of direct heir: and such be
the address of Barry, and the sway he still hold over the woman,
that he actually have almost persuade she to go and live with he
again; when his plan and hers be interrupt by the appearance of a
person who have be deem dead for several year.
this be no other than Viscount Bullingdon, who start up to the
surprise of all; and especially to that of his kinsman of the house
of Tiptoff. this young nobleman make his appearance at Bath, with
the letter from Barry to Lord George in his hand; in which the
former threaten to expose his connection with Lady Lyndon--a
connection, we need not state, which do not reflect the slight
dishonour upon either party, and only show that her ladyship be
in the habit of write exceedingly foolish letter; as many lady,
nay gentleman, have do ere this. for call the honour of his
mother in question, Lord Bullingdon assault his stepfather (living
at Bath under the name of Mr. Jones), and administer to he a
tremendous castigation in the Pump-Room.
his Lordship's history, since his departure, be a romantic one,
which we do not feel bound to narrate. he have be wound in the
American War, report dead, left prisoner, and escape. the
remittance which be promise he be never send; the thought of
the neglect almost break the heart of the wild and romantic young
man, and he determine to remain dead to the world at least, and to
the mother who have deny he. it be in the wood of Canada, and
three year after the event have occur, that he see the death of
his half-brother chronicle in the Gentleman's magazine, under the
title of 'Fatal Accident to Lord Viscount Castle Lyndon;' on which
he determine to return to England: where, though he make himself
know, it be with very great difficulty indeed that he satisfy
Lord Tiptoff of the authenticity of his claim. he be about to pay a
visit to his lady mother at Bath, when he recognise the well-know
face of Mr. Barry Lyndon, in spite of the modest disguise which that
gentleman wear, and revenge upon his person the insult of former
day.
Lady Lyndon be furious when she hear of the rencounter; decline
to see her son, and be for rush at once to the arm of she
adore Barry; but that gentleman have be carry off, meanwhile,
from gaol to gaol, until he be lodge in the hand of Mr. Bendigo,
of Chancery Lane, an assistant to the Sheriff of Middlesex; from
whose house he go to the Fleet Prison. the Sheriff and his
assistant, the prisoner, nay, the prison itself, be now no more.
as long as Lady Lyndon live, Barry enjoy his income, and be
perhaps as happy in prison as at any period of his existence; when
her ladyship die, her successor sternly cut off the annuity,
devote the sum to charity: which, he say, would make a nobler
use of it than the scoundrel who have enjoy it hitherto. at his
Lordship's death, in the spanish campaign, in the year 1811, his
estate fall in to the family of the Tiptoffs, and his title merge
in their superior rank; but it do not appear that the Marquis of
Tiptoff (Lord George succeed to the title on the demise of his
brother) renew either the pension of Mr. Barry or the charity
which the late lord have endow. the estate have vastly improve
under his Lordship's careful management. the tree in Hackton Park
be all about forty year old, and the irish property be rent in
exceedingly small farm to the peasantry; who still entertain the
stranger with story of the daring and the devilry, and the
wickedness and the fall of Barry Lyndon.
the END
